L  I  B  R.AFLY 

OF   THE 
U  N  1VER51TY 
or    ILLI  N015 


92007739 
P«38 


luiwK  mmoL  mm 


■^ 


^2£ 


371^ 


I  I  2f 


:^ 


m 


K 


r\  i:>} 


-oc^^ 


'^-^^ — m  M 


'<^ 


"y-vtgg^^g^^^^^rv^^^-^fyg 


JllfL 


j'C\V  jA.y'j 


^3>-<ra-~fJg>-a./^~g.:7T7r7'»v  ^^ 


•%^-S^:-v: :S^^ 


— OF— 


:0 


LJ 


Randolph,  Jackson,  Perry= 

# and  rionroe  Counties, 

•         ILLINOIS.         • 

Containing  Biographical  Sketches  of  Prominent 


REPRESENTA  TIVE    CITIZENS    OE    THE    COUNTIES, 

TOGETHER   WITH    BIOGRAPHIES   AND    PORTRAITS   OF   ALL   THE 

Presidents   of  ttie    United    States, 

AND    THE   GOVERNORS   OF  THE    STATE   OF  ILLINOIS. 


CHICAGO: 
BIOGRAPHICAL  PUBLISHING  CO. 


pF(Ep/^§E. 


/' 


3a.. 


Igs 


■^S^^  H-^'-t- <5^-» 

I  IE  greatest  of  English  historians,  Macaulat,  and  one  of  the  most  brilliant  writers  of 
tlie  present  century,  has  said:  "The  history-  of  a  country  is  best  told  in  a  record  of  the 
lives  of  its  people."  In  conformity  with  this  idea  tlie  Poutuait  and  BioouAruicAL 
Ri:(;oKi)  Qf  tijj^  county  lias  been  prepared.  Instead  of  going  to  musty  records,  and 
taiiing  therefrom  dry  statistical  matter  that  can  be  appreciated  by  but  few,  oui 
^»j'"f3:i^  corps  of  writers  have  gone  to  the  people,  the  men  and  women  who  have,  by  theii 
enterprise  and  industr}^  brought  the  county  to  rank  second  to  none  among  those 
comprising  this  great  and  noble  State,  and  from  their  lips  have  the  story  of  their  life 
struggles.  No  more  interesting  or  instructive  matter  could  be  presented  to  an  intelli- 
^  gent  public.  In  this  volume  will  be  found  a  record  of  many  whose  lives  are  worthy  the 
imitation  of  coming  generations.  It  tells  how  some,  commencing  life  in  poverty,  by 
iiidustr3'  and  economy  have  accumulated  wealth.  It  tells  how  others,  with  limited 
advantages  for  securing  an  education,  have  become  learned  men  and  women,  with  an 
influence  extending  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land.  It  tells  of  men  who 
have  risen  from  the  lower  walks  of  life  to  eminence  as  statesmen,  and  whose  names  have 
become  famous.  It  tells  of  those  in  every  walk  in  life  who  have  striven  to  succeed,  and 
records  how  that  success  has  usually  crowned  their  efforts.  It  teUs  also  of  many,  very 
many,  who,  not  seeking  the  applause  of  the  world,  have  pursued  "the  even  tenor  of  their  waj-,"  contend 
to  have  it  said  of  them  as  Christ  said  of  the  woman  performing  a  deed  of  mercy — "they  have  done  what 
tliey  could."  It  tells  bow  that  many  in  the  pride  and  strength  of  young  manhood  left  the  plow  and  the 
anvil,  the  lawyer's  office  and  the  counting-room,  left  every  trade  and  professioH,  and  at  their  country's 
call  went  forth  valiantly  "to  do  or  die,"  and  how  through  their  efforts  the  Union  was  restored  and  peace 
once  more  reigned  in  the  land.  In  the  life  of  every  man  and  of  every  woman  is  a  lesson  that  should  not 
be  lost  upon  those  who  follow  after. 

Coming  generations  will  appreciate  this  volume  and  preserve  it  as  a  sacred  treasure,  from  the  fact 

that  it  c(mtains  so  much  that  would  never  find  its  way  into  pul)lic  records,  and  which  would  otherwise  be 

inaccessible.     Great  care  has  been  taken  in  the  compilation  of  the  work  and  every  opportunity  possible 

^'given  to  those  represented  to  insure  correctness  in  what  has  been  written,  and  the  publishers  flatter  them- 

vjselves  that  they  give  to  their  readers  ;i  work  with  few  errors  of  consequence.     In  addition  to  the  biograph 

•oical  sketclies,  portraits  of  a  number  of  representative  citizens  are  given. 

^  The  faces  of  some,  and  biographical  sketches  of  many,  will  be  missed  in  this  volume.  For  this  the 
^.publishers  are  not  to  blame.  Not  having  a  proper  conception  of  the  work,  some  refused  to  give  the 
'^information  necessary  to  compile  a  sketch,  while  others  were  indifferent.  Occasionally  some  member  of 
t^the  family  would  oppose  the  enterprise,  and  on  account  of  such  opposition  the  support  of  the  interested 
^one  would  be  withheld.  In  a  few  instances  men  could  never  be  found,  though  repeated  calls  were  made 
^at  their  residence  or  place  of  business. 
^  April,  1894.  ISkxmiaimiioal  Publishing  Co. 


''•^ 


V^^it* 


^^i0!^^^^'-<^^      ^ 


I 


,t2^'Si^Mt,.,    ,, 


BIOGRAPHIES 


.^/iic-»^"^ 


■  ^}i\f»<^<^' 


Governors  of  Illinois, 


AND     OF    THE 


H  X  I  I  J  [l- 


^: 


-^WIlfOT^ 


,^-.s 


r 


^^ 


^. 


1^^ 


'A. 


GEORGE  WASHINGTON. 


y  HE  Father  of  our  Countr)-  was  boni  in  West- 
(  C  moreland  County,  Va. ,  February  22,  1732. 
V2/  His  parents  were  Augustine  and  Mary  (Ball) 
Washington.  The  family  to  which  he  belonged 
has  not  been  satisfactorily  traced  in  Kngland. 
His  great-grandfather,  John  Washington,  emi- 
grated to  \'irginia  about  1657,  and  became  a 
prosperous  planter.  He  had  two  sons,  Lawrence 
and  John.  The  former  married  Mildred  Wanier, 
and  had  three  children,  John,  Augu.stine  and 
Mildred.  Augustine,  the  father  of  George,  first 
married  Jane  Butler,  who  IxDre  him  four  children, 
two  of  whom,  Lawrence  and  Augustine,  reached 
maturitj'.  Of  six  children  by  his  second  mar- 
riage, George  was  the  eldest,  the  others  being 
Betty,  Samuel,  John  Augustine,  Charles  and 
Mildred. 

Augustine  Wa.shington,  the  father  of  George, 
died  in  1743,  leaving  a  large  landed  property. 
To  his  eldest  son,  Lawrence,  he  bequeathed  an 
estate  on  the  Potomac,  aften\*ards  known  as  Mt. 
Vemon,  and  to  George  he  left  the  parental  resi-  ' 
dence.  George  received  only  such  education  as 
the  neighborhood  schools  afforded,  sa\-e  for  a 
short  time  after  he  left  school,  when  he  received 
private  instruction  in  mathematics.  His  spelling 
was  rather  defective.  Remarkable  stories  are 
told  of  his  great  physical  strength  and  develop- 
ment at  an  early  age.  He  was  an  acknowledged 
leader  among  his  companions,  and  was  early 
noted  for  that  nobleness  of  character,  fairness  and 
veracity  which  characterized  his  whole  life. 

When  George  was  fourteen  },-ears  old  he  had  a 
desire  to  go  to  sea,  and  a  midshipman's  warrant 
was  .secured  for  him,  but  through  the  opposition 
of  his  mother  the   idea   was  abandoned.     Two  1 


years  later  he  was  appointed  sur\'ej^or  to  the  im- 
mense estate  of  Lord  Fairfax.  In  this  business 
he  spent  three  years  in  a  rough  frontier  life, 
gaining  experience  which  afterwards  proved  very 
essential  to  him.  In  1751,  though  only  nineteen 
\-ears  of  age,  he  was  appointed  Adjutant,  with  thfe 
rank  of  Major,  in  the  Virginia  militia,  then  being 
trained  for  active  .ser\'ice  against  the  French  and 
Indians.  Soon  after  this  he  sailed  to  the  West 
Indies  with  his  brother  Lawrence,  who  went  there 
to  restore  his  health.  They  soon  returned,  and 
in  the  summer  of  1752  Lawrence  died,  leaving  a 
large  fortune  to  an  infant  daughter,  who  did  not 
long  sur\-ive  him.  On  her  demise  the  estate  of 
Mt.  \'ernon  was  given  to  George. 

Upon  the  arrival  of  Robert  Dinwiddie  as  Lieu- 
tenant-Governor of  Virginia,  in  1752,  the  militia 
was  reorganized,  and  the  province  divided  into 
four  military  districts,  of  which  the  northern  was 
a.ssigned  to  Washington  as  Adjutant-General. 
Shorth-  after  this  a  ver>'  perilous  mission,  which 
others  had  refused,  was  assigned  him  and  ac- 
cepted. This  was  to  proceed  to  the  French  post 
near  Lake  Erie,  in  northwestern  Penn.sylvania. 
The  distance  to  be  traversed  was  about  si.x  hun- 
dred miles.  Winter  was  at  hand,  and  the  journey 
was  to  be  made  without  militar>-  escort,  through 
a  territory  occupied  by  Indians.  The  trip  was  a 
perilous  one,  and  .several  times  he  nearly  lost  his 
life,  but  he  returned  in  safety  and  furnished  a  full 
and  useful  report  of  his  expedition.  A  regiment 
of  three  hundred  men  was  raised  in  Virginia  and 
put  in  command  of  Col.  Joshua  Fry,  and  Maj. 
Washington  was  commis.sioned  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel. Active  war  was  then  begun  again.st  the 
French  and  Indians,  in  which  Washington  took 


GEORGE  WASHINGTON. 


a  most  important  part.  In  the  memorable  event 
of  July  9,  1755,  known  as  "Braddock's  defeat," 
Washington  was  almost  the  only  officer  of  dis- 
tinction who  escaped  from  the  calamities  of  the 
day  with  life  and  honor. 

Having  been  for  five  years  in  the  military  ser\'- 
ice,  and  having  vainly  sought  promotion  in  the 
royal  army,  he  took  advantage  of  the  fall  of  Ft.  Du- 
quesne  and  the  expulsion  of  the  French  from  the 
valley  of  the  Ohio  to  resign  his  commission.  Soon 
after  he  entered  the  Legislature,  where,  although 
not  a  leader,  he  took  an  active  and  important 
part.  January  17,  1759,  he  married  Mrs.  Martha 
(Dandridge)  Custis,  the  wealthy  widow  of  John 
Parke  Custis. 

When  the  British  Parliament  had  closed  the 
port  of  Boston,  the  cry  went  up  throughout  the 
provinces,  ' '  The  cause  ol  Boston  is  the  cause  of 
us  aU!  "  It  was  then,  at  the  suggestion  of  Vir- 
ginia, that  a  congress  of  all  the  colonies  was 
called  to  meet  at  Philadelphia  September  5, 
1774,  to  secure  their  common  liberties,  peaceably 
if  possible.  To  this  congress  Col.  Washington 
was  sent  as  a  delegate.  On  Maj'  10,  1775,  the 
congress  re-assembled,  when  the  hostile  inten- 
tions of  England  were  plainly  apparent.  The 
battles  of  Concord  and  Lexington  had  been  fought, 
and  among  the  first  acts  of  this  congress  was  the 
election  of  a  commander-in-chief  of  the  Colonial 
forces.  This  high  and  responsible  office  was  con- 
ferred upon  Washington,  who  was  still  a  member 
of  the  congress.  He  accepted  it  on  June  19,  but 
upon  the  express  condition  that  he  receive  no  sal- 
arj'.  Jle  would  keep  an  exact  account  of  ex- 
penses, and  expect  congress  to  pay  them  and 
nothing  more.  It  is  not  the  object  of  this  sketch 
to  trace  the  militarj-  acts  of  Washington,  to  whom 
the  fortunes  and  liberties  of  the  people  of  this 
couiitrj-  were  so  long  confided.  The  war  was 
conducted  by  him  under  every  possible  disadvan- 
tage; and  while  his  forces  often  met  with  reverses, 
yet  he  o\-ercame  every  obstacle,  and  after  seven 
years  of  heroic  devotion  and  matchless  skill  he 
gained  liberty  for  the  greatest  nation  of  earth. 
On  December  23,  1783,  Washington,  in  a  parting 
address  of  surpassing  beauty,  resigned  his  com- 
mission as  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  army  to  the 


Continental  Congress  sitting  at  Annapolis.  He 
retired  immediately  to  Mt.  Vernon  and  resumed 
his  occupation  as  a  farmer  and  planter,  shunning 
all  connection  with  public  life. 

In  February,  1789,  Washington  was  unani- 
mously elected  President,  and  at  the  expiration 
of  his  first  term  he  was  unanimouslj-  re-elected. 
At  the  end  of  this  term  many  were  anxious  that  he 
be  re-elected,  but  he  absolutely  refused  a  third 
nomination.  On  March  4,  1797,  at  the  expiration 
of  his  second  term  as  President,  he  returned  to  his 
home,  hoping  to  pass  there  his  few  remaining 
years  free  from  the  annoj-ances  of  public  life. 
Later  in  the  year,  however,  his  repose  seemed 
likely  to  be  interrupted  by  war  with  France.  At 
the  prospect  of  such  a  war  he  was  again  urged  to 
take  command  of  the  army,  but  he  chose  his  sub- 
ordinate officers  and  left  them  the  charge  of  mat- 
ters in  the  field,  which  he  superintended  from  his 
home.  In  accepting  the  command,  he  made  the 
reservation  that  he  was  not  to  be  in  the  field  until 
it  was  necessary.  In  the  midst  of  these  prepara- 
tions his  life  was  suddenly  cut  off.  December  1 2 
he  took  a  severe  cold  from  a  ride  in  the  rain, 
which,  settling  in  his  throat,  produced  inflamma- 
tion, and  terminated  fatally  on  the  night  of  the 
14th.  On  the  1 8th  his  body  was  borne  with  mili- 
tar>'  honors  to  its  final  resting-place,  and  interred 
in  the  family  vault  at  Mt.  Vernon. 

Of  the  character  of  Washington  it  is  impossible 
to  speak  but  in  terms  of  the  highest  respect  and 
admiration.  The  more  we  see  of  the  operations 
of  our  government,  and  the  more  deeplj'  we  feel 
the  difficulty  of  uniting  all  opinions  in  a  common 
interest,  the  more  highly  we  must  estimate  the 
force  of  his  talent  and  character,  which  have  been 
able  to  challenge  the  reverence  of  all  parties, 
and  principles,  and  nations,  and  to  win  a  fame  as 
extended  as  the  limits  of  the  globe,  and  which  we 
cannot  but  believe  will  be  as  lasting  as  the  exist- 
ence of  man. 

In  person,  Washington  wa's  unusually  tall,  erect 
and  well  proportioned,  and  his  muscular  strength 
was  great.  His  features  were  of  a  beausiful  .sym- 
metry. He  commanded  respect  without  any  ap- 
pearance of  haughtiness,  and  was  ever  serious 
without  being  dull. 


JOHN  ADAMS. 


(TOHN  ADAMS,  the  second  President  and  the 
I  first  Vice-President  of  the  United  States,  was 
C2?  born  in  Braintree  (now  Ouinc\')  Mass.,  and 
about  ten  miles  from  Boston,  October  19,  1735. 
His  great-grandfather,  Henr>-  Adams,  emigrated 
from  England  about  1640,  with  a  family  of  eight 
sons,  and  settled  at  Braintree.  The  parents  of 
John  were  John  and  Susannah  (Bojlston) 
Adams.  His  father,  who  was  a  farmer  of  limited 
means,  also  engaged  in  the  business  of  shoe- 
making.  He  gave  his  eldest  son,  John,  a  classical 
education  at  Har\-ard  College.  John  graduated 
in  1755,  and  at  once  took  charge  of  the  school  at 
Worcester,  Mass.  This  he  found  but  a  ' '  school 
of  affliction,"  from  which  he  endeavored  to  gain 
relief  bj-  devoting  himself,  in  addition,  to  the 
study  of  law.  For  this  purpose  he  placed  himself 
under  the  tuition  of  the  onlj-  lawyer  in  the  town. 
He  had  thought  seriously  of  the  clerical  profes- 
sion, but  seems  to  have  been  turned  from  this  by 
what  he  termed  ' '  the  frightful  engines  of  ecclesi- 
astical councils,  of  diabolical  malice,  and  Calvin- 
istic  good  nature,"  of  the  operations  of  which  he 
had  been  a  witness  in  his  native  town.  He  was 
well  fitted  for  the  legal  profession,  possessing  a 
clear,  sonorous  voice,  being  readj'  and  fluent  of 
speech,  and  having  quick  perceptive  powers.  He 
gradually  gained  a  practice,  and  in  1764  married 
Abigail  Smith,  a  daughter  of  a  minister,  and  a 
lady  of  superior  intelligence.  Shortly  after  his 
marriage,  in  1765,  the  attempt  at  parliamentary- 
taxation  turned  him  from  law  to  politics.  He 
took  initial  steps  toward  holding  a  town  meeting, 
and  the  resolutions  he  offered  on  the  subject  be- 
came ver>-  popular  throughout  the  province,  and 
were  adopted  word  for  word  by  over  forty  differ- 
ent towns.  He  moved  to  Boston  in  1768,  and 
became  one  of  the  most  courageous  and  promi- 
nent advocates  of  the  popular  cause,  and  was 
chosen  a  member  of  the  General  Court  (the  Leg- 
islature) in  1770. 

Mr.   Adams  was  chosen  one  of  the  first  dele- 


gates from  Massachusetts  to  the  first  Continent- 
al Congress,  which  met  in  1774.  Here  he  dis- 
tinguished himself  by  his  capacity  for  business 
and  for  debate,  and  advocated  the  movement  for 
independence  against  the  majority  of  the  mem- 
bers. In  May,  1776,  he  moved  and  carried  a  res- 
olution in  Congress  that  the  Colonies  should 
assume  the  duties  of  self-government.  He  was  a 
prominent  member  of  the  committee  of  five  ap- 
pointed June  1 1  to  prepare  a  declaration  of  inde- 
pendence. This  article  was  drawn  by  Jefferson, 
but  on  Adams  devolved  the  task  of  battling  it 
through  Congress  in  a  three-days  debate. 

On  the  day  after  the  Declaration  of  Independ- 
ence was  passed,  while  his  soul  was  j-et  warm 
with  the  glow  of  excited  feeling,  he  wrote  a  letter 
to  his  wife,  which,  as  we  read  it  now,  seems  to 
have  been  dictated  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy. 
"Yesterday,"  he  says,  "the  greatest  question 
was  decided  that  ever  was  debated  in  America; 
and  greater,  perhaps,  never  was  or  will  be  de- 
cided among  men.  A  resolution  was  passed 
without  one  dissenting  colon}',  'that  these  United 
States  are,  and  of  right  ought  to  be,  free  and  in- 
dependent states.'  The  daj^  is  passed.  The 
Fourth  of  Jul}-,  1776,  will  be  a  memorable  epoch 
in  the  histor\-  of  America.  I  am  apt  to  believe  it 
will  be  celebrated  bj-  succeeding  generations  as 
the  great  anuiversar>-  festival.  It  ought  to  be 
commemorated  as  the  day  of  deliverance  by 
solemn  acts  of  devotion  to  Almighty  God.  It 
ought  to  be  solemnized  with  pomp,  shows,  games, 
sports,  guns,  bells,  bonfires  and  illuminations 
from  one  end  of  the  continent  to  the  other,  from 
this  time  fon\-ard  forever.  You  will  think  me 
transported  with  enthusiasm,  but  I  am  not.  I 
am  well  aware  of  the  toil  and  blood  and  treas- 
ure that  it  will  cost  to  maintain  this  declaration 
and  .support  and  defend  these  States;  yet,  through 
all  the  gloom,  I  can  .see  the  rays  of  light  and 
glorj-.  I  can  see  that  the  end  is  worth  more  than 
all  the  means,  and  that  posterity  will  triumph, 


24 


JOHN  ADAMS. 


although  you  and  I  may  rue,  which  I  hope  we 
shall  not." 

In  November,  1777,  Mr.  Adams  was  appointed 
a  delegate  to  France,  and  to  co-operate  with  Ben- 
jamin Franklin  and  Arthur  Lee,  who  were  then 
in  Paris,  in  the  endeavor  to  obtain  assistance  in 
arms  and  monej-  from  the  French  government. 
This  was  a  severe  trial  to  his  patriotism,  as  it 
separated  him  from  his  home,  compelled  him  to 
cross  the  ocean  in  winter,  and  exposed  him  to 
great  peril  of  capture  bj-  the  British  cruisers,  who 
were  seeking  him.  He  left  France  June  17, 
1779.  In  September  of  the  same  year  he  was 
again  chosen  to  go  to  Paris,  and  there  hold  him- 
self in  readiness  to  negotiate  a  treaty  of  peace  and 
of  commerce  with  Great  Britain,  as  soon  as  the 
British  cabinet  might  be  found  willing  to  listen 
to  such  proposals.  He  sailed  for  France  in  No- 
vember, and  from  there  he  went  to  Holland,  where 
he  negotiated  important  loans  and  formed  im- 
portant commercial  treaties. 

Finally-,  a  treat}-  of  peace  ^-ith  England  was 
signed,  Januarj- 2 1 ,  1783.  The  re-action  from  the 
excitement,  toil  and  anxiety  through  which  Mr. 
Adams  had  passed  threw  him  into  a  fever.  After 
suffering  from  a  continued  fever  and  becoming 
feeble  and  emaciated,  he  was  advised  to  go  to 
England  to  drink  the  waters  of  Bath.  While  in 
England,  still  drooping  and  desponding,  he  re- 
ceived dispatches  from  his  own  government  urg- 
ing the  necessity  of  his  going  to  Amsterdam  to 
negotiate  another  loan.  It  was  winter,  his  health 
was  delicate,  >-et  he  immediately  set  out,  and 
through  storm,  on  sea,  on  horseback  and  foot,  he 
made  the  trip. 

Febniary  24,  1785,  Congress  appointed  Mr. 
Adams  envoy  to  the  Court  of  St.  James.  Here 
he  met  face  to  face  the  King  of  England,  who 
had  so  long  regarded  him  as  a  traitor.  As  Eng- 
land did  not  condescend  to  appoint  a  minister  to 
the  United  States,  and  as  Mr.  Adams  felt  that  he 
was  accomplishing  but  little,  he  sought  permis- 
sion to  return  to  his  own  countr}-,  where  he  ar- 
rived in  June,  1788. 

When  Washington  was  first  chosen  President, 
John  Adams,  rendered  illustrious  by  his  signal 
ser\-ices  at  home  and  abroad,  was  chosen  \'ice- 


President.  Again,  at  the  second  election  of  Wash- 
ington as  President,  Adams  was  chosen  ^'ice- 
President.  In  1796,  Washington  retired  from 
public  life,  and  Mr.  Adams  was  elected  President, 
though  not  without  much  opposition.  Ser\-ing 
in  this  office  four  years,  he  was  succeeded  by  Mr. 
Jefferson,  his  opponent  in  politics. 

While  Mr.  Adams  was  Vice-President  the 
great  French  Revolution  shook  the  continent  of 
Europe,  and  it  was  upon  this  point  that  he  was 
at  issue  with  the  majority  of  his  countrj-men,  led 
by  Mr.  Jefferson.  Mr.  Adams  felt  no  sympathy- 
with  the  French  people  in  their  struggle,  for  he 
had  no  confidence  in  their  power  of  self-govern- 
ment, and  he  utterly  abhorred  the  class  of  atheist 
philosophers  who.  he  claimed,  caused  it.  On  the 
other  hand,  Jefferson's  sympathies  were  strongly 
enlisted  in  behalf  of  the  French  people.  Hence 
originated  the  alienation  between  these  distin- 
tiuguished  men,  and  the  two  powerful  parties  were 
thus  soon  organized,  with  Adams  at  the  head  of 
the  one  whose  sympathies  were  with  England, 
and  Jefferson  leading  the  other  in  sympathy  \s-ith 
France. 

The  Fourth  of  July,  1826,  which  completed  the 
half-centurj-  since  the  signing  of  the  Declaration 
of  Independence,  arrived,  and  there  were  but 
three  of  the  signers  of  that  immortal  instrument 
left  upon  the  earth  to  hail  its  morning  light. 
And,  as  it  is  well  known,  on  that  day  two  of 
these  finished  their  earthh-  pilgrimage,  a  coinci- 
dence so  remarkable  as  to  seem  miraculous.  For 
a  few  days  before  Mr.  Adams  had  been  rapidly 
failing,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  Fourth  he 
found  himself  too  weak  to  rise  from  his  bed.  On 
being  requested  to  name  a  toast  for  the  cus- 
tomar}-  celebration  of  the  daj',  he  exclaimed 
"Independence  forever!"  When  the  day  was 
ushered  in  by  the  ringing  of  bells  and  the  firing 
of  cannons,  he  was  asked  by  one  of  his  attend- 
ants if  he  knew  what  day  it  was?  He  replied, 
' '  O  j-es,  it  is  the  glorious  Fourth  of  July — God 
bless  it — God  bless  you  all!"  In  the  course  of 
the  day  he  said,  "It  is  a  great  and  glorious 
daj-."  The  last  words  he  uttered  were,  "Jeffer- 
son sur\'ives."  But  he  had,  at  one  o'clock, 
resigned  his  spirit  into  the  hands  of  his  God. 


\^* 


>^    "^^S? 


7^^ 


'/^/l^ 


THOMAS  JEFFERSON. 


^HOMAS  JEFFERSON  was  bom  April  2, 
IQ.  1743,  at  Shadwell,  Albemarle  County,  Va. 
Vi2/  His  parents  were  Peter  and  Jane  (Ran- 
dolph) Jefferson,  the  former  a  native  of  Wales, 
and  the  latter  born  in  London.  To  them  were 
bom  six  daughters  and  two  sons,  of  whom  Thomas 
was  the  elder.  When  fourteen  years  of  age  his 
father  died.  He  received  a  most  liberal  educa- 
tion, having  been  kept  diligently  at  school  from 
the  time  he  was  five  years  of  age.  In  1760  he 
entered  William  and  Marj'  College.  Williams- 
burg was  then  the  seat  of  the  Colonial  court,  and 
it  was  the  abode  of  fashion  and  splendor.  Young 
Jefferson,  who  was  then  seventeen  years  old,  lived 
somewhat  expensively,  keeping  fine  horses,  and 
going  much  into  gay  society;  yet  he  was  ear- 
nestly devoted  to  his  studies,  and  irreproachable  in 
his  morals.  In  the  second  year  of  his  college 
course,  moved  by  some  unexplained  impulse,  he 
discarded  his  old  companions  and  pursuits,  and 
often  devoted  fifteen  hours  a  day  to  hard  study. 
He  thus  attained  very  high  intellectual  culture, 
and  a  like  excellence  in  philosophy  and  the  lan- 
guages. 

Immediately  upon  leaving  college  he  began  the 
study  of  law.  For  the  short  time  he  continued 
in  the  practice  of  his  profession  he  rose  rapidly, 
and  distinguished  himself  by  his  energy  and 
acuteness  as  a  lawyer.  But  the  times  called  for 
greater  action.  The  policy  of  England  had  awak- 
ened the  spirit  of  resistance  in  the  American  Col- 
onies, and  the  enlarged  views  which  Jefferson  had 
ever  entertained  soon  led  him  into  active  politi- 
cal life.  In  I  769  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the 
Virginia  House  of  Burgesses.     In  1772  he  mar- 


ried Mrs.  Martha  Skelton,  a  verj-  beautiful, 
wealth}-,  and  highl\-  accomplished  young  widow. 

In  1775  he  was  sent  to  the  Colonial  Congress, 
where,  though  a  silent  member,  his  abilities  as  a 
writer  and  a  reason er  soon  become  known,  and  he 
was  placed  upon  a  number  of  important  com- 
mittees, and  was  chairman  of  the  one  appointed 
for  the  drawing  up  of  a  declaration  of  independ- 
ence. This  committee  consisted  of  Thomas  Jef- 
ferson, John  Adams,  Benjamin  Franklin,  Roger 
Sherman  and  Robert  R.  Livingston.  Jefferson, 
as  chairman,  was  appointed  to  draw  up  the  paper. 
Franklin  and  Adams  suggested  a  few  verbal 
changes  before  it  was  .submitted  to  Congress.  On 
June  28,  a  few  slight  changes  were  made  in  it  by 
Congress,  and  it  was  passed  and  signed  Juh-  4, 
1776. 

In  1779  Mr.  Jefferson  was  elected  successor  to 
Patrick  Henr)-  as  Governor  of  \'irginia.  At  one 
time  the  British  officer  Tarleton  sent  a  secret 
expedition  to  Monticello  to  capture  the  Governor. 
Scarcely  five  miiuites  elapsed  after  the  hurried 
escape  of  Mr.  Jefferson  and  his  family  ere  his 
mansion  was  in  possession  of  the  British  troops. 
His  wife's  health,  never  very  good,  was  much 
injured  bj-  this  excitement,  and  in  the  summer 
of  1782  she  died. 

Mr.  Jefferson  was  elected  to  Congress  in  1783. 
Two  years  later  he  was  appointed  Minister  Pleni- 
potentiary to  France.  Returning  to  the  United 
States  in  September,  1789,  he  became  Secretar>' 
of  State  in  Washington's  cabinet.  This  position 
he  resigned  January  i,  1794.  In  1797,  he  was 
chosen  Vice-President,  and  four  j-ears  later  was 
elected  President  over  Mr.  Adams,  with  Aaron 


28 


THOMAS  JEFFERSON. 


Burr  as  Vice-President.  In  1804  he  was  re- 
elected with  wonderful  unanimity,  George  Clin- 
ton being  elected  Vice-President. 

The  earlj'  part  of  Mr.  Jeilerson's  second  ad- 
ministration was  distin-bed  by  an  event  which 
threatened  the  tranquillitj-  and  peace  of  the  Union; 
this  was  the  conspiracj-  of  Aaron  Burr.  Defeated 
in  the  late  election  to  the  Vice-Presidenc}-,  and 
led  on  by  an  unprincipled  ambition,  this  extraor- 
dinary man  formed  the  plan  of  a  militarj'  ex- 
pedition into  the  Spanish  territories  on  our  south- 
Western  frontier,  for  the  purpose  of  forming  there 
a  new  republic.  This  was  generally  supposed 
to  have  been  a  mere  pretext;  and  although  it  has 
not  been  generally  known  what  his  real  plans 
were,  there  is  no  doubt  that  thej' were  of  a  far 
more  dangerous  character. 

In  1809,  at  the  expiration  of  the  second  term 
for  which  Mr.  Jefferson  had  been  elected,  he  de- 
termined to  retire  from  political  life.  For  a  period 
of  nearly  forty  j-ears  he  had  been  continually  be- 
fore the  public,  and  all  that  time  had  been  em- 
ployed in  offices  of  the  greatest  trust  and  respon- 
sibility. Having  thus  devoted  the  best  part  of 
his  life  to  the  service  of  his  countrj-,  he  now  felt 
desirous  of  that  rest  which  his  declining  j-ears  re- 
quired, and  upon  the  organization  of  the  new  ad- 
ministration, in  March,  1809,  he  bade  farewell  for- 
ever to  public  life  and  retired  to  Monticello,  his 
famous  country  home,  which,  next  to  Mt.  Vernon, 
was  the  most  distinguished  residence  in  the  land. 

The  Fourth  of  July,  1826,  being  the  fiftieth  an- 
niversarj'  of  the  Declaration  of  American  Inde- 
pendence, great  preparations  were  made  in  everj- 
part  of  the  Union  for  its  celebration  as  the  nation's 
jubilee,  and  the  citizens  of  Washington,  to  add  to 
the  solemnity,'  of  the  occasion,  invited  Mr.  Jeffer- 
son, as  the  framer  and  one  of  the  few  sur\-iving 
signers  of  the  Declaration,  to  participate  in  their 
festivities.  But  an  illness,  which  had  been  of 
several  weeks'  duration  and  had  been  continually 
increasing,  compelled  him  to  decline  the  invita- 
tion. 

On  the  2d  of  July  the  disease  under  which  he 
was  laboring  left  him,  but  in  such  a  reduced 
state  that  his  medical  attendants  entertained  no 
hope  of  his  recovery.     From  this  time  he  was 


perfectly  sensible  that  his  last  hour  was  at  hand. 
On  the  next  day,  which  was  Monday,  he  asked 
of  those  around  him  the  day  of  the  month,  and 
on  being  told  it  was  the  3d  of  July,  he  ex- 
pressed the  earnest  wish  that  he  might  be  per- 
mitted to  breathe  the  air  of  the  fiftieth  anniver- 
sary. His  praj-er  was  heard — that  day  whose 
dawn  was  hailed  with  such  rapture  through  our 
land  burst  upon  his  ej-es,  and  then  they  were 
closed  forever.  And  what  a  noble  consummation 
of  a  noble  life!  To  die  on  that  day — the  birth- 
day of  a  nation — the  day  which  his  own  name 
and  his  own  act  had  rendered  glorious,  to  die 
amidst  the  rejoicings  and  festivities  of  a  whole 
nation,  who  looked  up  to  him  as  the  author,  un- 
der God,  of  their  greatest  blessings,  was  aU  that 
was  wanting  to  fill  up  the  record  of  his  life. 

Almost  at  the  same  hour  of  his  death,  the  kin- 
dred spirit  of  the  venerable  Adams,  as  if  to  bear 
him  company,  left  the  sceneof  his  earthly  honors. 
Hand  in  hand  they  had  stood  forth,  the  cham- 
pions of  freedom ;  hand  in  hand,  during  the  dark 
and  desperate  struggle  of  the  Revolution,  they 
had  cheered  and  animated  their  desponding  coun- 
tr\-men;  for  half  a  centur}'  they  had  labored  to- 
gether for  the  good  of  the  countrj-,  and  now  hand 
in  hand  they  departed.  In  their  lives  they  had 
been  united  in  the  same  great  cause  of  libertj', 
and  in  their  deaths  they  were  not  divided. 

In  person  Mr.  Jefferson  was  tall  and  thin,  rather 
above  six  feet  in  height,  but  well  formed;  hisejes 
were  light,  his  hair,  originally  red,  in  after  life  be- 
came white  and  silver}-,  his  complexion  was  fair, 
his  forehead  broad,  and  his  whole  countenance 
intelligent  and  thoughtful.  He  possessed  great 
fortitude  of  mind  as  well  as  personal  courage,  and 
his  command  of  temper  was  such  that  his  oldest 
and  most  intimate  friends  never  recollected  to 
have  seen  him  in  a  passion.  His  manners,  though 
dignified,  were  simple  and  unaffected,  and  his 
hospitalit>'  was  so  unbounded  that  all  found  at 
his  house  a  readj-  welcome.  In  conversation  he 
was  fluent,  eloquent  and  enthusiastic,  and  his 
language  was  remarkably  pure  and  correct.  He 
was  a  finished  classical  scholar,  and  in  his  writ- 
ings is  discernible  the  care  with  which  he  formed 
his  style  upon  the  best  models  of  antiquit>'. 


OA'C-i-^    A^CC  e*-^^^-^^  cr-^ 


JAMES  MADISON. 


(Tames  MADISON,    "Father  of  the   Consti- 

I  tution,"  and  fourth  President  of  the  United 
(2/  States,  was  born  March  i6,  1757,  and  died 
at  his  home  in  Virginia  June  28,  1836.  The 
name  of  James  Madison  is  inseparably  connected 
with  most  of  the  important  events  in  that  heroic 
period  of  our  countrj-  during  which  the  founda- 
tions of  this  great  repubhc  were  laid.  He  was 
the  la.st  of  the  founders  of  the  Constitution  of  the 
United  States  to  be  called  to  his  eternal  reward. 

The  Madison  family  were  among  the  early  emi- 
grants to  the  New  World,  landing  upon  the  shores 
of  the  Chesapeake  but  fifteen  years  after  the  settle- 
ment of  Jamestown.  The  father  of  James  Madison 
was  an  opulent  planter,  residing  upon  a  very  fine 
estate  called  Montpelier,  in  Orange  County,  Va. 
It  was  but  twenty-five  miles  from  the  home  of  Jef- 
ferson at  Monticello,  and  the  closest  personal  and 
political  attachment  existed  between  these  illustri- 
ous men  from  their  early  jouth  until  death. 

The  early  education  of  Mr.  Madison  was  con- 
ducted mostly  at  home  under  a  private  tutor.  At 
the  age  of  eighteen  he  was  sent  to  Princeton  Col- 
lege, in  New  Jersey.  Here  he  applied  himself  to 
stud)'  with  the  most  imprudent  zeal,  allowing  him- 
self for  months  but  three  hours'  sleep  out  of  the 
twenty-four.  His  health  thus  became  so  seriously 
impaired  that  he  never  recovered  any  vigor  of 
constitution.  He  graduated  in  1771,  with  a  feeble 
body,  but  with  a  character  of  utmost  purity,  and 
a  mind  highly  disciplined  and  richly  .stored  with 
learning,  which  embellished  and  gave  efficiency 
to  his  subsequent  career. 

Returning  to  Virginia,  he  commenced  the  study 
of  law  and  a  course  of  extensive  and  systematic 
reading.  This  educational  course,  the  spirit  of 
the  times  in  which  he  lived,  and  the  society  with 
which  he  associated,  all  combined  to  inspire  him 
with  a  .strong  love  of  libert}-,  and  to  train  him  for 
his  life-work  as  a  state.sman. 

In  the  spring  of  1776,  when  twenty-six  years  of 


age,  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Virginia  Con- 
vention to  frame  the  constitution  of  the  State.  The 
next  year  (1777),  he  wasa  candidate  for  the  Gen- 
eral As.sembly.  He  refused  to  treat  the  whisky -lov- 
ing voters,  and  consequently  lost  his  election ;  but 
those  who  had  witnes.sed  the  talent,  energy  and 
pubhc  spirit  of  the  modest  j-oung  man  enlisted 
themselves  in  his  behalf  and  he  was  appointed  to 
the  Executive  Council. 

Botli  Patrick  Henry  and  Thomas  Jefferson  were 
Governors  of  Virginia  while  Mr.  Madison  re- 
mained member  of  the  Council,  and  their  apprecia- 
tion of  his  intellectual,  social  and  moral  worth 
contributed  not  a  little  to  his  subsequent  eminence. 
In  the  year  1780  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the 
Continental  Congress.  Here  he  met  the  most  il- 
lustrious men  in  our  land,  and  he  was  immediately 
a.ssigned  to  one  ot  the  most  con.spicuous  positions 
among  them.  For  three  j-ears  he  continued  in  Con- 
gress, one  of  its  most  active  and  influential  mem- 
bers. In  1784,  his  tenn  having  expired,  he  was 
elected  a  member  of  the  Virginia  Legislature. 

No  man  felt  more  deeplj'  than  Mr.  Madison  the 
utter  inefficiency  of  the  old  confederac}',  with  no 
national  government,  and  no  power  to  form  trea- 
ties which  would  be  binding,  or  to  enforce  law. 
There  was  not  any  State  more  prominent  than 
Virginia  in  the  declaration  that  an  efficient  na- 
tional government  must  be  formed.  In  Januarj', 
1786,  Mr.  Madison  carried  a  resolution  through 
the  General  Assembly  of  Virginia,  inviting  the 
other  States  to  appoint  commis.sioners  to  meet  in 
convention  at  Ainiapolis  to  discuss  this  subject. 
Five  States  only  were  represented.  The  conven- 
tion, however,  issued  another  call,  drawn  up  by 
Mr.  Madison,  urging  all  the  States  to  send  their 
delegates  to  Philadelphia  in  May,  1787,  to  draft 
a  Constitution  for  the  United  States,  to  take  the 
place  of  the  Confederate  League.  The  delegates 
met  at  the  time  appointed.  Every  State  but 
Rhode  Island  was  represented.    George  Washing- 


32 


JAMES  MADISON. 


ton  was  chosen  president  of  the  convention,  and  the 
present  Constitution  of  the  United  States  was  then 
and  there  formed.  There  was,  perhaps,  no  mind 
and  no  pen  more  active  in  framing  this  immortal 
document  than  the  mind  and  the  pen  of  James 
Madison. 
The  Constitution,  adopted  by  a  vote  of  eighty-one 
to  sevent3--nine,  was  to  be  presented  to  the  several 
States  for  acceptance.  But  grave  solicitude  was 
felt.  Should  it  be  rejected,  we  should  be  left  but  a 
conglomeration  of  independent  States,  with  but 
little  power  at  home  and  little  respect  abroad.  Mr. 
Madison  was  elecfed  bj'  the  com-ention  to  draw  up 
an  address  to  the  people  of  the  United  States,  ex- 
pounding the  principles  of  the  Constitution,  and 
urging  its  adoption.  There  was  great  opposition 
to  it  at  first,  but  at  length  it  triumphed  over  all, 
and  went  into  effect  in  1789. 

Mr.  Madison  was  elected  to  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives in  the  first  Congress,  and  soon  became 
the  avowed  leader  of  the  Republican  party.  While 
in  New  York  attending  Congress,  he  met  Mrs. 
Todd,  a  young  widow  of  remarkable  power  of  fas- 
cination, whom  he  married.  She  was  in  person 
and  character  queenly,  and  probaby  no  lady  has 
thus  far  occupied  so  prominent  a  position  in  the 
verj'  peculiar  society-  which  has  constituted  our 
republican  court  as  did  Mrs.  Madison. 

Mr.  Madison  ser\'ed  as  Secretarj^  of  State  under 
Jefferson,  and  at  the  close  of  his  administration 
was  chosen  President.  At  this  time  the  encroach- 
ments of  England  had  brought  us  to  the  verge  of 
war.  British  orders  in  council  destroj-ed  our  com- 
merce, and  our  flag  was  exposed  to  constant  insult. 
Mr.  Madison  was  a  man  of  peace.  Scholarly  in 
his  taste,  retiring  in  his  disposition,  war  had  no 
charms  for  him.  But  the  meekest  spirit  can  be 
roused.  It  makes  one's  blood  boil,  even  now,  to 
think  of  an  American  ship  brought  to  upon  the 
ocean  by  the  guns  of  an  English  cruiser.  A 
young  lieutenant  steps  on  board  and  orders  the 
crew  to  be  paraded  before  him.  With  great  non- 
chalance he  selects  any  number  whom  he  may 
please  to  designate  as  British  .subjects,  orders  them 
down  the  ship's  side  into  his  boat,  and  places  them 
on  the  giuideck  of  his  man-of-war,  to  fight,  by 
compulsion,  the  battles  of  England.     This  right 


of  search  and  impressment  no  efforts  of  our  Gov- 
ernment could  induce  the  British  cabinet  to  re- 
linquish. 

On  the  1 8th  of  June,  181 2,  President  Madison 
gave  his  approval  to  an  act  of  Congress  declaring 
war  against  Great  Britain.  Notwithstanding  the 
bitter  hostility  of  the  Federal  party  to  the  war,  the 
countr>'  in  general  approved;  and  Mr.  Madison, 
on  the  4th  of  March,  1813,  was  re-elected  by  a 
large  majority,  and  entered  upon  his  second  term 
of  office.  This  is  not  the  place  to  describe  the 
various  adventures  of  this  war  on  the  land  and  on 
the  water.  Our  infant  na\'y  then  laid  the  found- 
ations of  its  renown  in  grappling  with  the  most 
formidable  power  which  ever  swept  the  seas.  The 
contest  commenced  in  earnest  by  the  appearance 
of  a  British  fleet,  early  in  Februarys  1813,  in 
Chesapeake  Bay,  declaring  nearly  the  whole  coast 
of  the  United  States  under  blockade. 

The  Emperor  of  Russia  offered  his  ser\-ices  as 
mediator.  America  accepted;  England  refused. 
A  British  force  of  five  thousand  men  landed  on  the 
banks  of  the  Patuxet  River,  near  its  entrance  into 
Chesapeake  Bay,  and  marched  rapidlj-,  by  way  of 
Bladensburg,  upon  Washington. 

The  stragghng  little  city  of  Washington  was 
thrown  into  consternation.  The  cannon  of  the 
brief  conflict  at  Bladensburg  echoed  through  the 
streets  of  the  metropolis.  The  whole  population 
fled  from  the  city.  The  President,  leaving  Mrs. 
Madison  in  the  White  House,  with  her  carriage 
drawn  up  at  the  door  to  await  his  speedy  return, 
hurried  to  meet  the  officers  in  a  council  of  war. 
He  met  our  troops  utterly  routed,  and  he  could  not 
go  back  without  danger  of  being  captured.  But 
few  hours  elapsed  ere  the  Presidential  Mansion, 
the  Capitol,  and  all  the  public  buildings  in  Wash- 
ington were  in  flames. 

The  war  closed  after  two  years  of  fighting,  and 
on  February  13,  181 5,  the  treaty  of  peace  was 
signed  at  Ghent.  On  the4th  of  March,  1817,  his 
second  term  of  office  expired,  and  he  resigned  the 
Presidential  chair  to  his  friend,  James  Monroe. 
He  retired  to  his  beautiful  home  at  Montpelier,  and 
there  passed  the  remainder  of  his  days.  On  June 
28,  1836,  at  the  age  of  eighty-five  years,  he  fell 
asleep  in  death.  Mrs   Madison  died  July  12,  1849. 


/■^2^,^-^'C  ^ 


JAMES  MONROE. 


(lAMElS  MONROE,  the  fifth  President  of  the 
I  United  States,  was  born  in  Westmoreland 
(2)  Couiitj-,  Va.,  April  28,  1758.  His  early  life 
WiiS  passed  at  the  place  of  his  nativity.  His  an- 
cestors had  for  many  years  resided  in  the  province 
in  which  he  was  bom.  When  he  was  seventeen 
years  old,  and  in  process  of  completing  his  educa- 
tion at  William  and  Mary  College,  the  Colonial 
Congress,  assembled  at  Philadelphia  to  deliberate 
upon  the  unjust  and  manifold  oppressions  of  Great 
Britain,  declared  the  separation  of  the  Colonies, 
and  promulgated  the  Declaration  of  Independence. 
Had  he  been  born  ten  j^ears  before,  it  is  highly 
probable  that  he  would  have  been  one  of  the 
signers  of  that  celebrated  instrument.  At  this 
time  he  left  school  and  enlisted  among  the  pa- 
triots. 

He  joined  the  arm}'  when  everj-thing  looked 
hopeless  and  gloomy.  The  number  of  deserters 
increased  from  day  to  day.  The  invading  armies 
came  pouring  in,  and  the  Tories  not  only  favored 
the  cause  of  the  mother  country,  but  disheartened 
the  new  recruits,  who  were  sufficient!}'  terrified 
at  the  prospect  of  contending  with  an  enemy 
whom  they  had  been  taught  to  deem  invincible. 
To  such  brave  spirits  as  James  Monroe,  who  went 
right  onward  undismayed  through  difficulty  and 
danger,  the  United  States  owe  their  political 
emancipation.  The  j'oung  cadet  joined  the  ranks 
and  espoused  the  cau.se  of  his  injured  country', 
with  a  firm  determination  to  live  or  die  in  her 
strife  for  liberty.  Firmly,  yet  sadly,  he  shared  in 
the  melanchoh-  retreat  from  Harlem  Heights 
and  White  Plains,  and  accompanied  the  dispirited 
army  as  it  fled  before  its  foes  through  New  Jerse}-. 
In  four  months  after  the  Declaration  of  Inde- 
pendence, the  patriots  had  been  beaten  in  seven 
battles.  At  the  battle  of  Trenton  he  led  the  van- 
guard, and  in  the  act  of  charging  upon  the  enemy 
he  received  a  wound  in  the  left  shoulder. 


As  a  reward  for  his  bravery,  Mr.  Monroe  was 
promoted  to  be  captain  of  infantrj-,  and,  ha\ing  re- 
covered from  his  wounds,  he  rejoined  the  army. 
He,  however,  receded  from  the  line  of  promotion 
by  becoming  an  officer  on  the  staff  of  L,ord  Ster- 
ling. During  the  campaigns  of  1777  and  1778, 
in  the  actions  of  Brandywine,  Germantown  and 
Monmouth,  he  continued  aide-de-camp;  but  be- 
coming desirous  to  regain  his  position  in  the 
army,  he  exerted  himself  to  collect  a  regiment  for 
the  Virginia  line.  This  scheme  failed,  owing  to 
the  exhausted  condition  of  the  State.  Upon  this 
failure  he  entered  the  office  of  Mr.  Jefferson,  at 
that  period  Governor,  and  pursued  with  consid- 
erable ardor  the  studj'  of  common  law.  He  did 
not,  however,  entirely  lay  aside  the  knapsack  for 
the  green  bag,  but  on  the  invasion  of  the  enemy 
ser\-ed  as  a  volunteer  during  the  two  years  of  his 
legal  pursuits. 

In  1782  he  was  elected  from  King  George 
Count}'  a  member  of  the  Legislature  of  \'irginia, 
and  by  that  bod}-  he  was  elevated  to  a  seat  in  the 
Executive  Council.  He  was  thus  honored  with 
the  confidence  of  his  fellow-citizens  at  twenty- 
three  years  of  age,  and  having  at  this  early  period 
displayed  some  of  that  ability  and  aptitude  foi 
legislation  which  were  afterward  employed  with 
unremitting  energy  for  the  public  good,  he  was 
in  the  succeeding  year  chosen  a  member  of  the 
Congress  of  the  United  States. 

Deeply  as  Mr.  Monroe  felt  the  imperfections  of 
the  old  Confederacy,  he  was  opposed  to  the  new 
Constitution,  thinking,  with  many  others  of  the 
Republican  party,  that  it  gave  too  much  power  to 
the  Central  Government,  and  not  enough  to  the 
individual  States.  Still  he  retained  the  esteem 
of  his  friends  who  were  its  warm  supporters,  and 
who,  notwithstanding  his  opposition,  secured  its 
adoption.  In  1789  he  became  a  member  of  the 
United  States  Senate,  which  office   he  held  for 


36 


JAMES  MONROE. 


four  years.  Ever>'  month  the  line  of  distinction 
between  the  two  great  parties  which  divided  the 
nation,  the  Federal  and  the  Republican,  was 
growing  more  distinct.  The  differences  which 
now  separated  them  lay  in  the  fact  that  the  Repub- 
lican party  was  in  sjmpathy  with  France,  and 
also  in  favor  of  such  a  strict  construction  of  the 
Constitution  as  to  give  the  Central  Government  as 
little  power,  and  the  State  Govemmtnts  as  much 
power,  as  the  Constitution  would  warrant;  while 
the  Federalists  sympathized  with  England,  and 
were  in  favor  of  a  liberal  construction  of  the  Con- 
stitution, which  would  give  as  much  power  to  the 
Central  Government  as  that  document  could  pos- 
sibly authorize. 

Washington  was  then  President.  England  had 
espoused  the  cause  of  the  Bourbons  against  the 
principles  of  the  French  Revolution.  All  Europe 
was  drawn  into  the  conflict.  We  were  feeble  and 
far  away.  Washington  issued  a  proclamation  of 
neutrality  between  these  contending  powers. 
France  had  helped  us  in  the  struggles  for  our 
liberties.  All  the  despotisms  of  Europe  were  now 
combined  to  prevent  the  French  from  escaping 
from  a  tyranny  a  thousand-fold  worse  than  that 
which  we  had  endured.  Col.  Monroe,  more  mag- 
nanimous than  prudent,  was  anxious  that,  at 
whatever  hazard,  we  should  help  our  old  allies  in 
their  extremity'.  It  was  the  impulse  of  a  gener- 
ous and  noble  nature,  and  Washington,  who  could 
appreciate  such  a  character,  .showed  his  calm,  se- 
rene, almost  divine,  greatness,  bj*  appointing  that 
very  James  Monroe  who  was  denouncing  the  pol- 
icy of  the  Government,  as  the  minister  of  that 
Government  to  the  Republic  of  France.  Mr. 
Monroe  was  welcomed  by  the  National  Conven- 
tion in  France  with  the  most  enthusiastic  dem- 
onstration. 

Shortly  after  his  return  to  this  country,  Mr. 
Monroe  was  elected  Governor  of  Virginia,  and 
held  the  ofiice  for  three  j-ears.  He  was  again 
sent  to  France  to  co-operate  with  Chancellor  Liv- 
ingston in  obtaining  the  vast  territory  then  known 
as  the  province  of  Louisiana,  which  France  had 
but  shortly  before  obtained  from  Spain.  Their 
united  efforts  were  successful.  For  the  compara- 
tively small  sum  of  fifteen  millions  of  dollars,  the 


entire  territory  of  Orleans  and  district  of  Loui- 
siana were  added  to  the  United  States.  This  was 
probabh'  the  largest  transfer  of  real  estate  which 
was  ever  made  in  all  the  history  of  the  world. 

From  France  Mr.  Monroe  went  to  England  to 
obtain  from  that  countrj-  some  recognition  of  our 
rights  as  neutrals,  and  to  remonstrate  against 
those  odious  impressments  of  our  seamen.  But 
England  was  unrelenting.  He  again  returned  to 
England  on  the  same  mission,  but  could  receive 
no  redress.  He  returned  to  his  home  and  was 
again  chosen  Governor  of  Virginia.  This  he  soon 
resigned  to  accept  the  position  of  Secretary  of 
State  under  Madison.  While  in  this  oifice  war 
with  England  was  declared,  the  Secretary  of  War 
resigned,  and  during  these  trj-ing  times  the 
duties  of  the  War  Department  were  also  put  upon 
him.  He  was  truly  the  armor-bearer  of  President 
Madison,  and  the  most  efiicient  business  man  in 
his  cabinet.  Upon  the  return  of  peace  he  re- 
signed the  Department  of  War,  but  continued  in 
the  office  of  Secretarj-  of  State  tmtil  the  expira- 
tion of  Mr.  Madison's  administration.  At  the 
election  held  the  previous  autumn,  Mr.  Monroe 
himself  had  been  chosen  President  with  but  little 
opposition,  and  upon  March  4,  1817,  he  was  in- 
augurated. Four  }-ears  later  he  was  elected  for 
a  second  term. 

Among  the  important  measures  of  his  Presi- 
dency were  the  cession  of  Florida  to  the  United 
States,  the  Missouri  Compromise,  and  the  famous 
"  Monroe  doctrine."  This  doctrine  was  enun- 
ciated by  him  in  1823,  and  was  as  follows:  ' '  That 
we  should  consider  anj-  attempt  on  the  part  of 
European  powers  to  extend  their  system  to  an\' 
portion  of  this  hemisphere  as  dangerous  to  our 
peace  and  safetj-,"  and  that  "  we  could  not  view 
any  interposition  for  the  purpose  of  oppressing  or 
controlling  American  governments  or  provinces 
in  any  other  light  than  as  a  manifestation  by 
European  powers  of  an  unfriendly  disposition 
toward  the  United  States." 

At  the  end  of  his  second  term,  Mr.  Monroe  re- 
tired to  his  home  in  Virginia,  where  he  lived  un- 
til 1830,  when  he  went  to  New  York  to  live  with 
his  son-in-law.  In  that  citj-  he  died,  on  the  4th 
of  July,  183 1. 


J,   S,  Ato/mi 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS. 


(John  QUINCY  ADAMS,  the  sixth  President 

I  of  the  United  States,  was  born  in  the  rural 
C^  home  of  his  honored  father,  John  Adams,  in 
Quincy,  Mass.,  on  the  nth  of  July,  1767.  His 
mother,  a  woman  of  exalted  worth,  watched  over 
his  childhood  during  the  almost  constant  ab- 
sence of  his  father.  When  but  eight  years  of 
age,  he  stood  with  his  mother  on  an  eminence, 
listening  to  the  booming  of  the  great  battle  on 
Bunker's  Hill,  and  gazing  out  upon  the  smoke 
and  flames  billowing  up  from  the  conflagration  of 
Charlestown. 

When  but  eleven  years  old  he  took  a  tearful 
adieu  of  his  mother,  to  sail  with  his  father  for  Eu- 
rope, through  a  fleet  of  hostile  British  cruisers. 
The  bright,  animated  boj'  spent  a  year  and  a-half 
in  Paris,  where  his  father  was  associated  with  i 
Franklin  and  Lee  as  Minister  Plenipotentiary-. 
His  intelligence  attracted  the  notice  of  these  dis- 
tinguished men,  and  he  received  from  them  flat- 
tering marks  of  attention. 

John  Adams  had  scarcely  returned  to  this 
country,  in  1779,  ere  he  was  again  sent  abroad. 
Again  John  Quincy  accompanied  his  father.  At 
Paris  he  applied  himself  to  study  with  great  dil- 
igence for  six  months,  and  then  accompanied  his 
father  to  Holland,  where  he  entered  first  a  school 
in  Amsterdam,  then  the  Universitj^  at  Leyden. 
About  a  year  from  this  time,  in  1781,  when  the 
manly  boy  was  but  fourteen  years  of  age,  he  was 
selected  by  Mr.  Dana,  our  Minister  to  the  Rus- 
sian court,  as  his  private  secretary-. 

In  this  school  of  incessant  labor  and  of  ennobl- 
ing culture  he  spent  fourteen  months,  and  then 
returned  to  Holland,  through  Sweden,  Denmark, 
Hamburg  and  Bremen.  This  long  journe)-  he 
took  alone  in  the  winter,  when  in  his  sixteenth 
year.  Again  he  resumed  his  studies,  under  a  pri- 
vate tutor,  at  The  Hague.  Then,  in  the  spring  of 
1782,  he  accompanied  his  father  to  Paris,  travel- 
ing leisurely,  and  forming  acquaintances  with  the 
most  distinguished  men  on  the  continent,  examin- 


ing architectural  remains,  galleries  of  paintings, 
and  all  renowned  works  of  art.  At  Paris  he 
again  became  associated  with  the  most  illustrious 
men  of  all  lands  in  the  contemplation  of  the 
loftiest  temporal  themes  which  can  engross  the 
human  mind.  After  a  short  visit  to  England  he 
returned  to  Paris,  and  consecrated  all  his  energies 
to  study  until  May,  1785,  when  he  returned  to 
America  to  finish  his  education. 

Upon  leaving  Han-ard  College  at  the  age  of 
twenty,  he  studied  law  for  three  years.  In  June, 
1794,  being  then  but  twenty-seven  years  of  age, 
he  was  appointed  by  Washington  Resident  Min- 
ister at  the  Netherlands.  Sailing  from  Boston  in 
July,  he  reached  London  in  October,  where  he 
was  immediately  admitted  to  the  deliberations  o) 
Messrs.  Jay  &  Pinckney,  as.sisting  them  in  nego- 
tiating a  commercial  treaty  with  Great  Britain. 
After  thus  spending  a  fortnight  in  London,  he 
proceeded  to  The  Hague. 

In  July,  1797,  he  left  The  Hague  to  go  to  Por- 
tugal as  Minister  Plenipotentiarj-.  On  his  way  to 
Portugal,  upon  arriving  in  London,  he  met  with 
despatches  directing  him  to  the  court  of  Berlin,  but 
requesting  him  to  remain  in  London  until  he 
should  receive  his  instructions.  While  waiting 
he  was  married  to  an  American  lady,  to  whom  he 
had  been  previously  engaged — Miss  Louisa  Cath- 
erine Johnson,  a  daughter  of  Joshua  Johnson, 
American  Consul  in  London,  and  a  lady  en- 
dowed with  that  beauty  and  those  accomplish- 
ments which  eminently  fitted  her  to  move  in  the 
elevated  sphere  for  which  .she  was  destined.  He 
reached  Berlin  with  his  wife  in  November,  1797, 
where  he  remained  until  July,  1799,  when,  hav- 
ing fulfilled  all  the  purposes  of  his  mission,  he  so 
licited  his  recall. 

Soon  after  his  return,  in  1802,  he  was  chosen 
to  the  Senate  of  Massachusetts  from  Boston,  and 
then  was  elected  Senator  of  the  United  States  for 
six  years,  from  the  4th  of  March,  1804.  His  rep- 
utation,  his    ability  and    his  experience    placed 


40 


JOHN  yilNCY  ADAMS. 


him  immediately  among  the  most  prominent  and 
influential  members  of  that  body. 

In  1S09,  Madison  succeeded  Jefferson  in  the 
Presidential  chair,  and  he  immediately  nominated 
John  Quincy  Adams  Minister  to  St.  Petersburgh. 
Resigning  his  professorship  in  Har\-ard  Col- 
lege, he  embarked  at  Boston  in  August,  1809. 

While  in  Russia,  Mr.  Adams  was  an  intense 
student.  He  devoted  his  attention  to  the  lan- 
guage and  histors-  of  Russia;  to  the  Chinese  trade; 
to  the  European  system  of  weights,  measures  and 
coins;  to  the  climate  and  astronomical  obser\-a- 
tions;  while  he  kept  up  a  familiar  acquaintance 
with  the  Greek  and  Latin  classics.  In  all  the 
universities  of  Europe,  a  more  accomplished 
scholar  could  scarcely  be  found.  All  through 
life  the  Bible  constituted  an  important  part  of  his 
studies.  It  was  his  rule  to  read  five  chapters 
everj-  daj-. 

On  the  4th  of  March,  181 7,  Mr.  Monroe  took 
the  Presidential  chair,  and  immediately  appointed 
Mr.  Adams  Secretary  of  State.  Taking  leave  of 
his  numerous  friends  in  public  and  private  life  in 
Europe,  he  sailed  in  June,  18 19,  for  the  United 
States.  On  the  i8th  of  August,  he  again  crossed 
the  threshold  of  his  home  in  Quincy.  During  the 
eight  years  of  Mr.  Monroe's  administration,  Mr. 
Adams  continued  Secretary-  of  State. 

Some  time  before  the  close  of  ^Ir.  Monroe's 
second  term  of  office,  new  candidates  began  to  be 
presented  for  the  Presidency.  The  friends  of  Mr. 
Adams  brought  for^vard  his  name.  It  was  an 
exciting  campaign,  and  party  spirit  was  never 
more  bitter.  Two  hundred  and  sixty  electoral 
votes  were  cast.  Andrew  Jackson  received  ninetj^- 
nine;  John  Quincy  Adams  eighty-four;  William 
H.  Crawford  forty-one;  and  Henr\-  Claj-  thirty- 
seven.  As  there  was  no  choice  bj^  the  people, 
the  question  went  to  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives. Mr.  Clay  gave  the  vote  of  Kentucky  to 
Mr.  Adams,  and  he  was  elected. 

The  friends  of  all  the  disappointed  candidates 
now  combined  in  a  venomous  and  persistent  as- 
sault upon  Mr.  Adams.  There  is  nothing  more 
disgraceful  in  the  past  histor\-  of  our  country-  than 
the  abuse  which  was  poured  in  one  uninterrupted 
stream  upon  this  high-minded,  upright  and  pa- 


triotic man.  There  never  was  an  administration 
more  pure  in  principles,  more  conscientiously  de- 
voted to  the  best  interests  of  the  country-,  than 
that  of  John  Quincy  Adams:  and  never,  perhaps, 
was  there  an  administration  more  unscrupulously 
and  outrageously-  assailed. 

On  the  4th  of  March,  1829,  Mr.  Adams  retired 
from  the  Presidency,  and  was  succeeded  by  An- 
drew Jackson.  John  C.  Calhoun  was  elected 
\'ice-President.  The  slavery'  question  now  be- 
gan to  assume  portentous  magnitude.  Mr.  Adams 
returned  to  Quincy  and  to  his  studies,  which  he 
pursued  with  unabated  zeal.  But  he  was  not 
long  permitted  to  remain  in  retirement.  In  No- 
vember, 1830,  he  was  elected  Representative  in 
Congress.  For  seventeen  years,  or  until  his  death, 
he  occupied  the  post  as  Representative,  towering 
above  all  his  peers,  ever  readj-  to  do  brave  battle 
for  freedom,  and  winning  the  title  of  "the  Old 
Man  Eloquent."  Upon  taking  his  seat  in  the 
House,  he  announced  that  he  should  hold  him- 
self bound  to  no  party.  Probably  there  never 
was  a  member  more  devoted  to  his  duties.  He 
was  usuallj-  the  first  in  his  place  in  the  morning, 
and  the  last  to  leave  his  seat  in  the  evening. 
Not  a  measure  could  be  brought  forward  and  es- 
cape his  scrutiny.  The  battle  which  Mr.  Adams 
fought,  almost  singly,  against  the  pro-slavery 
part\-  in  the  Government  was  sublime  in  its 
moral  daring  and  heroism.  For  persisting  in 
presenting  petitions  for  the  abolition  of  slaverj-, 
he  was  threatened  with  indictment  bj-  the  grand 
jurj-,  with  expulsion  from  the  House,  with  assas- 
sination; but  no  threats  could  intimidate  him,  and 
his  final  triumph  was  complete. 

On  the  2ist  of  Februarj-,  1848,  he  rose  on  the 
floor  of  Congress  with  a  paper  in  his  hand,  to 
address  the  speaker.  Suddenly  he  fell,  again 
stricken  by  parah-sis,  and  was  caught  in  the  arms 
of  those  around  him.  For  a  time  he  was  sense- 
less, as  he  was  conveyed  to  the  sofa  in  the  ro- 
tunda. With  reviving  consciousness,  he  opened 
his  e3-es,  looked  calml}*  around  and  said  ' '  This 
is  the  end  of  earth;"  then  after  a  moment's  pause 
he  added,  "  I  am  content."  These  were  the  last 
words  of  the  gfrand  ' '  Old  Man  Eloquent. ' ' 


r    , 


ANDREW  JACKSON. 


GlNDREW  JACKSON,  the  seventh  President 
LA  of  the  United  States,  was  born  in  Waxhaw 
/I  settlement,  N.  C,  March  15,  1767,  a  few 
dajs  after  his  father's  death.  His  parents  were 
poor  emigrants  from  Ireland,  and  took  up  their 
abode  in  Waxhaw  settlement,  where  they  lived 
in  deepest  poverty. 

Andrew,  or  And}-,  as  he  was  universally  called, 
grew  up  a  verj-  rough,  rude,  turbulent  boy.  His 
features  were  coarse,  his  form  ungainly,  and  there 
was  but  very  little  in  his  character  made  visible 
which  was  attractive. 

When  only  thirteen  years  old  he  joined  the 
volunteers  of  Carolina  against  the  British  invasion. 
In  1 78 1,  he  and  his  brother  Robert  were  captured 
and  imprisoned  for  a  time  at  Camden.  A  British 
officer  ordered  him  to  brush  his  mud-spattered 
boots.  "lam  a  prisoner  of  war,  not  j-our  serv- 
ant," was  the  reply  of  the  dauntless  bo}-. 

Andrew  supported  himselfin  various  ways,  such 
as  working  at  the  saddler's  trade,  teaching  school, 
and  clerking  in  a  general  store,  until  1784,  when 
he  entered  a  law  office  at  Salisbury,  N.  C.  He, 
however,  gave  more  attention  to  the  wild  amuse- 
ments of  the  times  than  to  his  studies.  In  1788, 
he  was  appointed  solicitor  for  the  Western  District 
of  Xorttu  Carolina,  of  which  Tennessee  was  then 
a  part.  This  involved  many  long  journeys  amid 
dangers  of  everj^  kind,  but  Andrew  Jackson  never 
knew  fear,  and  the  Indians  had  no  desire  to  re- 
peat a  skirmish  with    "Sharp  Knife." 

In  1 79 1,  Mr.  Jackson  was  married  to  a  woman 
who  supposed  herself  divorced  from  her  former 
husband.  Great  was  the  surprise  of  both  parties, 
two  years  later,  to  find  that  the  conditions  of  the 
divorce  had  just  been  definitely  settled  by  the 
first  husband.  The  marriage  ceremony  was  per- 
formed a  second  time,  but  the  occurrence  was 
often  used  by  his  enemies  to  bring  Mr.  Jackson 
into  disfavor. 


In  January,  1796,  the  Territory  of  Tennessee 
then  containing  nearlj-  eighty  thousand  inhabi- 
tants, the  people  met  in  convention  at  KnoxvUle 
to  frame  a  constitution.  Five  were  sent  from 
each  of  the  eleven  counties.  Andrew  Jackson 
was  one  of  the  delegates.  The  new  State  was 
entitled  to  but  one  member  in  the  National  House 
of  Representatives.  Andrew  Jackson  was  chosen 
that  member.  Mounting  his  horse,  he  rode  to 
Philadelphia,  where  Congress  then  held  its  ses- 
sions, a  distance  of  about  eight  hundred  miles. 

Jackson  was  an  earnest  advocate  of  the  Demo- 
cratic party,  and  Jefferson  was  his  idol.  He  ad- 
mired Bonaparte,  loved  France,  and  hated  Eng- 
land. As  Mr.  Jackson  took  his  seat,  Gen.  Wash- 
ington, whose  second  term  of  office  was  then 
expiring,  delivered  his  last  speech  to  Congress. 
A  committee  drew  up  a  complimentan,-  address  in 
reply.  Andrew  Jackson  did  not  approve  of  the 
address,  and  was  one  of  the  twelve  who  voted 
against  it.  He  was  not  willing  to  say  that  Gen. 
Washington's  administration  had  been  "wise, 
firm  and  patriotic." 

Mr.  Jackson  was  elected  to  the  United  States 
Senate  in  1797,  but  soon  resigned  and  returned 
home.  Soon  after  he  was  chosen  Judge  of  the 
Supreme  Court  of  his  State,  which  position  he 
held  for  six  years. 

When  the  War  of  18 12  with  Great  Britain  com- 
menced, Madison  occupied  the  Presidential  chair. 
Aaron  Burr  sent  word  to  the  President  that  there 
was  an  unknown  man  in  the  West,  Andrew  Jack- 
son, who  would  do  credit  to  a  commission  if  one 
were  conferred  upon  him.  Just  at  that  time  Gen. 
Jackson  offered  his  sendees  and  those  of  twenty- 
five  hundred  volunteers.  His  offer  was  accepted, 
and  the  troops  were  assembled  at  Nashville. 

As  the  British  were  hourly  expected  to  make 
an  attack  upon  New  Orleans,  where  Gen.  Wil- 
kinson was  in  command,  he  was  ordered  to  de- 


44 


ANDREW  JACKSON. 


scent!  the  river  with  fifteen  hundred  troops  to  aid 
Wilkinson.  The  expedition  reached  Natchez, 
and  after  a  delay  of  several  weeks  there  without 
accomplishing  anything,  the  men  were  ordered 
back  to  their  homes.  But  the  energy  Gen.  Jack- 
son had  displayed,  and  his  entire  de\otion  to  the 
comfort  of  his  soldiers,  won  for  him  golden  opin- 
ions, and  he  became  the  most  popular  man  in  the 
State.  It  was  in  this  expedition  that  his  tough- 
ness gave  him  the  nickname  of   "Old  Hickorj'." 

Soon  after  this,  while  attempting  to  horsewhip 
Col.  Thomas  Benton  for  a  remark  that  gentleman 
made  about  his  taking  part  as  second  in  a  duel 
in  which  a  j-ounger  brother  of  Benton's  was  en- 
gaged, he  received  two  severe  pistol  wounds. 
While  he  was  lingering  upon  a  bed  of  suffering, 
news  came  that  the  Indians,  who  had  combined 
under  Tecumseh  from  Florida  to  the  Lakes  to  ex- 
terminate the  white  settlers,  were  committing  the 
most  awful  ravages.  Decisive  action  became  nec- 
essary-. Gen.  Jackson,  with  his  fractured  bone 
just  beginning  to  heal,  his  arm  in  a  sling,  and 
unable  to  mount  his  horse  without  assistance, 
gave  his  amazing  energies  to  the  raising  of  an 
army  to  rendezvous  at  Fayettesville,  Ala. 

The  Creek  Indians  had  established  a  strong 
fort  on  one  of  the  bends  of  the  Tallapoosa  River, 
near  the  center  of  Alabama,  about  fifty  miles  be- 
low Ft.  Strother.  With  an  army  of  two  thousand 
men,  Gen.  Jackson  traversed  the  pathless  wilder- 
ness in  a  march  of  eleven  da}s.  He  reached  their 
fort,  called  Tohopeka  or  Horse-shoe,  on  the  27th 
of  March,  1814.  The  bend  of  the  river  enclosed 
nearly  one  hundred  acres  of  tangled  forest  and 
wild  ravine.  Across  the  narrow  neck  the  Indians 
had  constructed  a  formidable  breastwork  of  logs 
and  brush.  Here  nine  hundred  warriors,  with 
an  ample  supply  of  arms,  were  assembled. 

The  fort  was  stormed.  The  fight  was  utterlj- 
desperate.  Not  an  Indian  would  accept  quarter. 
When  bleeding  and  dying,  they  would  fight  those 
who  endeavored  to  spare  their  lives.  From  ten 
in  the  morning  until  dark  the  battle  raged.  The 
carnage  was  awful  and  revolting.  Some  threw 
themselves  into  the  river;  but  the  unerring  bul- 
lets stmck  their  heads  as  they  swam.  Nearly 
ever}-    one    of  the   nine   hundred   warriors   was  1 


killed.  A  few,  probably,  in  the  night  swam 
the   river   and   escaped.      This   ended  the   war. 

This  closing  of  the  Creek  War  enabled  us  to 
concentrate  all  our  militia  upon  the  British,  who 
were  the  allies  of  the  Indians.  No  man  of  less 
resolute  will  than  Gen.  Jackson  could  have  con- 
ducted this  Indian  campaign  to  so  successful  an 
issue.  Immediately  he  was  appointed  Major- 
General. 

Late  in  August,  with  an  army  of  two  thousand 
men  on  a  rushing  march.  Gen.  Jackson  went  to 
Mobile.  A  British  fleet  went  from  Pensacola, 
landed  a  force  upon  the  beach,  anchored  near  the 
little  fort,  and  from  both  ship  and  shore  com- 
menced a  furious  assault.  The  battle  was  long 
and  doubtful.  At  length  one  of  the  ships  was 
blown  up  and  the  rest  retired. 

Garrisoning  Mobile,  where  he  had  taken  his 
little  arm}',  he  moved  his  troops  to  New  Orleans, 
and  the  battle  of  New  Orleans,  which  soon  ensued, 
was  in  reality  a  ver\-  arduous  campaign.  This 
won  for  Gen.  Jackson  an  imperishable  name. 
Here  his  troops,  which  numbered  about  four 
thousand  men,  won  a  signal  victory  over  the 
British  army  of  about  nine  thousand.  His  loss 
was  but  thirteen,  while  the  loss  of  the  British  was 
twenty-six  hundred. 

The  name  of  Gen.  Jackson  soon  began  to  be 
mentioned  in  connection  with  the  Presidency, 
but  in  1824  he  was  defeated  by  Mr.  Adams. 
He  was,  however,  successful  in  the  election  ol 
1828,  and  was  re-elected  for  a  second  term  in 
1832.  In  1829,  just  before  he  assumed  the  reins 
of  government,  he  met  with  the  most  terrible 
afiliction  of  his  life  in  the  death  of  his  wife,  whom 
he  had  loved  with  a  devotion  which  has  perhaps 
never  been  surpassed.  From  the  shock  of  her 
death  he  never  recovered. 

His  administration  was  one  of  the  most  mem- 
orable in  the  annals  of  our  country — applauded 
by  one  party,  condemned  by  the  other.  No  man 
had  more  bitter  enemies  or  warmer  friends.  At 
the  expiration  of  his  two  terms  of  office  he  retired 
to  the  Hermitage,  where  he  died  June  8,  1845.  The 
last  years  of  Mr.  Jackson's  life  were  those  of  a  de- 
voted Christian  man. 


O  >  ^i/l^^^  z^^L^/^  ^^e-^^i^ 


MARTIN  VAN  BUREN. 


yyiARTlN  VAN  BUREN,  the  eighth  Presi- 

y  dent  of  the  United  States,  was  born  at  Kin- 
(9  derhook,  N.  Y.,  December  5,  1782.  He 
died  at  the  same  place,  July  24,  1862.  His  body 
rests  in  the  cemeterj-  at  Kinderhook.  Above  it  is 
a  plain  granite  shaft,  fifteen  feet  high,  bearing  a 
simple  inscription  about  half-way  up  on  one  face. 
The  lot  is  unfenced,  unbordered  or  unbounded 
by  shrub  or  flower. 

There  is  but  little  in  the  life  of  Martin  Van 
Buren  of  romantic  interest.  He  fought  no  battles, 
engaged  in  no  wild  adventures.  Though  his  life 
was  stormy  in  political  and  intellectual  conflicts, 
and  he  gained  many  signal  victories,  his  days 
passed  uneventful  in  those  incidents  which  give 
zest  to  biography.  His  ancestors,  as  his  name  indi- 
cates, were  of  Dutch  origin,  and  were  among  the 
earliest  emigrants  from  Holland  to  the  banks  of 
the  Hudson.  His  father  was  a  farmer,  residing 
in  the  old  town  of  Kinderhook.  His  mother,  also 
of  Dutch  lineage,  was  a  woman  of  superior  intel- 
ligence and  exemplary  piety. 

He  was  decidedlj-  a  precocious  boy,  developing 
unusual  activity,  vigor  and  strength  of  mind.  At 
the  age  of  fourteen,  he  had  finished  his  academic 
studies  in  his  native  village,  and  commenced  the 
stud}'  of  law.  As  he  had  not  a  collegiate  educa- 
tion, seven  years  of  study  in  a  law-office  were  re- 
quired of  him  before  he  could  be  admitted  to  the 
Bar.  Inspired  with  a  lofty  ambition,  and  con- 
scious of  his  powers,  he  pursued  his  studies  with 
indefatigable  industry'.  After  spending  six  years 
in  an  office  in  his  native  village,  he  went  to  the  city 
of  New  York,  and  prosecuted  his  studies  for  the 
seventh  year. 

In  1803,  Mr.  Van  Buren,  then  twenty -one  years 


of  age,  commenced  the  practice  of  law  in  his  na- 
tive village.  The  great  conflict  between  the  Federal 
and  Republican  parties  was  then  at  its  height. 
Mr.  Van  Buren  was  from  the  beginning  a  politi- 
cian. He  had,  perhaps,  imbibed  that  spirit  while 
listening  to  the  many  discussions  which  had  been 
carried  on  in  his  father's  hotel.  He  was  in  cordial 
sympathy  with  Jefferson,  and  earnestlj-  and  elo- 
quently espoused  the  cau.se  of  State  Rights,  though 
at  that  time  the  Federal  party  held  the  supremacy 
both  in  his  town  and  State. 

His  success  and  increasing  reputation  led  him 
after  six  years  of  practice  to  remove  to  Hudson, 
the  county  seat  of  his  county.  Here  he  spent 
seven  years,  constantly  gaining  strength  by  con- 
tending in  the  courts  with  some  of  the  ablest  men 
who  have  adorned  the  Bar  of  his  State. 

Just  before  leaving  Kinderhook  for  Hudson,  Mr. 
Van  Buren  married  a  lady  alike  distinguished  for 
beauty  and  accomplishments.  After  twelve  short 
years  she  sank  into  the  grave,  a  victim  of  con- 
sumption, leaving  her  husband  and  four  sons  to 
weep  over  her  loss.  For  twenty-five  years,  Mr. 
Van  Buren  was  an  earnest,  successful,  assiduous 
lawyer.  The  record  of  those  years  is  barren  in 
items  of  public  interest.  In  18 12,  when  thirty 
years  of  age,  he  was  chosen  to  the  State  Senate, 
and  gave  his  strenuous  support  to  Mr.  Madison's 
administration.  In  1815,  he  was  appointed  At- 
torney-General, and  the  next  year  moved  to  Al- 
bany, the  capital  of  the  State. 

While  he  was  acknowledged  as  one  of  the  most 
prominent  leaders  of  the  Democratic  party,  he  had 
the  moral  courage  to  avow  that  true  democracy  did 
not  require  that  "universal  suffrage' '  which  admits 
the  vile,  the  degraded,  the  ignorant,  to  the  righi 


48 


MARTIN  VAN  HUREN. 


of  governing  the  State.  In  true  consistency  with 
his  democratic  principles,  he  contended  tliat,  while 
the  path  leading  to  the  privilege  of  voting  should 
be  open  to  everj'  man  without  distinction,  no  one 
should  be  invested  with  that  sacred  prerogative 
unless  he  were  in  some  degree  qualified  for  it  by 
intelligence,  virtue,  and  some  property  interests  in 
the  welfare  of  the  State. 

In  182 1  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  United 
States  Senate,  and  in  the  same  year  he  took  a 
seat  in  the  convention  to  revise  the  Constitution  of 
his  native  State.  His  course  in  this  convention 
secured  the  approval  of  men  of  all  parties.  No 
one  could  doubt  the  singleness  of  his  endeavors  to 
promote  the  interests  of  all  classes  in  the  com- 
munity. In  the  Senate  of  the  United  States,  he 
rose  at  once  to  a  conspicuous  position  as  an  active 
and  useful  legislator. 

In  1827,  John  Quincy  Adams  being  then  in  the 
Presidential  chair,  Mr.  Van  Buren  was  re-elected 
to  the  Senate.  He  had  been  from  the  beginning 
a  determined  opposer  of  the  administration,  adopt- 
ing the  "State  Rights"  view  in  opposition  to  what 
was  deemed  the  Federal  proclivities  of  Mr.  Adams. 

Soon  after  this,  in  1828,  he  was  chosen  Governor 
of  the  State  of  New  York,  and  accordingl}'  resigned 
his  .seat  in  the  Senate.  Probably  no  one  in  the 
United  States  contributed  so  much  towards  eject- 
ing John  Q.  Adams  from  the  Presidential  chair, 
and  placing  in  it  Andrew  Jackson,  as  did  Martin 
Van  Buren.  Whether  entitled  to  the  reputation 
or  not,  he  certainly  was  regarded  throughout  the 
United  States  as  one  of  the  most  skillful,  .sagacious 
and  cunning  of  politicians.  It  was  supposed  that 
no  one  knew  so  well  as  he  how  to  touch  the  secret 
springs  of  action,  how  to  pull  all  the  wires  to 
put  his  machinery  in  motion,  and  how  to  organize 
a  political  amiy  which  would  secretly  and  stealth- 
ily accomplish  the  most  gigantic  results.  By  these 
powers  it  is  said  that  he  outwitted  Mr.  Adams,  Mr. 
Clay,  and  Mr.  Web.ster,  and  .secured  results  which 
few  then  thought  could  be  accomplished. 

When  Andrew  Jackson  was  elected  President 
he  appointed  Mr.  \^an  Buren  Secretary  of  State. 
This  position  he  resigned  in  1831,  and  was  im- 
mediately appointed  Minister  to  England,  where 
he  went  the  same  autumn.     The  »Senate,  however, 


when  it  met,  refused  to  ratify  the  nomination,  and 
he  returned  home,  apparently  untroubled.  Later 
he  was  nominated  Vice-President  in  the  place  of 
Calhoun,  at  the  re-election  of  President  Jackson, 
and  with  .smiles  for  all  and  frowns  for  none,  he 
took  his  place  at  the  head  of  that  Senate  which  had 
refused  to  confirm  his  nomination  as  ambassador. 

His  rejection  by  the  Senate  roused  all  the  zeal 
of  President  Jackson  in  behalf  of  his  repudiated 
favorite;  and  this,  probably,  more  than  any  other 
cause  secured  his  elevation  to  the  chair  of  the 
Chief  Executive.  On  the  20th  of  May,  1836,  Mr. 
Van  Buren  received  the  Democratic  nomination 
to  succeed  Gen.  Jackson  as  President  of  the  United 
States.  He  was  elected  by  a  handsome  majority, 
to  the  delight  of  the  retiring  President.  '  'Leaving 
New  York  out  of  the  canvass,"  says  Mr.  Parton, 
"the  election  of  Mr.  Van  Buren  to  the  Presidency 
was  as  much  the  act  of  Gen.  Jackson  as  though 
the  Constitution  had  conferred  upon  him  the  power 
to  appoint  a  successor." 

His  administration  was  filled  with  exciting 
events.  The  insurrection  in  Canada,  which 
threatened  to  involve  this  country  in  war  with 
England,  the  agitation  of  the  slavery  question, 
and  finally  the  great  commercial  panic  which 
spread  over  the  country,  all  were  trials  of  his  wis- 
dom. The  financial  distress  was  attributed  to 
the  management  of  the  Democratic  party,  and 
brought  the  President  into  such  disfavor  that  he 
failed  of  re-election,  and  on  the  4th  of  March, 
1 84 1,  he  retired  from  the  presidency. 

With  the  exception  of  being  nominated  for  the 
Presidency  by  the  "Free  Soil"  Democrats  in  1848, 
Mr.  Van  Buren  lived  quietly  upon  his  estate  until 
his  death.  He  had  ever  been  a  prudent  man,  of 
frugal  habits,  and,  living  within  his  income,  had 
now  fortunately  a  competence  for  his  declining 
years.  From  his  fine  estate  at  Lindenwald,  he 
still  exerted  a  powerful  influence  upon  the  politics 
of  the  country.  From  this  time  until  his  death, 
on  the  24th  of  Jul}',  1862,  at  the  age  of  eighty 
years,  he  resided  at  Lindenwald,  a  gentleman  of 
leisure,  of  culture  and  wealth,  enjoj'ing  in  a 
healthy  old  age  probably  far  more  happiness  than 
he  had  before  experienced  amid  the  stormy  scenes 
of  his  active  life. 


^^  ;^;fe<zW^'>^ 


WILLIAM  HENRY  HARRISON. 


IILLIAM  HENRY  HARRISON,  the  ninth 
Piesideut  of  the  United  States,  was  born 
at  Berkeley,  Ya. ,  February  9,  1773.  His 
father,  Benjamin  Harrison,  was  in  comparatively 
opulent  circumstances,  and  was  one  of  the  most 
distinguished  men  of  his  day.  He  was  an  inti- 
mate friend  of  George  Washington,  was  early 
elected  a  member  of  the  Continental  Congress, 
and  was  conspicuous  among  the  patriots  of  Yir- 
ginia  in  resisting  the  encroachments  of  the  British 
crown.  In  the  celebrated  Congress  of  1775,  Ben- 
jamin Harrison  and  John  Hancock  were  both 
candidates  for  the  office  of  Speaker. 

Mr.  Harrison  was  subsequently  chosen  Gov- 
ernor of  Yirginia,  and  was  twice  re-elected.  His 
.son  William  Henry,  of  course,  enjoyed  in  child- 
hood all  the  advantages  which  wealth  and  intel- 
lectual and  cultivated  society  could  give.  Hav- 
ing received  a  thorough  common-school  educa- 
tion, he  entered  Hampden  Sidney  College,  where 
he  graduated  with  honor  soon  after  the  death  of 
his  father.  He  then  repaired  to  Philadelphia  to 
.study  medicine  under  the  instructions  of  Dr.  Rush 
and  the  guardianship  of  Robert  Morris,  both  of 
whom  were,  with  his  father,  signers  of  the  Dec- 
laration of  Independence. 

Upon  the  outbreak  of  the  Indian  troubles,  and 
notwithstanding  the  remonstrances  of  his  friends, 
he  abandoned  his  medical  studies  and  entered  the 
army,  ha\  ing  obtained  a  commission  as  Ensign 
from  President  Washington.  He  was  then  but 
nineteen  years  old.  From  that  time  he  passed 
gradually  upward  in  rank  until  he  became  aide 
to  Gen.  Wayne,  after  whose  death  he  resigned 
his  comnii.ssion.  He  was  then  appointed  Secre- 
tary of  the  Northwestern  Territory.  This  Terri- 
torj'  was  then  entitled  to  but  one  member  in  Con- 


gress, and  Harrison  was  chosen  to  fill  that  position. 
In  the  spring  of  1800  the  Northwestern  Terri- 
tory- was  divided  bj'  Congress  into  two  portions. 
The  eastern  portion,  comprising  the  region  now 
embraced  in  the  State  of  Ohio,  was  called  "The 
Territory  northwest  of  the  Ohio."  The  western 
portion,  which  included  what  is  now  called  Indi- 
ana, Illinois  and  Wisconsin,  was  called  "the  Indi- 
ana Territorj-."  William  Henry  Harrison,  then 
twenty-seven  j-ears  of  age,  was  appointed  by  John 
Adams  Governor  of  the  Indiana  Territorj-,  and 
immediately  after  also  Governor  of  Upper  Loui- 
siana. He  was  thus  ruler  over  almost  as  exten- 
sive a  realm  as  any  sovereign  upon  the  globe. 
He  was  Superintendent  of  Indian  Affairs,  and 
was  invested  with  powers  nearly  dictatorial  over 
the  then  rapidly  increasing  white  population.  The 
abilitj'  and  fidelity  with  which  he  discharged 
these  responsible  duties  may  be  inferred  from  the 
fact  that  he  was  four  times  appointed  to  this 
office — first  by  John  Adams,  twice  by  Thomas 
Jefferson,  and  afterwards  by  President  Madison. 

When  he  began  his  administration  there  were 
but  three  white  settlements  in  that  almost  bound- 
less region,  now  crowded  with  cities  and  resound- 
ing with  all  the '  tumult  of  wealth  and  traffic. 
One  of  these  settlements  was  on  the  Ohio,  nearly 
opposite  Louisville;  one  at  Yincennes,  on  the 
Waba.sh;  and  the  third  was  a  French  settlement. 

The  vast  wilderness  over  which  Gov.  Harrison 
reigned  was  filled  with  many  tribes  of  Indians. 
About  the  year  1806,  two  extraordinarj-  men, 
twin  brothers  of  the  Shawnee  tribe,  rose  among 
them.  One  of  these  was  called  Tecumseh,  or 
"the  Crouching  Panther;"  the  other  OUiwa- 
checa,  or  "the  Prophet."  Tecum!;eh  was  not 
only  an  Indian  warrior,  but  a  man  of  great  sagac- 


52 


WILLIAM  HENRY  HARRISON. 


ity,  far-reaching  foresight  and  indomitable  perse- 
verance in  any  enterprise  in  which  he  might  en- 
gage. His  brother,  the  Prophet,  was  an  orator, 
who  could  sway  the  feelings  of  the  untutored  In- 
dians as  the  gale  tossed  the  tree-tops  beneath 
which  they  dwelt.  With  an  enthusiasm  unsur- 
passed by  Peter  the  Hermit  rousing  Europe  to  the 
crusades,  he  went  from  tribe  to  tribe,  assuming 
that  he  was  specially  sent  by  the  Great  Spirit. 

Gov.  Harrison  made  many  attempts  to  con- 
ciliate the  Indians,  but  at  last  war  came,  and  at 
Tippecanoe  the  Indians  were  routed  with  great 
slaughter.  October  28,  1812,  his  army  began  its 
march.  When  near  the  Prophet's  town,  three 
Indians  of  rank  made  their  appearance  and  in- 
quired why  Gov.  Harrison  was  approaching  them 
in  so  hostile  an  attitude.  After  a  short  confer- 
ence, arrangements  were  made  for  a  meeting  the 
next  day  to  agree  upon  terms  of  peace. 

But  Gov.  Harrison  was  too  well  acquainted 
with  the  Indian  character  to  be  deceived  by  such 
protestations.  Selecting  a  favorable  spot  for  his 
night's  encampment,  he  took  ever>'  precaution 
against  surprise.  His  troops  were  posted  in  a 
hollow  square  and  slept  upon  their  arms.  The 
wakeful  Governor,  between  three  and  four  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  had  risen,  and  was  sitting 
in  conversation  with  his  aides  by  the  embers 
of  a  waning  fire.  It  was  a  chill,  cloudy  morning, 
with  a  drizzling  rain.  In  the  darkness,  the  In- 
dians had  crept  as  near  as  possible,  and  just  then, 
with  a  savage  yell,  rushed,  with  all  the  despera- 
tion which  superstition  and  passion  most  highly 
inflamed  could  give,  upon  the  left  flank  of  the 
little  army.  The  savages  had  been  amply  pro- 
vided with  guns  and  ammunition  by  the  English, 
and  their  war-whoop  was  accompanied  by  a 
shower  of  bullets. 

The  camp-fires  were  instantly  extinguished,  as 
the  light  aided  the  Indians  in  their  aim,  and 
Gen.  Harrison's  troops  stood  as  immovable  as 
the  rocks  around  them  until  day  dawned,  when 
they  made  a  simultaneous  charge  with  the  bayo- 
net and  swept  everything  before  them,  completely 
routing  the  foe. 

Gov.  Harrison  now  had  all  his  energies  tasked 
to  the  utmost.     The  British,  descending  from  the 


Canadas,  were  of  themselves  a  very  formidable 
force,  but  with  their  savage  allies  rushing  like 
wolves  from  the  forest,  burning,  plundering,  scalp- 
ing, torturing,  the  wide  frontier  was  plunged  into 
a  state  of  consternation  which  even  the  mo.st  vivid 
imagination  can  but  faintly  conceive.  Gen.  Hull 
had  made  an  ignominious  surrender  of  his  forces  at 
Detroit.  Under  these  despairing  circumstances, 
Gov.  Harrison  was  appointed  by  President  Madi- 
son Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Northwestern 
Army,  with  orders  to  retake  Detroit  and  to  protect 
the  frontiers.  It  would  be  difficult  to  place  a  man 
in  a  situation  demanding,  more  energy,  sagacity 
and  courage,  but  he  was  found  equal  to  the 
position,  and  nobly  and  triumphantly  did  he  meet 
all  the  responsibilities. 

In  1816,  Gen.  Harrison  was  chosen  a  member 
of  the  National  House  of  Representatives,  to  rep- 
resent the  District  of  Ohio.  In  Congress  he  proved 
an  active  member,  and  whenever  he  spoke  it  was 
with  a  force  of  reason  and  power  of  eloquence 
which  arrested  the  attention  of  all  the  members. 

In  18 ig,  Harrison  was  elected  to  the  vSenate  of 
Ohio,  and  in  1824,  as  one  of  the  Presidential  Elec- 
tors of  that  State,  he  gave  his  vote  for  Henry 
Clay.  The  same  year  he  was  chosen  to  the  Uni- 
ted States  Senate.  In  1836  his  friends  brought 
him  forward  as  a  candidate  for  the  Presidency 
against  Van  Buren,  but  he  was  defeated.  At  the 
close  of  Mr.  Van  Buren's  term,  he  was  re-nom- 
inated by  his  party,  and  Mr.  Harri.son  was  unani- 
mously nominated  by  the  Whigs,  with  John  Tyler 
for  the  Vice-Presidency.  The  contest  was  very 
animated.  Gen.  Jackson  gave  all  his  influence  to 
prevent  Harrison's  election,  but  his  triumph  was 
signal. 

The  cabinet  which  he  fomied,  with  Daniel  Web- 
ster at  its  head  as  Secretary  of  State,  was  one  of 
the  most  brilliant  with  which  any  President  had 
ever  been  surrounded.  Never  were  the  prospects 
of  an  administration  more  flattering,  or  the  hopes 
of  the  country  more  sanguine.  In  the  midst  of 
these  bright  and  joyous  prospects,  Gen.  Harrison 
was  seized  by  a  pleurisy-fever,  and  after  a  few 
days  of  violent  sickness  died,  on  the  4th  of  April, 
just  one  month  after  his  inauguration  as  President, 
ofthe  United  States. 


^lyTL 


JOHN  TYLER. 


(John  TYLKR,  the  tenth  President  of  the 
I  United  States,  and  was  born  in  Charles 
Q)  City  Count}-,  Va.,  March  29,  1790.  He  was 
the  favored  child  of  affluence  and  high  social  po- 
sition. At  the  early  age  of  twelve,  John  entered 
William  and  Maiy  College,  and  graduated  with 
much  honor  when  but  seventeen  years  old.  After 
graduating,  he  devoted  himself  with  great  assi- 
duity to  the  study  of  law,  partly  with  his  father 
and  partly  with  Edmund  Randolph,  one  of  the 
most  distinguished  lawyers  of  Virginia. 

At  nineteen  years  of  age,  he  commenced  the 
practice  of  law.  His  success  was  rapid  and  as- 
tonishing. It  is  said  that  three  months  had  not 
elapsed  ere  there  was  scarcely  a  case  on  the 
docket  of  the  court  in  which  he  was  not  retained. 
When  but  twenty-one  j-ears  of  age,  he  was  almost 
unanimously  elected  to  a  seat  in  the  State  Legis- 
lature. He  connected  himself  with  the  Demo- 
cratic part}',  and  warmly  advocated  the  measures 
of  Jefferson  and  Madison.  For  five  successive 
years  he  was  elected  to  the  Legislature,  receiving 
nearly  the  unanimous  vote  of  his  county. 

When  but  twenty-six  years  of  age,  he  was 
elected  a  Member  of  Congress.  Here  he  acted  ear- 
nestly and  ably  with  the  Democratic  party,  oppos- 
ing a  national  bank,  internal  improvements  by 
the  General  Government,  and  a  protective  tariff; 
advocating  a  strict  construction  of  the  Constitu- 
tion and  the  most  careful  vigilance  over  State 
rights.  His  labors  in  Congress  were  so  arduous 
that  before  the  close  of  his  second  term  he  found 
it  necessary  to  resign  and  retire  to  his  estate  in 
Charles  City  County  to  recruit  his  health.  He, 
however,  soon  after  consented  to  take  his  seat  in 
the  State  Legislature,  where  his  influence  was 
powerful  in  promoting  public  works  of  great 
utilit}'.  With  a  reputation  thus  constantly  in- 
creasing, he  was  chosen  by  a  very  large  majority 
of  votes  Governor  of  his  native  State.  His  ad- 
ministration was  a  signally  successfiil  one,  and  his 
popularity  secured  his  re-election. 


John  Randolph,  a  brilliant,  erratic,  half-crazed 
man,  then  represented  Virginia  in  the  Senate  of 
the  United  States.  A  portion,  of  the  Democratic 
party  was  displeased  with  Mr.  Randolph's  way- 
ward course,  and  brought  forward  John  Tyler  as 
his  opponent,  considering  him  the  only  man  in 
Virginia  of  sufficient  popularity  to  succeed 
again.st  the  renowned  orator  of  Roanoke.  Mr. 
Tyler  was  the  victor. 

In  accordance  with  his  professions,  upon  tak- 
ing his  .seat  in  the  Senate  he  joined  the  ranks  of 
the  oppo.sition.  He  oppo.sed  the  tariff,  and  spoke 
against  and  voted  against  the  bank  as  unconsti- 
tutional; he  strenuously  opposed  all  restrictions 
upon  slavery,  resisting  all  projects  of  internal  im- 
provements by  the  General  Government,  and 
avowed  his  sympathy  with  Mr.  Calhoun's  view 
of  nullification;  he  declared  that  Gen.  Jackson, 
by  his  opposition  to  the  nullifiers,  had  abandoned 
the  principles  of  the  Democratic  party.  Such 
was  Mr.  T}Ier's  record  in  Congress — a  record  in 
perfect  accordance  with  the  principles  which  he 
had  always  avowed. 

Returning  to  Virginia,  he  resumed  the  practice 
of  his  profession.  There  was  a  split  in  the  Demo- 
cratic party.  His  friends  still  regarded  him  as  a 
true  Jeffersonian,  gave  him  a  dinner,  and  show- 
ered compliments  upon  him.  He  had  now  at- 
tained the  age  of  forty-six,  and  his  career  had  been 
very  brilliant.  In  consequence  of  his  devotion  to 
public  business,  his  private  affairs  had  fallen  into 
some  disorder,  and  it  was  not  without  satisfac- 
tion that  he  resumed  the  practice  of  law,  and  de- 
voted himself  to  the  cultivation  of  his  plantation. 
Soon  after  this  he  removed  to  Williamsburg,  for 
the  better  education  of  his  children,  and  he  again 
took  his  seat  in  the  Legislature  of  Virginia. 

By  the  southern  Whigs  he  was  sent  to  the 
national  convention  at  Harrisburg  in  1839  to  nom- 
inate a  President.  The  majority  of  votes  were 
given  to  Gen  Harrison,  a  genuine  Whig,  much 
to  the  disappointment  of  the  South,  which  wished 


56 


JOHN  TYLER. 


for  Henry  Cla3^  To  conciliate  the  southern 
Wliigs  and  to  secure  their  vote,  the  convention 
then  nominated  John  Tyler  for  Vice-President. 
It  was  well  known  that  he  was  not  in  sympathy 
with  the  Whig  party  in  the  North;  but  the  Vice- 
President  has  very  little  power  in  the  Govern- 
ment, his  main  and  almost  only  duty  being  to 
preside  over  the  meetings  of  the  Senate.  Thus  it 
happened  that  a  Whig  President  and,  in  reality, 
a  Democratic  Vice-President  were  chosen. 

In  1S41,  Mr.  Tyler  was  inaugurated  Vice- 
President  of  the  United  States.  In  one  short 
month  from  that  time.  President  Harrison  died, 
and  Mr.  Tyler  thus  found  himself,  to  his  own 
surprise  and  that  of  the  whole  nation,  an  occu- 
pant of  the  Presidential  chair.  Hastening  from 
Williamsburg  to  Washington,  on  the  6th  of 
April  he  was  inaugurated  to  the  high  and  re- 
sponsible office.  He  was  placed  in  a  position  of 
exceeding  delicacy  and  difficulty.  All  his  long 
life  he  had  been  opposed  to  the  main  j-rinciples  of 
the  party  which  had  brought  him  into  power. 
He  had  ever  been  a  consistent,  honest  man,  with 
an  unblemished  record.  Gen.  Harrison  had  se- 
lected a  Whig  cabinet.  Should  he  retain  them, 
and  thus  surround  himself  with  counselors  whose 
views  were  antagonistic  to  his  own  ?  or,  on  the 
other  hand,  should  he  turn  against  the  party 
which  had  elected  him,  and  select  a  cabinet  in 
harmony  with  himself,  and  which  would  oppose 
all  those  views  which  the  Whigs  deemed  essen- 
tial to  the  public  welfare  ?  This  was  his  fearful 
dilemma.  He  invited  the  cabinet  which  Presi- 
dent Harrison  had  selected  to  retain  their  seats, 
and  recommended  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer, 
that  God  would  guide  and  bless  us. 

The  Whigs  carried  through  Congress  a  bill  for 
the  incorporation  of  a  fiscal  bank  of  ;he  United 
States.  The  President,  after  ten  daj-s'  delay,  re- 
turned it  with  his  veto.  He  suggested,  however, 
that  he  would  approve  of  a  bill  drawn  up  upon 
such  a  plan  as  he  proposed.  Such  a  bill  was  ac- 
cordingly prepared,  and  privately  submitted  to 
him.  He  gave  it  his  approval.  It  was  passed 
without  alteration,  and  he  sent  it  back  with  his 
veto.  Here  commenced  the  open  rupture.  It  is 
said  that  Mr.  Tyler  was  provoked  to  this  meas- 


ure by  a  published  letter  from  the  Hon.  John  M. 
Botts,  a  distinguished  Virginia  Whig,  who  se- 
verely touched  the  pride  of  the  President. 

The  opposition  now  exultingly  received  the 
President  into  their  arms.  The  party  which 
elected  him  denounced  him  bitterly.  All  the 
members  of  his  cabinet,  excepting  Mr.  Webster, 
resigned.  The  Whigs  of  Congress,  both  the 
Senate  and  the  House,  held  a  meeting  and  i.s.sued 
an  address  to  the  people  of  the  United  States, 
proclaiming  that  all  political  alliance  between  the 
Whigs  and  President  Tyler  was  at  an  end. 

Still  the  President  attempted  to  conciliate.  He 
appointed  a  new  cabinet  of  distinguished  Whigs 
and  Conservatives,  carefully  leaving  out  all  strong 
party  men.  Mr.  Webster  soon  found  it  necessary 
to  resign,  forced  out  by  the  pressure  of  his  Whig 
friends.  Thus  the  four  years  of  Mr.  Tyler's  un- 
fortunate administration  passed  sadly  away.  No 
one  was  satisfied.  The  land  was  filled  with  mur- 
murs and  vituperation.  Whigs  and  Democrats 
alike  assailed  him.  More  and  more,  however,  he 
brought  himself  into  sympathy  with  his  old 
friends,  the  Democrats,  until  at  the  close  of  his 
term  he  gave  his  whole  influence  to  the  support 
of  Mr.  Polk,  the  Democratic  candidate  for  his 
successor. 

On  the  4th  of  March,  1845,  President  T)ler  re- 
tired from  the  harassments  of  office,  to  the  regret 
of  neither  party,  and  probably  to  his  own  un.speak- 
able  relief  The  remainder  of  his  days  were 
passed  mainly  in  the  retirement  of  his  beautiful 
home — Sherwood  Forest,  Charles  City  County, 
Va.  His  first  wife,  Miss  Letitia  Christian,  died 
in  Washington  in  1842;  and  in  June,  1844, 
he  was  again  married,  at  New  York,  to  Miss  Julia 
Gardiner,  a  young  lady  of  many  personal  and 
intellectual  accomplishments. 

When  the  great  Rebellion  rose,  wliicli  the 
State  Rights  and  nullifying  doctrines  of  John  C. 
Calhoun  had  inaugurated.  President  Tyler  re- 
nounced his  allegiance  to  the  United  States,  and 
joined  the  Confederates.  He  was  chosen  a  mem- 
ber of  their  Congress,  and  while  engaged  in 
active  measures  to  destroy,  by  force  of  arms,  the 
Government  over  which  he  had  once  presided,  he. 
was  taken  sick  and  soon  died. 


^k7  -- 


JAMES  K.  POLK. 


(TAMEvS  K.  polk,  the  eleventh  President  of 
I  the  United  States,  was  bom  in  Mecklenburgh 
(2/  Countj',  N.  C,  November  2,  1795.  His 
parents  were  Samuel  and  Jane  (Knox)  Polk,  the 
former  a  son  of  Col.  Thoma,s  Polk,  who  located 
at  the  above  place,  as  one  of  the  first  pioneers,  in 
1735.  In  1806,  with  his  wife  and  children,  and 
soon  after  followed  by  most  of  the  members  of  the 
Polk  family,  vSamuel  Polk  emigrated  some  two  or 
three  hundred  miles  farther  west,  to  the  rich  val- 
ley of  the  Duck  River.  Here,  in  the  midst  of  the 
wilderness,  in  a  region  which  was  .subsequently 
called  Maun.-  County,  they  erected  their  log  huts 
and  established  their  homes.  In  the  hard  toil  of 
a  new  fanu  in  the  wilderness,  James  K.  Polk 
spent  the  early  years  of  his  childhood  and  youth. 
His  father,  adding  the  pursuit  of  a  surveyor  to 
that  of  a  farmer,  gradualh^  increa.sed  in  wealth, 
until  he  became  one  of  the  leading  men  of  the 
region.  His  mother  was  a  superior  woman,  of 
strong  common  sense  and  earnest  piety. 

Very  early  in  life  James  developed  a  taste  for 
reading,  and  expressed  the  strongest  desire  to  ob- 
tain a  liberal  education.  His  mother's  training 
had  made  him  methodical  in  his  habits,  had  taught 
him  punctuality  and  industr>%  and  had  inspired 
him  with  lofty  principles  of  morality.  His  health 
was  frail,  and  his  father,  fearing  that  he  might  not 
be  able  to  endure  a  sedentary  life,  got  a  situation 
for  him  behind  the  counter,  hoping  to  fit  him  for 
commercial  pursuits. 

This  was  to  James  a  bitter  disappointment.  He 
had  no  taste  for  these  duties,  and  his  daily  tasks 
were  irksome  in  the  extreme.  He  remained  in  this 
uncongenial  occupation  but  a  few  weeks,  when, 
at  his  earnest  solicitation,  his  father  removed 
him  and  made  arrangements  for  him  to  pros- 
ecute his  studies.  Soon  after  he  sent  him  to  Mur- 
freesboro  Academy.  With  ardor  which  could 
scarcely  be  surpassed,  he  pressed  forward  in  his 


studies,  and  in  less  than  two  and  a-half  years,  in 
the  autumn  of  18 15,  entered  the  sophomore  class 
in  the  University  of  North  Carolina,  at  Chapel 
Hill.  Here  he  was  one  of  the  most  exemplar)-  of 
scholars,  punctual  in  ever)'  exercise,  never  allow- 
ing himself  to  be  absent  from  a  recitation  or  a 
religious  sen'ice. 

Mr.  Polk  graduated  in  1818,  with  the  highest 
honors,  being  deemed  the  best  scholar  of  his  class, 
l)oth  in  mathematics  and  the  classics.  He  was 
then  twenty-three  j-ears  of  age.  His  health  was 
at  this  time  much  impaired  by  the  assiduity  with 
which  he  had  prosecuted  his  studies.  After  a 
short  season  of  relaxation,  he  went  to  Nashville, 
and  entered  the  office  of  Felix  Grundj-,  to  study 
law.  Here  Mr.  Polk  renewed  his  acquaintance 
with  Andrew  Jackson,  who  resided  on  his  planta- 
tion, the  "  Hermitage,"  but  a  few  miles  from 
Nashville.  They  had  probably  been  slightly  ac- 
quainted before. 

Mr.  Polk's  father  was  a  Jeffersonian  Republican 
and  James  K.  adhered  to  the  same  political  faith. 
He  was  a  popular  public  speaker,  and  was  con- 
stantly called  upon  to  address  the  meetings  of  his 
party  friends.  His  skill  as  a  speaker  was  such 
that  he  was  popularly  called  the  Napoleon  of  the 
stump.  He  was  a  man  of  unblemished  morals, 
genial  and  courteous  in  his  bearing,  and  with  that 
sympathetic  nature  in  the  joys  and  griefs  of  oth- 
ers which  gave  him  hosts  of  friends.  In  1823, 
he  was  elected  to  the  Legislature  of  Tennessee, 
and  gave  his  strong  influence  toward  the  election 
of  his  friend,  Mr.  Jackson,  to  the  Presidency  of 
the  United  States. 

In  Januar)-,  1824,  Mr.  Polk  married  Miss  Sarah 
Childress,  of  Rutherford  County,  Tenn.  His 
bride  was  altogether  worthy  of  him — a  lady  of 
beauty  and  culture.  In  the  fall  of  1S25  Mr.  Polk 
was  chosen  a  member  of  Congress,  and  the  .satis- 
faction he  gave  his  constituents  may  be  inferred 


6o 


JAMES  K.  POLK. 


from  the  fact,  that  for  fourteen  successive  years, 
or  until  1839,  he  was  continued  in  that  ofl&ce.  He 
then  voluntarily  withdrew,  only  that  he  might 
accept  the  Gubernatorial  chair  of  Tennessee.  In 
Congress  he  was  a  laborious  member,  a  frequent 
and  a  popular  speaker.  He  was  always  in  his 
seat,  alwaj^s  courteous,  and  whenever  he  spoke 
it  was  alwaj's  to  the  point,  without  any  ambitious 
rhetorical  di.splay. 

During  five  sessions  of  Congress  Mr.  Polk  was 
Speaker  of  the  House.  Strong  passions  were 
roused  and  stormy  scenes  were  witnessed,  but  he 
performed  his  arduous  duties  to  a  verj^  general 
satisfaction,  and  a  unanimous  vote  of  thanks  to 
him  was  passed  by  the  House  as  he  withdrew  on 
the  4th  of  March,  1839. 

In  accordance  with  Southern  usage,  Mr.  Polk, 
as  a  candidate  for  Governor,  canvassed  the  State. 
He  was  elected  by  a  large  majority,  and  on  Octo- 
ber 14,  1839,  took  the  oath  of  office  at  Nashville. 
In  1 841  his  term  of  office  expired,  and  he  was 
again  the  candidate  of  the  Democratic  party,  but 
was  defeated. 

On  the  4th  of  March,  1845,  Mr.  Polk  was  in- 
augurated President  of  the  United  States.  The 
verdict  of  the  country  in  favor  of  the  annexation 
of  Texas  exerted  its  influence  upon  Congress, 
and  the  last  act  of  the  administration  of  President 
Tj'ler  was  to  affix  his  signature  to  a  joint  resolu- 
tion of  Congress,  passed  on  the  3d  of  March,  ap- 
proving of  the  annexation  of  Texas  to  the  Union. 
As  Mexico  still  claimed  Texas  as  one  of  her 
provinces,  the  Mexican  Minister,  Almonte,  im- 
mediately demanded  his  passports  and  left  the 
country,  declaring  the  act  of  the  annexation  to  be 
an  act  hostile  to  Mexico. 

In  his  first  message.  President  Polk  urged  that 
Texas  should  immediately,  by  act  of  Congress,  be 
received  into  the  Union  on  the  same  footing  with 
the  other  States.  In  the  mean  time.  Gen.  Taylor 
was  sent  with  an  army  into  Texas  to  hold  the 
countrj'.  He  was  first  sent  to  Nueces,  which  the 
Mexicans  said  was  the  western  boundary'  of  Tex- 
as. Then  he  was  sent  nearly  two  hundred  miles 
further  west,  to  the  Rio  Grande,  where  he  erected 
batteries  which  commanded  the  Mexican  city  of 
Matamoras,   which  was  situated  on  the  western 


banks.  The  anticipated  collision  soon  took  place, 
and  war  was  declared  against  Mexico  by  President 
Polk.  The  war  was  pushed  forward  by  his  ad- 
ministration with  great  vigor.  Gen.  Taylor, 
whose  army  was  first  called  one  of  ' '  obsen'ation, ' ' 
then  of  "occupation,"  then  of  "invasion,"  was 
sent  forward  to  Monterey.  The  feeble  Mexicans 
in  every  encounter  were  hopeles.sly  slaughtered. 
The  day  of  judgment  alone  can  reveal  the  miser>' 
which  this  war  caused.  It  was  by  the  ingenuity 
of  Mr.  Polk's  administration  that  the  war  was 
brought  on. 

"To  the  victors  belong  the  spoils. "  Mexico 
was  prostrate  before  us.  Her  capital  was  in  our 
hands.  We  now  consented  to  peace  upon  the 
condition  that  Mexico  should  surrender  to  us,  in 
addition  to  Texas,  all  of  New  Mexico,  and  all  of 
Upper  and  Lower  Califoniia.  This  new  demand 
embraced,  exclusive  of  Texas,  eight  hundred 
thousand  square  miles.  This  was  an  extent  of 
territorj'  equal  to  nine  States  of  the  size  of  New 
York.  Thus  slavery  was  securing  eighteen  ma- 
jestic States  to  be  added  to  the  Union.  There 
were  some  Americans  who  thought  it  all  right; 
there  were  others  who  thought  it  all  wrong.  In 
the  prosecution  of  this  war  we  expended  twenty 
thousand  lives  and  more  than  $100,000,000.  Of 
this  money  $15,000,000  were  paid  to  Mexico. 

On  the  3d  of  March,  1849,  Mr.  Polk  retired 
from  office,  having  ser\'ed  one  term.  The  next 
day-  was  Snndaj-.  On  the  5th,  Gen.  Taylor  was 
inaugurated  as  his  successor.  Mr.  Polk  rode  to 
the  Capitol  in  the  same  carriage  with  Gen.  Tay- 
lor, and  the  same  evening,  with  Mrs.  Polk,  he 
conmienced  his  return  to  Tennessee.  He  was 
then  but  fiftj--four  years  of  age.  He  had  alway-s 
been  strictl}'  temperate  in  all  his  habits,  "and  his 
health  was  good.  With  an  ample  fortune,  a 
choice  library^  a  cultivated  mind,  and  domestic 
ties  of  the  dearest  nature,  it  seemed  as  though 
long  years  of  tranquillitj-  and  happiness  were  be- 
fore him.  But  the  cholera — that  fearful  scourge 
— was  then  sweeping  up  the  Valley  of  the  Missis- 
sippi, and  he  contracted  the  disease,  dying  on  the 
15th  of  June,  1849,  i"  the  fifty-fourth  year  of  his 
age,  greatly  mourned  by  his  countr\-men.         , 


ZACHARY  TAYLOR. 


G7ACHARY  TAYLOR,  Uvelfth  President  of 
j.  the  Uuitefl  States,  was  born  on  the  24th  of 
/~)  November,  1784,  in  Orange  County,  \'a. 
His  father.  Col.  Taylor,  was  a  Virginian  of 
note,  and  a  distinguished  patriot  and  soldier  of 
the  Revolution.  When  Zacharj-  was  an  infant, 
his  father,  with  his  wife  and  two  children,  emi- 
grated to  Kentucky,  where  he  settled  in  the  path- 
less wilderness,  a  few  miles  from  Louisville.  In 
this  frontier  home,  away  from  civilization  and  all 
its  refinements,  young  Zachary  could  enjoy  but 
few  social  and  educational  advantages.  When 
six  years  of  age  he  attended  a  common  school, 
and  was  then  regarded  as  a  bright,  active  boy, 
rather  remarkable  for  bluntness  and  decision  of 
character.  He  was  strong,  fearless  and  self-reli- 
ant, and  manifested  a  strong  desire  to  enter  the 
army  to  fight  the  Indians,  who  were  ravaging  the 
frontiers.  There  is  little  to  be  recorded  of  the 
uneventful  years  of  his  childhood  on  his  father's 
large  but  lonely  plantation. 

In  1808,  his  father  succeeded  in  obtaining  for 
him  a  commission  as  Lieutenant  in  the  United 
States  annj-,  and  he  joined  the  troops  which  were 
stationed  at  New  Orleans  under  Gen.  Wilkinson. 
Soon  after  this  he  married  Miss  Margaret  Smith, 
a  yoiuig  lady  from  one  of  the  first  families  of 
Maryland. 

Immediately  after  the  declaration  of  war  with 
England,  in  1812,  Capt.  Taylor  (for  he  had  then 
been  promoted  to  that  rank)  was  put  in  command 
of  Ft.  Harrison,  on  the  Wabash,  about  fifty  miles 
above  Vincennes.  This  fort  had  been  built  in  the 
wilderness  by  Gen.  Harri.son,  on  his  march  to 
Tippecanoe.  It  was  one  of  the  first  points  of  at- 
tack by  the  Indians,  led  by  Tecumseh.  Its  garri- 
son consisted  of  a  broken  company  of  infantry, 
numbering  fifty  men,  manj-  of  whom  were  sick. 

Early  in  the  autumn  of  1812,  the  Indians, 
stealthily,  and  in  large  nnmbers,  moved  upon  the 


fort.  Their  approach  was  first  indicated  by  the 
nuirder  of  two  soldiers  just  outside  of  the  stockade. 
Capt.  Taylor  made  every  possible  preparation  to 
meet  the  anticipated  assault.  On  the  4th  of  Sep- 
tember, a  band  of  forty  painted  and  plumed  sav- 
ages c&nie  to  the  fort,  waving  a  white  flag,  and 
informed  Capt.  Taylor  that  in  the  morning  their 
chief  would  come  to  have  a  talk  with  him.  It 
was  evident  that  their  object  was  merely  to  ascer- 
tain the  state  of  things  at  the  fort,  and  Capt. 
Ta\ior,  well  versed  in  the  wiles  of  the  savages, 
kept  them  at  a  distance. 

The  sun  went  down;  the  savages  disappeared; 
the  garrison  slept  upon  their  arms.  One  hour 
before  midnight  the  war-whoop  burst  from  a 
thousand  lips  in  the  forest  around,  followed  by 
the  discharge  of  musketr>'  and  the  rush  of  the 
foe.  Every  man,  sick  and  well,  sprang  to  his 
post.  Every  man  knew  that  defeat  was  not 
merelj'  death,  but,  in  the  case  of  capture,  death  by 
the  most  agonizing  and  prolonged  torture.  No 
pen  can  describe,  no  imagination  can  conceive,  the 
scenes  which  ensued.  The  savages  succeeded  in 
setting  fire  to  one  of  the  block-houses.  Until  six 
o'clock  in  the  morning  this  awful  conflict  con- 
tinued, when  the  savages,  baffled  at  ever>'  point 
and  gnashing  their  teeth  with  rage,  retired. 
Capt.  Taylor,  for  this  gallant  defense,  was  pro- 
moted to  the  rank  of  Major  by  brevet. 

Until  the  close  of  the  war,  Maj.  Taylor  was 
placed  in  such  situations  that  he  saw  but  little 
more  of  active  service.  He  was  sent  far  away 
into  the  depths  of  the  wilderness  to  Ft.  Craw- 
ford, on  Fox  River,  which  empties  into  Green 
Bay.  Here  there  was  little  to  be  done  but  to 
wear  away  the  tedious  hours  as  one  best  could. 
There  were  no  books,  no  society,  no  intellectual 
stimulus.  Thus  with  him  the  uneventful  years 
rolled  on.  Gradually  he  rose  to  the  rank  of 
Colonel.     In   the   Black  Hawk  War,   which   re- 


64 


ZACHARY  TAYLOR. 


suited  in  the  capture  of  that  renowned  chieftain, 
Col.  Taylor  took  a  subordinate,  but  a  brave  and 
efficient,  part. 

For  twentj'-four  jears  Col.  Taylor  was  engaged 
in  the  defense  of  the  frontiers,  in  scenes  so  re- 
mote, and  in  employments  so  obscure,  that  his 
name  was  unknown  beyond  the  limits  of  his  own 
immediate  acquaintance.  In  the  year  1836,  he 
was  sent  to  Florida  to  compel  the  Seminole  Indi- 
ans to  vacate  that  region,  and  retire  beyond  the 
Mississippi,  as  their  chiefs  by  treaty  had  prom- 
ised they  should  do.  The  services  rendered  here 
secured  for  Col.  Taylor  the  high  appreciation  of 
the  Government,  and  as  a  reward  he  was  ele- 
vated to  the  high  rank  of  Brigadier-General  by 
brevet,  and  soon  •  after,  in  May,  1838,  was  ap- 
pointed to  the  chief  command  of  the  United 
States  troops  in  Florida. 

After  two  jears  of  wearisome  emplo}-ment 
amidst  the  everglades  of  the  Peninsula,  Gen.  Tay- 
lor obtained,  at  his  own  request,  a  change  of 
command,  and  was  stationed  over  the  Department 
of  the  Southwest.  This  field  embraced  lyonisiana, 
Mississippi,  Alabama  and  Georgia.  Establishing 
his  headquarters  at  Ft.  Jessup,  in  Louisiana,  he 
removed  his  family  to  a  plantation  which  he  pur- 
chased near  Baton  Rouge.  Here  he  remained 
for  five  years,  buried,  as  it  were,  from  the  world, 
but  faithfully  discharging  every  dut)-  imposed 
upon  him. 

In  1846,  Gen.  Taylor  was  sent  to  guard  the 
land  between  the  Nueces  and  Rio  Grande,  the 
latter  river  being  the  boundary  of  Texas,  which 
was  then  claimed  by  the  United  States.  Soon 
the  war  with  Mexico  was  brought  on,  and  at  Palo 
Alto  and  Resaca  de  la  Palma,  Gen.  Taylor  won 
brilliant  victories  over  the  Mexicans.  The  rank 
of  Major-General  by  brevet  was  then  conferred 
upon  Gen.  Taylor,  and  his  name  was  received 
with  enthusiasm  almost  everywhere  in  the  na- 
tion. Then  came  "the  battles  of  Monterej-  and 
Buena  Vista,  in  which  he  won  signal  victories 
over  forces  much  larger  than  he  commanded. 

The  tidings  of  the  brilliant  victory  of  Buena 
Vista  spread  the  wildest  enthusiasm  over  the 
country.  The  name  of  Gen.  Taylor  was  on 
everj-  one's  lips.     The   Whig  party  decided  to 


take  advantage  of  this  wonderful  popularity  in 
bringing  forward  the  unpolished,  unlettered,  hon- 
est soldier  as  their  candidate  for  the  Presidency. 
Gen.  Taylor  was  astonished  at  the  announce- 
ment, and  for  a  time  would  not  listen  to  it,  de- 
claring that  he  was  not  at  all  qualified  for  such 
an  office.  So  little  interest  had  he  taken  in  poli- 
tics, that  for  forty  )-ears  he  had  not  cast  a  vote. 
It  was  not  without  chagrin  that  several  distin- 
guished statesmen,  who  had  been  long  years  in 
the  public  service,  found  their  claims  set  aside  in 
behalf  of  one  whose  name  had  never  been  heard 
of,  save  in  connection  with  Palo  Alto,  Resaca  de 
la  Palma,  MontercN-  and  Buena  Vista.  It  is  said 
that  Daniel  Webster,  in  his  haste,  remarked,  "  It 
is  a  nomination  not  fit  to  be  made." 

Gen.  Taylor  was  not  an  eloquent  speaker  nor  a 
fine  writer.  His  friends  took  possession  of  him, 
and  prepared  such  few  communications  as  it  was 
needful  should  be  presented  to  the  public.  The 
popularity  of  the  successful  warrior  swept  the 
land.  He  was  triumphantly  elected  over  two 
opposing  candidates, — Gen.  Cass  and  Ex-Presi- 
dent Martin  Van  Buren.  Though  he  selected  an 
excellent  cabinet,  the  good  old  man  found  himself 
in  a  very  uncongenial  position,  and  was  at  times 
sorely  perplexed  and  harassed.  His  mental  suf- 
ferings were  very  severe,  and  probabl}-  tended  to 
hasten  his  death.  The  pro-slavery  party  was 
pu.shing  its  claims  with  tireless  energy;  expedi- 
tions were  fitting  out  to  capture  Cuba;  California 
was  pleading  for  admission  to  the  Union,  while 
slavery  stood  at  the  door  to  bar  her  out.  Gen. 
Taylor  found  the  political  conflicts  in  Wa.shington 
to  be  far  more  trying  to  the  ner\'es  than  battles 
with  Mexicans  or  Indians. 

In  the  midst  of  all  these  troubles.  Gen.  Taylor, 
after  he  had  occupied  the  Presidential  chair  but 
little  over  a  year,  took  cold,  and  after  a  brief 
sickness  of  but  little  over  five  days,  died,  on  the 
9th  of  July,  1850.  His  last  words  were,  "I  am 
not  afraid  to  die.  I  am  ready.  I  have  endeav- 
ored to  do  my  duty."  He  died  universally  re- 
spected and  beloved.  An  honest,  unpretending 
man,  he  had  been  steadily  growing  in  the  affec- 
tions of  the  people,  and  the  Nation  bitterlj-  la- 
mented his  death. 


?^m 


W  :  -^  ft; 


/  c/y    '^(^c-^U^f  <riO 


MILLARD  FILLMORE. 


jV  yi  ILLARD  FILLMORE,  thirteenth  President 
I  y  of  the  United  States,  was  born  at  Summer 
[0  Hill.  Cayuga  County,  N.  Y.,  on  the  7th  of 
J.uuary,  1800.  Hisfather  was  a  farmer,  and,  owing 
t;j  misfortune,  in  humble  circumstances.  Of  his 
r.iother,  the  daughter  of  Dr.  Abiathar  Millard,  of 
Pittsfield,  Mass.,  it  has  been  said  that  she  pos- 
sessed an  intellect  of  a  high  order,  united  with 
much  personal  loveliness,  sweetness  of  disposi- 
tion, graceful  manners  and  exquisite  sensibilities. 
She  died  in  1831,  having  lived  to  see  her  son  a 
young  man  of  distinguished  promise,  though  she 
was  not  permitted  to  witness  the  high  dignity 
which  he  finally  attained. 

In  consequence  of  the  .secluded  home  and  limited 
means  of  his  father,  Millard  enjoyed  but  slender 
advantages  for  education  in  his  earh-  j-ears.  The 
common  schools,  which  he  cccasionalh-  attended, 
were  very  imperfect  institutions,  and  books  were 
scarce  and  expensive.  There  was  nothing  then 
in  his  character  to  indicate  the  brilliant  career 
upon  which  he  was  about  to  enter.  He  was  a 
plain  farmer's  boy — intelligent,  good-looking, 
kind-hearted.  The  sacred  iufluences  of  home 
had  taught  him  to  revere  the  Bible,  and  had  laid 
the  foundations  of  an  upright  character.  When 
fourteen  years  of  age,  his  father  sent  him  some 
hundred  miles  from  home  to  the  then  wilds  of 
Livingston  County,  to  learn  the  trade  of  a  clothier. 
Near  the  mill  there  was  a  small  village,  where 
some  enterprising  man  had  commenced  the  col- 
lection of  a  village  librar}-.  This  proved  an  in- 
estimable blessing  to  j^oung  Fillmore.  His  even- 
ings were  spent  in  reading.  Soon  every  leisure 
moment  was  occupied  with  books.  His  thirst  for 
knowledge  became  insatiate,  and  the  selections 
which  he  made  were  continually  more  elevating 
and  instructive.  He  read  history,  biography, 
oratory-,   and  thus  gradually  there  was  enkindled 


in  his  heart  a  desire  to  be  something  more  than  a 
mere  worker  with  his  hands. 

The  yoiuig  clothier  had  now  attained  the  age 
of  nineteen  j'ears,  and  was  of  fine  personal  appear- 
ance and  of  gentlemanly  demeanor.  It  so  hap- 
pened that  there  was  a  gentleman  in  the  neigh- 
borhood of  ample  pecuniarj-  means  and  of  benev- 
olence,— Judge  Walter  Wood, — who  was  struck 
with  the  prepossessing  appearance  of  young  Fill- 
more. He  made  his  acquaintance,  and  was  so 
much  impres.sed  with  his  ability  and  attainments 
that  he  advised  him  to  abandon  his  trade  and  de- 
vote himself  to  the  study  of  the  law.  The  j-oung 
man  replied  that  he  had  no  means  of  his  own, 
no  friends  to  help  him,  and  that  his  previous  edu- 
cation had  been  verj-  imperfect.  But  Judge  Wood 
had  .so  much  confidence  in  him  that  he  kindly 
offered  to  take  him  into  his  own  office,  and  to 
lend  him  such  money  as  he  needed.  Most  grate- 
fully the  generous  offer  was  accepted. 

There  is  in  many  minds  a  strange  delusion 
about  a  collegiate  education.  A  young  man  is 
supposed  to  be  liberallj-  educated  if  he  has  gradu- 
ated at  some  college.  But  many  a  boy  who  loi- 
ters through  uni\-ersitj-  halls  and  then  enters  a 
law  office  is  by  no  means  as  well  prepared  to 
prosecute  his  legal  studies  as  was  Millard  Fill- 
more when  he  graduated  at  the  clothing-mill  at 
the  end  of  four  years  of  manual  labor,  during 
which  even,-  leisure  moment  had  been  devoted  to 
intense  mental  culture. 

In  1823,  when  twent3^-three  j-ears  of  age,  he 
was  admitted  to  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas. 
He  then  went  to  the  village  of  Aurora,  and  com- 
menced the  practice  of  law.  In  this  secluded, 
quiet  region,  his  practice,  of  course,  was  limited, 
and  there  was  no  opportunity  for  a  sudden  rise  in 
fortune  or  in  fame.  Here,  in  1826,  he  married  a 
lady  of  great  moral  worth,  and  one  capable  of 


MILLARD  FILLMORE. 


adorning  any  station  she  might  be  called  to  fill, — 
Miss  Abigail  Powers. 

His  elevation  of  character,  his  untiring  industry, 
his  legal  acquirements,  and  his  skill  as  an  advo- 
cate, gradually  attracted  attention,  and  he  was 
invited  to  enter  into  partnership,  under  highly  ad- 
vantageous circumstances,  with  an  elder  member 
of  the  Bar  in  Buffalo.  Just  before  removing  to 
Buffalo,  in  1829,  he  took  his  seat  in  the  House  of 
Assembly  of  the  State  of  New  York,  as  a  Repre- 
sentative from  Erie  County.  Though  he  had 
never  taken  a  very  active  part  in  politics,  his  vote 
and  sympathies  were  with  the  Whig  party.  The 
State  was  then  Democratic,  and  he  found  himself 
in  a  helpless  minority  in  the  Legislature;  still  the 
testimony  comes  from  all  parties  that  his  courtesy, 
ability  and  integrity  won,  to  a  verj-  unusual  de- 
gree, the  respect  of  his  associates. 

In  the  autumn  of  1832,  he  was  elected  to  a 
seat  in  the  United  States  Congress.  He  entered 
that  troubled  arena  in  the  most  tumultuous  hours 
of  our  national  history,  when  the  great  conflict 
respecting  the  national  bank  and  the  removal  of 
the  deposits  was  raging. 

His  term  of  two  years  closed,  and  he  returned 
to  his  profession,  which  he  pursued  with  increas- 
ing reputation  and  success.  After  a  lapse  of  two 
years  he  again  became  a  candidate  for  Congress; 
was  re-elected,  and  took  his  seat  in  1837.  ^i^ 
past  experience  as  a  Representative  gave  him 
strength  and  confidence.  The  first  term  of  service 
in  Congress  to  any  man  can  be  but  little  more 
than  an  introduction.  He  was  now  prepared  for 
active  duty.  All  his  energies  were  brought  to 
bear  upon  the  public  good.  Every  measure  re- 
ceived his  impress. 

Mr.  Fillmore  was  now  a  man  of  wide  repute, 
and  his  popularity  filled  the  State.  In  the  year 
1847,  when  he  had  attained  the  age  of  forty- 
seven  years,  he  was  elected  Comptroller  of  the 
State.  His  labors  at  the  Bar,  in  the  Legisla- 
ture, in  Congress  and  as  Comptroller,  had  given 
him  very  considerable  fame.  The  Whigs  were 
casting  about  to  find  suitable  candidates  for  Presi- 
dent and  Vice-President  at  the  approaching  elec- 
tion. Far  away  on  the  waters  of  the  Rio  Grande, 
there  was  a  rough  old  soldier,  who  had   fought 


one  or  two  .successful  battles  with  the  Mexicans, 
which  had  caused  his  name  to  be  proclaimed  in 
trumpet-tones  all  over  the  land  as  a  candidate  for 
the  presidency.  But  it  was  necessarj^  to  associate 
with  him  on  the  same  ticket  some  man  of  repu- 
tation as  a  statesman. 

Under  the  influence  of  these  considerations,  the 
names  of  Zacharj^  Taylor  and  Millard  Fillmore 
became  the  rallying-cry  of  the  Whigs,  as  their 
candidates  for  President  and  Vice-President.  The 
Whig  ticket  was  signallj-  triumphant.  On  the 
4th  of  March,  1849,  Gen.  Taylor  was  inaugurated 
President,  and  Millard  Fillmore  Vice-President, 
of  the  United  States. 

On  the  9th  of  July,  1850,  President  Taylor, 
about  one  year  and  four  months  after  his  inaugura- 
tion, was  suddenly  taken  sick  and  died.  By  the 
Constitution,  Vice-President  Fillmore  thus  be- 
came President.  He  appointed  a  very  able  cabi- 
net, of  which  the  illustrious  Daniel  Webster  was 
Secretary  of  State;  neverthele.ss,  he  had  serious 
difficulties  to  contend  with,  .since  the  opposition 
had  a  majority  in  both  Houses.  He  did  all  in  his 
power  to  conciliate  the  South;  but  the  pro-slavery 
party  in  the  South  felt  the  inadequacy  of  all 
measures  of  transient  conciliation.  The  popula- 
tion of  the  free  States  was  so  rapidly  increasing 
over  that  of  the  .slave  States,  that  it  was  inevitable 
that  the  power  of  the  Government  should  soon 
pa.ss  into  the  hands  of  the  free  States.  The  fa- 
mous compromise  measures  were  adopted  under 
Mr.  Fillmore's  administration,  and  the  Japan  ex- 
pedition was  sent  out.  On  the  4th  of  March, 
1853,  he,  having  served  one  term,  retired. 

In  1856,  Mr.  Fillmore  was  nominated  for  the 
Presidency  by  the  "Know-Nothing"  part)-,  but 
was  beaten  by  Mr.  Buchanan.  After  that  Mr. 
Fillmore  lived  in  retirement.  During  the  terri- 
ble conflict  of  civil  war,  he  was  mosth-  silent.  It 
was  generally  supposed  that  his  sympathies  were 
rather  with  those  who  were  endeavoring  to  over- 
throw our  institutions.  President  Fillmore  kept 
aloof  from  the  conflict,  without  any  cordial  words 
of  cheer  to  one  party  or  the  otlier.  He  was  thus 
forgotten  by  both.  He  lived  to  a  ripe  old  age, 
and  died  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  March  8,  1874. 


w. 


FRANKLIN  PIERCE. 


""RANKLIN  pierce,  the  fourteenth  Presi- 
'3  dent  of  the  United  States,  was  born  in  Hills- 
borough,  N.  H.,  November  23,  1804.  His 
lather  was  a  Revohitionary  soldier,  who  with  his 
own  strong  arm  hewed  out  a  home  in  the  wilder- 
ness. He  was  a  man  of  inflexible  integritj',  of 
strong,  though  uncultivated,  mind,  and  was  an  un- 
compromising Democrat.  The  mother  of  Frank- 
lin Pierce  was  all  that  a  son  could  desire — an  in- 
telligent, prudent,  affectionate,  Christian  woman. 

Franklin,  who  was  the  sixth  of  eight  children, 
was  a  remarkably  bright  and  handsome  boy, 
generous,  warm-hearted  and  brave.  He  won 
alike  the  love  of  old  and  young.  The  boys  on 
the  play-ground  lo^•ed  him.  His  teachers  loved 
him.  The  neighbors  looked  upon  him  with  pride 
and  affection.  He  was  by  instinct  a  gentleman, 
always  speaking  kind  words,  and  doing  kind 
deeds,  with  a  peculiar,  unstudied  tact  which 
taught  him  what  was  agreeable.  Without  de- 
veloping any  precocity  of  genius,  or  any  unnatural 
devotion  to  books,  he  was  a  good  scholar,  and  in 
body  and  mind  a  finely  developed  boy. 

When  sixteen  years  of  age,  in  the  year  1820, 
he  entered  Bowdoin  College,  at  Brunswick,  Me. 
He  was  one  of  the  most  popular  young  men  in 
the  college.  The  purity  of  his  moral  character, 
the  unvarying  courtesy  of  his  demeanor,  his  rank 
as  a  scholar,  and  genial  nature,  rendered  him  a 
universal  favorite.  There  was  something  pe- 
culiarly winning  in  his  address,  and  it  was  evi- 
dently not  in  the  slightest  degree  studied — it  was 
the  simple  outgu.shing  of  his  own  magnanimous 
and  loving  nature. 

Upon  graduating,  in  the  year  1824,  Franklin 
Pierce  commenced  the  study  of  law  in  the  office 
of  Judge  Woodljur>',  one  of  the  most  distinguished 


lawyers  of  the  State,  and  a  man  of  great  private 
worth.  The  eminent  social  qualities  of  the  young 
lawyer,  his  father's  prominence  as  a  public  man, 
and  the  brilliant  political  career  into  which  Judge 
Woodburj^  was  entering,  all  tended  to  entice  Mr. 
Pierce  into  the  fascinating  j-et  perilous  path  of 
political  life.  With  all  the  ardor  of  his  nature  he 
espoused  the  cause  of  Gen.  Jackson  for  the  Presi- 
dency. He  commenced  the  practice  of  law  in 
Hillsborough,  and  was  soon  elected  to  represent 
the  town  in  the  State  Legislature.  Here  he 
served  for  four  years.  The  last  two  years  he  was 
cho.sen  Speaker  of  the  House  by  a  very  large 
vote. 

In  1833,  at  the  age  of  twenty-nine,  he  was 
elected  a  member  of  Congress.  In  1837,  being 
then  bui  thirtj'-three  j-ears  old,  he  was  elected  to 
the  Senate,  taking  his  seat  just  as  Mr.  Van  Buren 
commenced  his  administration.  He  was  the 
youngest  member  in  the  Senate.  In  the  year 
1834,  he  married  Miss  Jane  Means  Appleton,  a 
lady  of  rare  beauty  and  accomplishments,  and  one 
admirably  fitted  to  adorn  every  station  with  which 
her  hu.sband  was  honored.  Of  the  three  sons  who 
were  born  to  them,  all  now  sleep  with  their  par- 
ents in  the  grave. 

In  the  year  1838,  Mr.  Pierce,  with  growing 
fame  and  increasing  business  as  a  lawyer,  took  up 
his  residence  in  Concord,  the  capital  of  New 
Hampshire.  President  Polk,  upon  his  accession 
to  office,  appointed  Mr.  Pierce  Attorney-General 
of  the  United  States;  but  the  offer  was  declined 
in  consequence  of  numerous  professional  engage- 
ments at  home,  and  the  precarious  state  of  Mrs. 
Pierce's  health.  He  also,  about  the  same  time, 
declined  the  nomination  for  Governor  by  the 
Democratic  party.     The  war  with  Mexico  called 


72 


FRANKLIN  PIERCE. 


Mr.  Pierce  into  the  army.  Receiving  the  appoint- 
ment of  Brigadier-General,  he  embarked  with  a 
portion  of  his  troops  at  Newport,  R.  I.,  on  the 
27th  of  May,  1847.  He  took  an  important  part 
in  this  war,  proving  himself  a  brave  and  true  sol- 
dier. 

When  Gen.  Pierce  reached  his  home  in  his  na- 
tive State,  he  was  received  enthusiastically  by  the 
ad\-ocates  of  the  Mexican  War,  and  coldlj-  by  his 
opponents.  He  resumed  the  practice  of  his  pro- 
fession, verj-  frequently  taking  an  active  part  in 
political  questions,  giving  his  cordial  support  to 
the  pro-slaver>'  wing  of  the  Democratic  part}'. 
The  compromise  measures  met  cordially  with  his 
approval,  and  he  strenuously  advocated  the  en- 
forcement of  the  infamous  Fugitive  Slave  Law, 
which  so  shocked  the  religious  sensibilities  of  the 
North.  He  thus  became  distinguished  as  a 
' '  Northern  man  with  Southern  principles. ' '  The 
strong  partisans  of  -slaverj'  in  the  South  conse- 
quentl}-  regarded  him  as  a  man  whom  they  could 
safel}-  trust  in  ofiBce  to  carrj^  out  their  plans. 

On  the  i2tli  of  June,  1852,  the  Democratic  con- 
vention met  in  Baltimore  to  nominate  a  candidate 
for  the  Presidency.  For  four  days  they  contin- 
ued in  .ses.sion,  and  in  thirty-five  ballotings  no  one 
had  obtained  a  two-thirds  vote.  Not  a  vote  thus 
far  had  been  thrown  for  Gen.  Pierce.  Then  the 
Virginia  delegation  brought  forward  his  name. 
There  were  fourteen  more  ballotings,  during  which 
Gen.  Pierce  constantly  gained  strength,  until,  at 
the  fort3'-ninth  ballot,  he  received  two  hundred 
and  eightj-'two  votes,  and  all  other  candidates 
eleven.  Gen.  Winfield  Scott  was  the  Whig  can- 
didate. Gen.  Pierce  was  chosen  with  great  una- 
nimitj-.  Only  four  States — Vermont,  Massachu- 
setts, Kentucky-  and  Tennessee — cast  their  elec- 
toral votes  against  him.  Gen.  Franklin  Pierce 
was  therefore  inaugurated  President  of  the  United 
Staters  on  the  4th  of  March,  1853. 

His  administration  proved  one  of  the  most 
stormj-  our  country  had  ever  experienced.  The 
controversy  between  slavery-  and  freedom  was 
then  approaching  its  culminating  point.  It  be- 
came evident  that  there  was  to  be  an  irrepressible 
conflict  between  them,  and  that  this  nation 
could  not  long  exist  "  half  slave  and  half  free." 


President  Pierce,  during  the  whole  of  his  admin- 
istration, did  everj'thing  he  could  to  conciliate  the 
South;  but  it  was  all  in  vain.  The  conflict  ever>' 
year  grew  more  violent,  and  threats  of  the  disso- 
lution of  the  Union  were  borne  to  the  North  on 
every  Southern  breeze. 

Such  was  the  condition  of  affairs  when  Presi- 
dent Pierce  approached  the  close  of  his  four- 
years  term  of  office.  The  North  had  become 
thoroughl}-  alienated  from  him.  The  anti-slavery 
sentiment,  goaded  by  great  outrages,  had  been 
rapidly  increasing;  all  the  intellectual  ability  and 
social  worth  of  President  Pierce  were  forgotten  in 
deep  reprehension  of  his  administrative  acts.  The 
slaveholders  of  the  South  also,  unmindful  of  the 
fidelity  with  which  he  had  ad\-ocated  those  meas- 
ures of  Government  which  tliej-  approved,  and 
perhaps  feeling  that  he  had  rendered  himself 
so  unpopular  as  no  longer  to  be  able  to  accepta- 
bly sen-e  them,  ungratefully  dropped  him,  and 
nominated  James  Buchanan  to  succeed  him. 

On  the  4tli  of  March,  1857,  President  Pierce  re- 
turned to  his  home  in  Concord.  His  three  chil- 
dren were  all  dead,  his  last  surviving  child  hav- 
ing been  killed  before  his  ej-es  in  a  railroad  acci- 
dent; and  his  wife,  one  of  the  most  estimable  and 
accomplished  of  ladies,  was  rapidly  sinking  in 
consumption.  The  hour  of  dreadful  gloom  soon 
came,  and  he  was  left  alone  in  the  \\orkl  without 
wife  or  child. 

When  the  terrible  Rebellion  burst  forth  which 
divided  our  country'  into  two  parties,  and  two 
only,  Mr.  Pierce  remained  steadfast  in  the  prin- 
ciples which  he  had  always  cherished,  and  gave 
his  sympathies  to  that  pro-slavery  party  with 
which  he  had  ever  been  allied.  He  declined  to 
do  anything,  either  by  voice  or  pen,  to  strengthen 
the  hand  of  the  National  Govermnent.  He  con- 
tinued to  reside  in  Concord  until  the  time  of  his 
death,  which  occurred  in  October,  1869.  He  was 
one  of  the  most  genial  and  social  of  men,  an  hon- 
ored communicant  of  the  Episcopal  Church,  and 
one  of  the  kindest  of  neighbors.  Generous  to  a 
fault,  he  contributed  liberally  toward  the  allevia- 
tion of  suffering  and  want,  and  many  of  his 
towns-people  were  often  gladdened  by  his  material 
bounty. 


X 


^*%VV. 


?'W 


■^^<?7?^</  G 


-y^^o:;^^  /-> 


'?^^^7^^ 


JAMES  BUCHANAN. 


(Tames  BUCHANAN,  the  fifteenth  President 
I  of  the  United  States,  was  born  in  a  small 
(2/  frontier  town,  at  the  foot  of  the  eastern  ridge 
of  the  Alleghanies,  in  Franklin  County,  Pa.,  on 
the  23d  of  April,  1791.  The  place  where  the 
humble  cabin  home  stood  was  called  Stony  Bat- 
ter. His  father  was  a  native  of  the  north  of  Ire- 
land, who  had  emigrated  in  1783,  with  little  prop- 
erty save  his  own  strong  arms.  Five  years  after- 
ward he  married  Elizabeth  Spear,  the  daughter 
of  a  respectable  farmer,  and,  with  his  young  bride, 
plunged  into  the  wilderness,  staked  his  claim, 
reared  his  log  hut,  opened  a  clearing  with  his 
axe,  and  settled  down  there  to  perform  his  obscure 
part  in  the  drama  of  life.  When  James  was  eight 
years  of  age,  his  father  removed  to  the  village  of 
Mercersburg,  where  his  son  was  placed  at  school, 
and  commenced  a  course  of  study  in  English, 
Latin  and  Greek.  His  progress  was  rapid,  and 
at  the  age  of  fourteen  he  entered  Dickinson  Col- 
lege, at  Carlisle.  Here  he  developed  remarkable 
talent,  and  took  his  stand  among  the  first  scholars 
in  the  institution. 

In  the  year  1809,  he  graduated  with  the  high- 
est honors  of  his  class.  He  was  then  eighteen 
years  of  age;  tall  and  graceful,  vigorous  in  health, 
fond  of  athletic  sports,  an  unerring  shot,  and  en- 
livened with  an  exuberant  flow  of  animal  spirits. 
He  immediately  commenced  the  study  of  law  in 
the  city  of  Lancaster,  and  was  admitted  to  the 
Bar  in  1 8 1 2 ,  when  he  was  but  twentj-one  years 
of  age. 

In  1S20,  he  reluctantly  consented  to  run  as  a 
candidate  for  Congress.  He  was  elected,  and  for 
ten  years  he  remained  a  member  of  the  Lower 
House.     During  the  vacations  of  Congress,   he 


occa.-:ionally  tried  some  important  case.  In  1831 
he  retired  altogether  from  the  toils  of  his  profes- 
sion, having  acquired  an  ample  fortune. 

Gen.  Jackson,  upon  his  elevation  to  the  Presi- 
dency, appointed  Mr.  Buchanan  Minister  to  Rus- 
sia. The  duties  of  his  mi.ssion  he  performed 
with  ability,  and  gave  satisfaction  to  all  parties. 
Upon  his  return,  in  1833,  he  was  elected  to  a  seat 
in  the  United  States  Senate.  He  there  met  as 
his  associates  Webster,  Clay,  Wright  and  Cal- 
houn. He  advocated  the  measures  proposed  by 
President  Jack.son,  of  making  reprisals  against 
France  to  enforce  the  payment  of  our  claims 
against  that  country,  and  defended  the  course  of 
the  President  in  his  unprecedented  and  wholesale 
removal  from  oflSce  of  those  who  were  not  the 
supporters  of  his  administration.  Upon  this 
question  he  was  brought  into  direct  collision  with 
Henry  Clay.  He  also,  with  voice  and  vote,  ad- 
vocated expunging  from  the  journal  of  the  Senate 
the  vote  of  cen.sure  against  Gen.  Jackson  for  re- 
moving the  deposits.  Earnestly  he  opposed  the 
abolition  of  slavery  in  the  District  of  Columbia, 
and  urged  the  prohibition  of  the  circulation  of 
anti-slavery  documents  by  the  United  States 
mails.  As  to  petitions  on  the  subject  of  slavery, 
he  advocated  that  they  should  be  respectfully  re- 
ceived, and  that  the  reply  should  be  returned 
that  Congress  had  no  power  to  legislate  upon  the 
subject.  "  Congress, "  said  he,  "might  as  well 
undertake  to  interfere  with  slaverj'  under  a  for- 
eign government  as  in  any  of  the  States  where  it 
now  exi.sts. ' ' 

Upon  Mr.  Polk's  accession  to  the  Presidency, 
Mr.  Buchanan  became  vSecretary  of  wState,  and  as 
such   took  his  share  of  the  responsibility  in  the 


76 


JAMES  BUCHANAN. 


conduct  of  the  Mexican  War.  Mr.  Polk  assumed 
that  crossing  the  Nueces  by  the  American 
troops  into  the  disputed  territory  was  not  wrong, 
but  for  the  Mexicans  to  cross  the  Rio  Grande 
into  Texas  was  a  declaration  of  war.  No  candid 
man  can  read  with  pleasure  the  account  of  the 
course  our  Government  pursued  in  that  movement. 

Mr.  Buchanan  identified  himself  thoroughly 
with  the  party  devoted  to  the  perpetuation  and 
extension  of  slavery,  and  brought  all  the  energies 
of  his  mind  to  bear  against  the  Wilmot  Proviso. 
He  gave  his  cordial  approval  to  the  compromise 
measures  of  1850,  which  included  the  Fugitive 
Slave  Law.  Mr.  Pierce,  upon  his  election  to  the 
Presidency,  honored  Mr.  Buchanan  with  the  mis- 
sion to  England. 

In  the  year  1856,  a  national  Democratic  Con- 
vention nominated  Mr.  Buchanan  for  the  Presi- 
dency. The  political  conflict  was  one  of  the  most 
severe  in  which  our  country  has  ever  engaged. 
All  the  friends  of  slavery  were  on  one  side;  all 
the  advocates  of  its  restriction  and  final  abolition 
on  the  other.  Mr.  Fremont,  the  candidate  of  the 
enemies  of  slavery,  received  one  hundred  and 
fourteen  electoral  votes.  Mr.  Buchanan  received 
one  hundred  and  seventy-four,  and  was  elected. 
The  popular  vote  stood  1,340,618  for  Fremont, 
1,224,750  for  Buchanan.  On  March  4,  1857, 
the  latter  was  inaugurated. 

Mr.  Buchanan  was  far  advanced  in  life.  Only 
four  years  were  wanting  to  fill  up  his  three-score 
years  and  ten.  His  own  friends,  those  with 
whom  he  had  been  allied  in  political  principles 
and  action  for  years,  were  seeking  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Government,  that  they  might  rear 
upon  the  ruins  of  our  free  institutions  a  nation 
whose  corner-stone  .should  be  human  slavery.  In 
tl:is  emergency,  Mr.  Buchanan  was  hopelessly 
bewildered.  He  could  not,  with  his  long-avowed 
principles,  consistently  oppose  the  State  Rights 
party  in  their  assumptions.  As  President  of  the 
United  States,  bound  by  his  oath  faithfully  to 
administer  the  laws,  he  could  not,  without  per- 
jury of  the  grossest  kind,  unite  with  those  en- 
deavoring to  overthrow  the  Republic.  He  there- 
fore did  nothing. 

The  opponents  of  Mr.  Buchanan's  administra- 


tion nominated  Abraham  Lincoln  as  their  stand- 
ard-bearer in  the  next  Presidential  canvass. 
The  pro-slavery  party  declared  that  if  he  were 
elected  and  the  control  of  the  Go\ernment  were 
thus  taken  from  their  hands,  they  would  secede 
from  the  Union,  taking  with  them  as  they  retired 
the  National  Capitol  at  Washington  and  the 
lion's  share  of  the  territory  of  the  United  States. 

As  the  storm  increased  in  violence,  the  slave- 
holders claiming  the  right  to  secede,  and  Mr. 
Buchanan  avowing  that  Congre.ss  had  no  power 
to  prevent  it,  one  of  the  most  pitiable  exhibitions 
of  governmental  imbecility  was  exhibited  that  the 
world  has  ever  seen.  He  declared  that  Congress 
had  no  power  to  enforce  its  laws  in  any  State 
which  had  withdrawn,  or  which  was  attempting 
to  withdraw,  from  the  Union.  This  was  not  the 
doctrine  of  Andrew  Jackson,  when,  with  his  hand 
upon  his  sword-hilt,  he  exclaimed:  "The  Union 
must  and  shall  be  preserved!" 

South  Carolina  .seceded  in  December,  i860, 
nearly  three  months  before  the  inauguration  of 
President  Lincoln.  Mr.  Buchanan  looked  on  in 
listless  despair.  The  rebel  flag  was  raised  in 
Charleston;  Ft.  Sumter  was  besieged;  our  forts, 
navy-yards  and  arsenals  were  seized;  our  depots 
of  military  stores  were  plundered,  and  our  cus- 
tom-houses and  post-oflices  were  appropriated  by 
the  reliels. 

The  energ}-  of  the  rebels  and  the  imbecilitj-  of 
our  Executive  were  alike  marvelous.  The  na- 
tion looked  on  in  agony,  waiting  for  the  slow 
weeks  to  glide  awa}-  and  close  the  administration, 
so  terrible  in  its  weakness.  At  length  the  long- 
looked-for  hour  of  deliverance  came,  when  Abra- 
ham Lincoln  was  to  receive  the  scepter. 

The  administration  of  President  Buchanan  was 
certainly  the  most  calamitous  our  country  has  ex- 
perienced. His  best  friends  can  not  recall  it  with 
pleasure.  And  still  more  deplorable  it  is  for  his 
fame,  that  in  that  dreadful  conflict  which  rolled 
its  billows  of  flame  and  blood  over  our  whole 
land,  no  word  came  from  his  lips  to  indicate  his 
wish  that  our  couutrj-'s  banner  should  triumph 
over  the  flag  of  the  Rebellion.  He  died  at  his 
Wheatland  retreat,  June  i,   1S6S. 


/-t/T — 


c^~^    j^yv^t^^ 


Q^yyCfi^^^'^^^'^^~-<^-^ly 


ABRAHAM  LINCOLN. 


61  BRAHAM  LINCOLN,  the  sixteenth  Presi- 
LA  dent  of  the  United  States,  was  born  in  Hardin 
I  I  County,  Ky.,  February-  12,  1809.  About 
the  year  1 7  So.  a  man  by  the  name  of  Abraham 
Lincohi  left  \'irginia  with  his  family  and  moved 
into  the  then  wilds  of  Kentucky.  Only  two  years 
after  this  emigration,  and  while  .still  a  young  man. 
he  was  working  one  daj^  in  a  field,  when  an  Indian 
stealthily  approached  and  killed  him.  His  widow 
was  left  in  extreme  poverty  with  five  little  chil- 
dren, three  boj-s  and  two  girls.  Thomas,  the 
3-oungest  of  the  boys,  and  the  father  of  President 
Abraham  Lincoln,  was  four  years  of  age  at  his 
father's  death. 

When  twenty-eight  years  old,  Thomas  Lincoln 
built  a  log  cabin,  and  married  Nancy  Hanks,  the 
daughter  of  another  family  of  poor  Ktntuckj- 
emigrants,  who  had  also  come  from  Virginia. 
Their  second  child  was  Abraham  Lincoln,  the  sub- 
ject of  this  sketch.  The  mother  of  Abraham  was 
a  noble  woman,  gentle,  loving,  pensive,  created 
to  adorn  a  palace,  but  doomed  to  toil  and  pine,  and 
die  in  a  hovel.  "  All  that  I  am,  or  hope  to  be,'' 
exclaimed  the  gratefiil  son,  "  I  owe  to  lay  angel- 
mother."  When  he  was  eight  j-ears  ot  age,  his 
father  sold  his  cabin  and  small  farm  and  moved 
to  Indiana,  where  two  years  later  his  mother  died. 

As  the  j-ears  rolled  on,  the  lot  of  this  lowly 
family  was  the  usual  lot  of  humanity.  There 
were  joys  and  griefs,  weddings  and  funerals. 
Abraham's  si.ster  Sarah,  to  whom  he  was  tenderly 
attached,  was  married  when  a  child  of  but  four- 
teen years  of  age,  and  soon  died.  The  family 
was  graduallj-  scattered,  and  Thomas  Lincoln 
.sold  out  his  .squatter's  claim  in  1S30,  and  emi- 
grated to  Macon  County,  111. 

Abraham  Lincoln  was  then  twentN'-one  years 
of  age.  With  vigorous  hands  he  aided  his  father 
in  rearing  another  log  cabin,  and  worked  quite 
diligently  at  this  until  he  saw  the  family  com- 
fortably settled,  and  their  small  lot  of  enclosed 
prairie  planted  with  corn,  when  he  announced  to 


his  father  his  intention  to  leave  home,  and  to  gc 
out  into  the  world  and  seek  his  fortune.  Littk 
did   he  or  his  friends  imagine  how  brilliant  that 

.  fortune  was  to  be.  He  saw  the  value  of  educa- 
tion and  was  intenselj^  earnest  to  improve  his 
mind  to  the  utmost  of  his  power.  Religion  he 
revered.  His  morals  were  pure,  and  he  was  un- 
contaminated  by  a  single  vice. 

Young  Abraham  worked  for  a  time  as  a  hired 
laborer  among  the  farmers.  Then  he  went  to 
Springfield,  where  he  was  employed  in  building 
a  large  flat-boat.  In  this  he  took  a  herd  of  swine, 
floated  them  down  the  Sangamon  to  Illinois,  and 
thence  by  the  Mississippi  to  New  Orleans.  What- 
ever Abraham  Lincoln  undertook,  he  performed 
so  faithfull3'  as  to  give  great  satisfaction  to  his 
employers.  In  this  adventure  the  latter  were 
so  well  pleased,  that  upon  his  return  they  placed 
a  store  and  mill  under  his  care. 

In  1832,  at  the  outbreak  of  the  Black  Hawk 
War,  he  enlisted  and  was  chosen  Captain  of  a 
company.  He  returned  to  Sangamon  County, 
and,  although onh-  twenty-three  jearsof  age,  was 
a  candidate  for  the  Legislature,  but  was  defeated. 
He  soon  after  recei\-ed  from  Andrew  Jackson  the 
appointment  of  Postmaster  of  New  Salem.  His 
only  post-office  was  his  hat.  All  the  letters  he 
received  he  carried  there,  read}-  to  deliver  to  those 
he  chanced  to  meet.  He  studied  surveying,  and 
.soon  made  this  his  business.  In  1834  he  again 
became  a  candidate  for  the  Legislature  and  was 
elected.  Mr.  Stuart,  of  Springfield,  advi.sed  him 
to  study  law.  He  walked  from  New  Salem  to 
Springfield,  borrowed  of  Mr.  Stuart  a  load  oi 
books,  carried  them  back,  and  began  his  legal 
.studies.  When  the  Legislature  assembled,  he 
trudged  on  foot  with  his  pack  on  his  back  one 
hundred  miles  to  Vandalia,  then  the  capital.  In 
1836  he  was  re-elected  to  the  Legislature.  Here 
it  was  he  first  met  Stephen  A.  Douglas.  In  1839 
he  removed  to  Springfield  and  began  the  practice 

'   of  law.     His  success  with  the  jur\-  was  so  great 


8o 


ABRAHAM  LINCOLN. 


that  he  was  soon  engaged  in  almost  everj'  noted 
case  in  the  circuit. 

In  1854  the  great  discussion  began  between  Mr. 
Lincohi  and  Mr.  Douglas  on  the  slavery  ques- 
tion. In  the  organization  of  the  Republican  party 
in  Illinois,  in  1S56,  he  took  an  active  part,  and  at 
once  became  one  of  the  leaders  in  that  party. 
Mr.  Lincoln's  speeches  in  opposition  to  Senator 
Douglas  in  the  contest  in  1S58  for  a  seat  in  the 
Senate,  fonn  a  most  notable  part  of  his  history. 
The  isstie  was  on  the  slavery-  question,  and  he 
took  the  broad  ground  of  the  Declaration  of  In- 
dependence, that  all  men  are  created  equal.  Mr. 
Lincoln  was  defeated  in  this  contest,  but  won  a 
far  higher  prize. 

The  great  Republican  Convention  met  at  Chi- 
cago on  the  i6tli  of  June,  i860.  The  delegates 
and  strangers  who  crowded  the  city  amounted  to 
twenty-five  thousand.  An  immense  building 
called  "The  Wigwam,"  was  reared  to  accommo- 
date the  convention.  There  were  eleven  candi- 
dates for  whom  votes  were  thrown.  William  H. 
Seward,  a  man  whose  fame  as  a  statesman  had 
long  filled  the  land,  was  the  most  prominent.  It 
was  generally  supposed  he  would  be  the  nomi- 
nee. Abraham  Lincoln,  however,  received  the 
nomination  on  the  third  ballot. 

Election  day  came,  and  Mr.  Lincoln  received 
one  hundred  and  eighty  electoral  votes  out  of  two 
hundred  and  three  cast,  and  was,  therefore,  con- 
stitutionally elected  President  of  the  LTnited  States. 
The  tirade  of  abuse  that  was  poured  upon  this 
good  and  merciful  man,  especiall}'  by  the  slave- 
holders, was  greater  than  upon  anj-  other  man 
ever  elected  to  this  high  position.  In  February-, 
i86i,  Mr.  Lincoln  .started  for  Washington,  stop- 
ping in  all  the  large  cities  on  his  waj-,  making 
speeches.  The  whole  journey  was  fraught  with 
much  danger.  Manj'  of  the  Southern  States  had 
already  seceded,  and  several  attempts  at  assassi- 
nation were  afterward  brought  to  light.  A  gang 
in  Baltimore  had  arranged  upon  his  arrival  to 
"get  up  a  row,"  and  in  the  confusion  to  make 
sure  of  his  death  with  revohers  and  hand-gren- 
ades. A  detective  unra\'elled  the  plot.  A  secret 
and  .special  train  was  pro\ided  to  take  him  from 
Harrisburg,  through  Baltimore,  at  an  unexpected 


hour  of  the  night.  The  tram  started  at  half- past 
ten,  and  to  prevent  anj-^  possible  communication 
on  the  part  of  the  Secessionists  with  their  Con- 
federate gang  in  Baltimore,  as  soon  as  the  train 
had  started  the  telegraph-wires  were  cut.  Mr. 
Lincoln  reached  Washington  in  safety  and  was 
inaugurated,  althotigh  great  anxiety  was  felt  by 
all  loyal  people. 

In  the  selection  of  his  cabinet  Mr.  Lincoln  gave 
to  Mr.  Seward  the  Department  of  State,  and  to 
other  prominent  opponents  before  the  convention 
he  gave  important  positions;  but  during  no  other 
administration  had  the  duties  devolving  upon  the 
President  been  so  manifold,  and  the  responsibilities 
.so  great,  as  those  which  fell  to  his  lot.  Knowing 
this,  and  feeling  his  own  weakness  and  inability 
to  meet,  and  in  his  own  strength  to  cope  with, 
the  difficulties,  he  learned  early  to  seek  Divine 
wisdom  and  guidance  in  determining  his  plans, 
and  Divine  comfort  in  all  his  trials,  both  personal 
and  national.  Contrary  to  his  own  estimate  of 
himself,  Mr.  Lincoln  was  one  of  the  most  cour- 
ageous of  men.  He  went  directly  into  the  rebel 
capital  just  as  the  retreating  foe  was  leaving,  with 
no  guard  but  a  few  sailors.  From  the  time  he 
had  left  Springfield,  in  1861,  however,  plans  had 
been  made  for  his  assassination,  and  he  at  last 
fell  a  victim  to  one  of  them.  April  14,  1865,  he, 
with  Gen.  Grant,  was  urgently  invited  to  attend 
Ford's  Theatre.  It  was  announced  that  they 
would  be  present.  Gen.  Grant,  however,  left  the 
city.  President  Lincoln,  feeling,  with  his  char- 
acteristic kindliness  of  heart,  that  it  would  be  a 
disappointment  if  he  should  fail  them,  very  re- 
luctantly consented  to  go.  While  listening  to 
the  play,  an  actor  by  the  name  of  John  Wilkes 
Booth  entered  the  box  where  the  President  and 
famih*  were  .seated,  and  fired  a  bullet  into  his 
brain.  He  died  the  next  morning  at  seven 
o'clock. 

Never  before  in  the  histor\-  of  the  world  was 
a  nation  plunged  into  such  deep  grief  by  the  death 
of  its  ruler  Strong  men  met  in  the  streets  and 
wept  in  speechless  anguish.  His  was  a  life  which 
will  fitly  become  a  model.  His  name  as  the 
Savior  of  his  country  will  live  with  that  of  Wash- 
ington's, its  Father. 


'^v/yJlyC-'iy^ 


ANDREW  JOHNSON. 


Gl  NDREW  JOHNSON,  seventeenth  President 

0  of  the  United  States.     The  early  life  of  An- 

1  I  drew  Johnson  contains  but  the  record  of  pov- 
erty, destitution  and  friendlessness.  He  was  born 
December  29,  1808,  in  Raleigh,  N.  C.  His  par- 
ents, belonging  to  the  class  of  "poor  whites" 
of  the  South,  were  in  such  circum.stances  that  they 
could  not  confer  even  the  slightest  advantages  of 
education  upon  their  child.  When  Andrew  was 
five  years  of  age,  his  father  accidentally  lest  his 
life,  while  heroically  endeavoring  to  save  a  frien4 
from  drowning.  Until  ten  years  of  age,  Andrew 
was  a  ragged  boy  about  the  streets,  supported  by 
the  labor  of  his  mother,  who  obtained  her  living 
with  her  own  hands. 

He  then,  having  never  attended  a  school  one 
day,  and  being  unable  either  to  read  or  write, was 
apprenticed  to  a  tailor  in  his  native  town.  A  gen- 
tleman was  in  the  habit  of  going  to  the  tailor's 
shop  occasionally,  and  reading  to  the  boys  at 
work  there.  He  often  read  from  the  speeches  of 
distinguished  British  statesmen.  Andrew,  who 
was  endowed  with  a  mind  of  more  than  ordinarj- 
ability,  became  much  interested  in  these  speeches; 
his  ambition  was  roused,  and  he  was  inspired  with 
a  strong  desire  to  learn  to  read. 

He  accordingly  applied  himself  to  the  alphabet, 
and  with  the  assistance  of  some  of  his  fellow- 
workmen  learned  his  letters.  He  then  called  upon 
the  gentleman  to  borrow  the  book  of  speeches. 
The  owner,  pleased  with  his  zeal,  not  only  gave 
him  the  book,  but  assisted  him  in  learning  to  com- 
bine the  letters  into  words.  Under  such  difficul- 
ties he  pressed  onward  laboriously,  spending  usu- 
ally ten  or  twelve  hours  at  work  in  the  shop,  and 
then  robbing  himself  of  rest  and  recreation  to  de- 
vote such  time  as  he  could  to  reading. 

He  went  to  Tennessee  in   1826,  and  located  at 


Greenville,  where  he  married  a  young  lady  who 
possessed  some  education.  Under  her  instructions 
he  learned  to  write  and  cipher.  He  became 
prominent  in  the  village  debating  society,  and  a 
favorite  with  the  students  of  Greenville  College. 
In  1828,  he  organized  a  working  man's  party, 
which  elected  him  Alderman,  and  in  1830  elected 
him  Mayor,  which  position  he  held  three  years. 

He  now  began  to  take  a  lively  interest  in 
political  affairs,  identifying  himself  with  the  work- 
ing-class, to  which  he  belonged.  In  1835,  he 
was  elected  a  member  of  the  House  of  Represent- 
atives of  Tennessee.  He  was  then  just  twenty- 
seven  years  of  age.  He  became  a  very  active 
member  of  the  Legislature,  gave  his  support  to 
the  Democratic  party,  and  in  1840  "stumped  the 
State,"  advocating  Martin  Van  Buren's  claims  to 
the  Presidency,  in  opposition  to  those  of  Gen. 
Harrison.  In  this  campaign  he  acquired  much 
readiness  as  a  speaker,  and  extended  and  increased 
his  reputation. 

In  1841,  he  was  elected  State  Senator;  in  1843, 
he  was  elected  a  Member  of  Congress,  and  by  suc- 
ce.ssive  elections  held  that  important  post  for  ten 
years.  In  1853,  he  was  elected  Governor  of  Tenn- 
essee, and  was  re-elected  in  1855.  In  all  these 
respon.sible  positions,  he  discharged  his  duties 
with  distinguished  ability,  and  proved  himself  the 
warm  friend  of  the  working  classes.  In  1857,  Mr. 
Johnson  was  elected  United  States  Senator. 

Years  before,  in  1845,  he  had  warmly  adv-ocated 
the  annexation  of  Texas,  stating,  however,  as  his 
reason,  that  he  thought  this  annexation  would 
probably  prove  '  'to  be  the  gateway  out  of  which 
the  sable  sons  of  Africa  are  to  pass  from  bondage 
to  freedom,  and  become  merged  in  a  population 
congenial  to  themselves."  In  1850,  he  also  sup- 
ported the  compromise  measures,  the  two  essen- 


ANDREW  JOHNSON. 


tial  features  of  which  vver^,  that  the  white  people 
of  the  Territories  should  be  permitted  to  decide 
for  themselves  whether  they  would  enslave  the 
colored  people  or  not,  and  that  the  free  States  of 
the  North  should  return  to  the  South  persons  who 
attempted  to  escape  from  slavery. 

Mr.  Johnson  was  never  ashamed  of  his  lowly 
origin:  on  the  contrary,  he  often  took  pride  in 
avowing  that  he  owed  his  distinction  to  his  own 
exertions.  "Sir,"  said  he  on  the  floor  of  the 
Senate,  "I  do  not  forget  that  I  am  a  mechanic; 
neither  do  I  forget  that  Adam  was  a  tailor  and 
sewed  fig-leaves,  and  that  our  Savior  was  the  son 
of  a  carpenter. ' ' 

In  the  Charleston-Baltimore  convention  of  i860, 
he  was  the  choice  of  the  Tennessee  Democrats  for 
the  Presidency.  In  1861,  when  the  purpose  of 
the  Southern  Democracj'  became  apparent,  he  took 
a  decided  stand  in  favor  of  the  Union,  and  held 
that  "slaverjf  must  be  held  subordinate  to  the 
Union  at  whatever  cost. ' '  He  returned  to  Tenn- 
essee, and  repeatedly  imperiled  his  own  life  to 
protect  the  Unionists  of  that  State.  Tennessee 
having  seceded  from  the  Union,  President  Lincoln, 
on  March  4,  1862,  appointed  him  Military  Gov- 
ernor of  the  State,  and  he  established  the  most 
stringent  militar\-  rule.  His  numerous  proclama- 
tions attracted  wide  attention.  In  1864,  he  was 
elected  Vice-President  of  the  United  States,  and 
upon  the  death  of  Mr.  lyincoln,  April  15,  1865, 
became  President.  In  a  speech  two  days  later  he 
said,  "The  American  people  must  be  taught,  if 
they  do  not  already  feel,  that  treason  is  a  crime 
and  must  be  punished;  that  the  Government  will 
not  always  bear  with  its  enemies;  that  it  is  strong 
not  only  to  protect,  but  to  punish.  *  *  The 
people  must  understand  that  it  (treason)  is  the 
blackest  of  crimes,  and  will  surely  be  punished." 
Yet  his  whole  administration,  the  historj'  of  which 
is  so  well  known,  was  in  utter  inconsistenc}'  with, 
and  in  the  most  violent  opposition  to,  the  princi- 
ples laid  down  in  that  speech. 

In  his  loose  policy  of  reconstruction  and  general 
amnesty,  he  was  opposed  by  Congress,  and  he 
characterized  Congress  as  a  new  rebellion,  and 
lawlessly  defied  it  in  everj^thing  pos.sible  to  the  ut- 
most.    In  the  beginning  of  1868,   on  account  of 


"High  crimes  and  misdemeanors,"  the  principal 
of  which  was  the  removal  of  Secretary  Stanton  in 
violation  of  the  Tenure  of  Office  Act,  articles  of 
impeachment  were  preferred  against  him,  and  the 
trial  began  March  23. 

It  was  very  tedious,  continuing  for  nearly  three 
months.  A  test  article  of  the  impeachment  was 
at  length  submitted  to  the  court  for  its  action.  It 
was  certain  that  as  the  court  voted  upon  that  ar- 
ticle so  would  it  vote  upon  all .  Thirty-four  voices 
pronounced  the  President  guiltj-.  As  a  two-thirds 
vote  was  necessary  to  his  condenniation,  he  was 
pronounced  acquitted,  notwithstanding  the  great 
majorit}'  against  him.  The  change  of  one  vote 
from  the  not  guilty  side  would  have  sustained  the 
impeachment. 

The  President,  for  the  remainder  of  his  term, 
was  but  little  regarded.  He  continued,  though 
impotently,  his  conflict  with  Congress.  His  own 
party  did  not  think  it  expedient  to  renominate 
him  for  the  Presidency.  The  Nation  rallied  with 
enthusiasm,  unparalleled  since  the  days  of  Wash- 
ington, around  the  name  of  Gen.  Grant.  Andrew 
Johnson  was  forgotten.  The  bullet  of  the  assassin 
introduced  him  to  the  President's  chair.  Not- 
withstanding this,  never  was  there  presented  to  a 
man  a  better  opportunitj-  to  immortalize  his  name, 
and  to  win  the  gratitude  of  a  nation.  He  failed 
utterly.  He  retired  to  his  home  in  Greenville, 
Tenn. ,  taking  no  very  active  part  in  politics  until 
1875.  On  January  26,  after  an  exciting  struggle, 
he  was  chosen  by  the  Legislature  of  Tennessee 
United  States  Senator  in  the  Forty-fourth  Congess, 
and  took  his  seat  in  that  body,  at  the  special  ses- 
sion convened  by  President  Grant,  on  the  5th  of 
March.  On  the  27th  of  July,  1875,  the  ex-Presi- 
dent made  a  visit  to  his  daughter's  home,  near 
Carter  Station,  Tenn.  When  he  started  on  his 
journey,  he  was  apparently  in  his  usual  vigorou.s; 
health,  but  on  reaching  the  residence  of  his  child 
the  following  daj-,  he  was  stricken  with  parah-.sis, 
which  rendered  him  unconscious.  He  rallied  oc- 
casionally, but  finally  pas.sed  away  at  2  a.  m., 
July  31,  aged sixt^'-seven  jears.  His  funeral  was 
held  at  Greenville,  on  the  3d  of  August,  with 
every  demonstration  of  respect. 


^^- 


ULYSSES  S.  GRANT. 


yLYSSES  S.  GRANT,  the  eighteenth  Presi- 
dent of  the  United  States,  was  born  on  the 
29th  of  April,  1822,  of  Christian  parents,  in 
a  humble  home  at  Point  Pleasant,  on  the  banks 
of  the  Ohio.  Shortly  after,  his  father  moved  to 
Georgetown,  Brown  County,  Ohio.  In  this  re- 
mote frontier  hamlet,  Ulysses  received  a  common- 
.school  education.  At  the  age  of  seventeen,  in 
the  year  1839,  he  entered  the  Military  Academy 
at  West  Point.  Here  he  was  regarded  as  a  solid, 
sensible  young  man,  of  fair  abilitj-,  and  of  sturdy, 
honest  character.  He  took  respectable  rank  as  a 
.scholar.  In  June,  1843,  he  graduated  about  the 
middle  in  his  class,  and  was  sent  as  Lieutenant  of 
Infantn,-  to  one  of  the  distant  militar>-  po.sts  in  the 
Missouri  Territory.  Two  years  he  passed  in  these 
drearj'  .solitudes,  watching  the  vagabond  Indians. 

The  war  with  Mexico  came.  Lieut.  Grant  was 
.sent  with  his  regiment  to  Corpus  Christi.  His 
first  battle  was  at  Palo  Alto.  There  was  no 
chance  here  for  the  exhibition  of  either  skill  or 
heroism,  nor  at  Resaca  de  la  Palma,  his  second 
battle.  At  the  battle  of  Monterey,  his  third  en- 
gagement, it  is  said  that  he  performed  a  signal 
ser\'ice  of  daring  and  skillful  horsemanship. 

At  the  close  of  the  Mexican  War,  Capt.  Grant 
returned  with  his  regiment  to  New  York,  an  1 
was  again  sent  to  one  of  the  militarj-  posts  on  the 
frontier.  The  di.scovery  of  gold  in  California 
causing  an  immen.se  tide  of  emigration  to  flow  to 
the  Pacific  shores,  Capt.  Grant  was  sent  with  a 
battalion  to  Ft.  Dallas,  in  Oregon,  for  the  protec- 
tion of  the  interests  of  the  immigrants.  But  life 
was  wearisome  in  those  wilds,  and  he  resigned 
his  commission  and  returned  to  the  States.  Hav- 
ing married,  he  entered  upon  the  cultivation  of  a 
small  farm  near  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  but  having  little 


skill  as  a  farmer,  and  finding  his  toil  not  re- 
munerative, he  turned  to  mercantile  life,  entering 
into  the  leather  business,  with  a  younger  brother 
at  Galena,  111.  This  was  in  the  year  i860.  As 
the  tidings  of  the  rebels  firing  on  Ft.  Sumter 
reached  the  ears  of  Capt.  Grant  in  his  counting- 
room,  he  said:  "Uncle  Sam  has  educated  me 
for  the  army;  though  I  have  served  him  through 
oile  war,  I  do  not  feel  that  I  have  j-et  repaid  the 
debt.  I  am  still  read}'  to  discharge  my  obliga- 
tions. I  shall  therefore  buckle  on  my  sword  and 
see  Uncle  Sam  through  this  war  too. ' ' 

He  went  into  the  streets,  raised  a  company  of 
volunteers,  and  led  them  as  their  Captain  to 
Springfield,  the  capital  of  the  State,  where  their 
sen-ices  were  offered  to  Gov.  Yates.  The  Gov- 
ernor, impressed  by  the  zeal  and  straightforward 
executive  ability  of  Capt.  Grant,  gave  him  a  desk 
in  his  office  to  assist  in  the  volunteer  organiza- 
tion that  was  being  formed  in  the  State  in  behalf 
of  the  Government.  On  the  r 5th  of  June,  1861, 
Capt.  Grant  received  a  commission  as  Colonel  of 
the  Twenty-first  Regiment  of  Illinois  Volunteers. 
His  merits  as  a  West  Point  graduate,  who  had 
served  for  fifteen  years  in  the  regular  army,  were 
such  that  he  was  soon  promoted  to  the  rank  of 
Brigadier-General,  and  was  placed  in  command  at 
Cairo.  The  rebels  rai.sed  their  banner  at  Padu- 
cali,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Tennessee  River. 
Scarcely  had  its  folds  appeared  in  the  breeze  ere 
Gen.  Grant  was  there.  The  rebels  fled,  their 
banner  fell,  and  the  Stars  and  Stripes  were  un- 
furled in  its  stead. 

He  entered  the  ser\'ice  with  great  determina- 
tion and  iramediatelj-  began  active  duty.  This 
was  the  beginning,  and  until  the  surrender  of 
Lee  at  Richmond  he  was  ever  pushing  the  enemy 


88 


ULYSSES  S.  GRANT. 


with  great  vigor  and  effectiveness.  At  Belmont, 
a  few  daj-s  later,  he  surprised  and  routed  the 
rebels,  then  at  Ft.  Henry  won  another  victory. 
Then  came  the  brilliant  fight  at  Ft.  Donelson. 
The  nation  was  electrified  by  the  victory,  and  the 
brave  leader  of  the  boys  in  blue  was  immediately 
made  a  Major-General,  and  the  military  district 
of  Tennessee  was  assigned  to  him. 

Like  all  great  captains,  Gen.  Grant  knew  well 
how  to  secure  the  results  of  victor^'.  He  imme- 
diately pushed  on  to  the  enemies'  lines.  Then 
came  the  terrible  battles  of  Pittsburg  Landing, 
Corinth,  and  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  where  Gen. 
Pemberton  made  an  unconditional  surrender  of 
the  city  with  over  thirty  thousand  men  and  one 
hundred  and  seventj^-two  cannon.  The  fall  of 
\'icksburg  was  by  far  the  most  severe  blow  which 
the  rebels  had  thus  far  encountered,  and  opened 
up  the  Mississippi  from  Cairo  to  the  Gulf. 

Gen.  Grant  was  next  ordered  to  co-operate  with 
Gen.  Banks  in  a  movement  upon  Texas,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  New  Orleans,  where  he  was  thrown 
from  his  horse,  and  received  severe'injuries,  from 
which  he  was  laid  up  for  months.  He  then 
rushed  to  the  aid  of  Gens.  Rosecrans  and  Thomas 
at  Chattanooga,  and  bj'  a  wonderful  series  of 
strategic  and  technical  measures  put  the  Union 
army  in  fighting  condition.  Then  followed  the 
bloody  battles  at  Chattanooga,  Lookout  Moun- 
tain and  Missionary-  Ridge,  in  which  the  rebels 
were  routed  with  great  loss.  This  won  for  him 
unbounded  praise  in  the  North.  On  the  4th  of 
Februarj-,  1S64,  Congress  revived  the  grade  of 
lieutenant-general,  and  the  rank  was  conferred 
on  Gen.  Grant.  He  repaired  to  Washington  to 
receive  his  credentials  and  enter  upon  the  duties 
of  his  new  office. 

Gen.  Grant  decided  as  soon  as  he  took  charge 
of  the  army  to  concentrate  the  widely-dispersed 
National  troops  for  an  attack  upon  Richmond, 
the  nominal  capital  of  the  rebellion,  and  endeavor 
there  to  destroj-  the  rebel  armies  which  would  be 
prompth-  assembled  from  all  quarters  for  its  de- 
fense. The  whole  continent  seemed  to  tremble 
imder  the  tramp  of  these  majestic  armies,  rushing 
to  the  decisive  battle-field.  Steamers  were  crowd- 
ed with  troops.     Railway  trains  were  burdened 


with  closely-packed  thousands.  His  plans  were 
comprehensive,  and  involved  a  series  of  cam- 
paigns, which  were  executed  with  remarkable 
energy  and  ability,  and  were  consummated  at  the 
surrender  of  Lee,  April  9,  1865. 

The  war  was  ended.  The  Union  was  saved. 
The  almost  unanimous  voice  of  the  nation  de- 
clared Gen.  Grant  to  be  the  most  prominent  in- 
.strimient  in  its  salvation.  The  eminent  services 
he  had  thus  rendered  the  country  brought  him 
conspicuouslj^  forward  as  the  Republican  candi- 
date for  the  Presidential  chair. 

At  the  Republican  Convention  held  at  Chicago, 
May  21,  1868,  he  was  unanimouslj-  nominated 
for  the  Presidency-,  and  at  the  autunm  election 
received  a  majoritj-  of  the  popular  vote,  and  two 
hundred  and  fourteen  out  of  two  hundred  and 
ninety-four   electoral  votes. 

The  National  Convention  of  the  Republican 
party,  which  met  at  Philadelphia  on  the  5th  01 
June,  1872,  placed  Gen.  Grant  in  nomination  for 
a  second  term  by  a  unanimous  vote.  The  selec- 
tion was  emphaticalh-  indorsed  bj-  the  people  five 
months  later,  two  hundred  and  ninety-two  elect- 
oral votes  being  cast  for  him. 

Soon  after  the  close  of  his  second  term.  Gen. 
Grant  started  upon  his  famous  trip  around  the 
world.  He  visited  almost  everj-  country  of  the 
civilized  world,  and  was  ever\-w-here  received 
with  such  ovations  and  demonstrations  of  respect 
and  honor,  private  as  well  as  public  and  official, 
as  were  never  before  bestowed  upon  any  citizen 
of  the  United  States. 

He  was  the  most  prominent  candidate  before 
the  Republican  National  Convention  in  1880  for 
a  renomination  for  President.  He  went  to  New 
York  and  embarked  in  the  brokerage  business 
under  the  firm  name  of  Grant  &  Ward.  The 
latter  proved  a  villain,  wrecked  Grant's  fortune, 
and  for  larceny  was  sent  to  the  'penitentiary'. 
The  General  was  attacked  with  cancer  in  the 
throat,  but  suffered  in  his  stoic-like  manner,  never 
complaining.  He  was  re-instated  as  General  of 
the  Army,  and  retired  by  Congress.  The  cancer 
soon  finished  its  deadly  work,  and  July  23,  1885, 
the  nation  went  in  mourning  over  the  death  01 
the  illustrious  General. 


O  oU_6^JV' 


RUTHERFORD  B.  HAYES. 


RUTHERFORD  B.  HAYES,  the  nineteenth  ' 
President  of  the  United  States,  was  born  in 
Delaware,  Ohio,  October  4,  1822,  almost 
three  months  after  the  death  of  his  father,  Ruther- 
ford Haj-es.  His  ancestrj-  on  both  the  paternal  and 
maternal  sides  was  of  the  most  honorable  char- 
acter. It  can  be  traced,  it  is  said,  as  far  back  as 
1280,  when  Hayes  and  Rutherford  were  two 
Scottish  chieftains,  fighting  side  b}'  side  with 
Baliol,  William  Wallace  and  Robert  Bruce.  Both 
families  belonged  to  the  nobility,  owned  extensive 
estates,  and  had  a  large  following.  Misfortune 
overtaking  the  family,  George  Hayes  left  Scotland 
in  1680,  and  settled  in  Windsor,  Conn.  His  son 
George  was  born  in  Windsor,  and  remained  there 
during  his  life.  Daniel  Ha^-es,  son  of  the  latter, 
married  Sarah  Lee,  and  lived  from  the  time  of 
his  marriage  until  his  death  in  Simsburj',  Conn. 
Ezekiel,  son  of  Daniel,  was  born  in  1724,  and  was 
a  manufacturer  of  scythes  at  Bradford,  Conn. 
Rutherford  Hayes,  son  of  Ezekiel  and  grandfather 
of  President  Hayes,  was  born  in  New  Haven,  in 
August,  1756.  He  was  a  farmer,  blacksmith  and 
tavern-keeper.  He  emigrated  to  Vermont  at  an 
unknown  date,  settling  in  Brattleboro,  where  he 
established  a  hotel.  Here  his  son,  Rutherford 
Haj'es,  the  father  of  President  Haj'es,  was  born. 
He  was  married,  in  September,  1S13,  to  Sophia 
Birchard,  of  Wilmington,  Vt.,  whose  ancestors 
emigrated  thither  from  Connecticut,  they  having 
been  among  the  wealthiest  and  best  families  of 
Norwich.  Her  ancestn,-  on  the  male  side  is 
traced  back  to  1635,  to  John  Birchard,  one  of  the 
principal  founders  of  Norwich.  Both  of  her  grand- 
fathers were  soldiers  in  the  Revolutionary-  War. 

The  father  of  President  Hayes  was  an  industri- 
ous, frugal,  yet  open-hearted  man.      Jle  was  of  a 


mechanical  turn  of  mind,  and  could  mend  a  plow, 
knit  a  stocking,  or  do  almost  anything  else  that 
he  chose  to  undertake.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
church,  active  in  all  the  benevolent  enterprises 
of  the  town,  and  conducted  his  business  on  Chris- 
tian principles.  After  the  close  of  the  War  of 
1812,  for  reasons  inexplicable  to  his  neighbors,  he 
resolved  to  emigrate  to  Ohio. 

The  journey  from  Vennont  to  Ohio  in  that  daj', 
when  there  were  no  canals,  steamers,  or  rail- 
ways, was  a  verj'  serious  affair.  A  tour  of  in- 
spection was  first  made,  occupying  four  months. 
Mr.  Hayes  decided  to  move  to  Delaware,  where 
the  family  arrived  in  181 7.  He  died  July  22, 
1822,  a  victim  of  malarial  fever,  less  than  three 
months  before  the  birth  of  the  son  of  whom  we 
write.  Mrs.  Hayes,  in  her  sore  bereavement, 
found  the  support  she  so  much  needed  in  her 
brother  Sardis,  who  had  been  a  member  of  the 
household  from  the  day  of  its  departure  from 
Vermont,  and  in  an  orphan  girl,  whom  she  had 
adopted  some  time  before  as  an  act  of  charity. 

Rutherford  was  seven  )-ears  old  before  he  went 
to  school.  His  education,  however,  was  not  neg- 
lected. He  probably  learned  as  much  from  his 
mother  and  sister  as  he  would  have  done  at 
school.  His  sports  were  almost  wholly  within 
doors,  his  playmates  being  his  sister  and  her  asso- 
ciates. The.se  circumstances  tended,  no  doubt,  to 
foster  that  gentleness  of  disposition  and  that  del- 
icate consideration  for  the  feelings  of  others  which 
were  marked  traits  of  his  character. 

His  uncle,  Sardis  Birchard,  took  the  deepest 
interest  in  his  education;  and  as  the  boy's  health 
had  improved,  and  he  was  making  good  progress 
in  his  studies,  he  proposed  to  send  him  to  college. 
His  preparation  commenced  with  a  tutor  at  home; 


92 


RUTHERFORD  B.  HAYES. 


but  he  was  afterwards  sent  for  one  j-ear  to  a  pro- 
fessor in  the  Wesleyan  Uin\-ersity  in  Middletown, 
Conn.  He  entered  Kenyo.n  College  in  1838,  at 
the  age  of  sixteen,  and  was  graduated  at  the  head 
of  his  class  in  1842. 

Immediately  after  his  graduation  he  began  the 
study  of  law  in  the  ofiBce  of  Thomas  Sparrow, 
Esq.,  in  Columbus.  Finding  his  opportunities 
for  study  in  Columbus  somewhat  limited,  he  de- 
termined to  enter  the  Law  School  at  Cambridge, 
Mass.,  where  he  remained  two  jears. 

In  1S45,  after  graduating  at  the  L,aw  School,  he 
was  admitted  to  the  Bar  at  Marietta,  Ohio,  and 
shortlj-  after^vard  went  into  practice  as  an  at- 
torney-at-law  with  Ralph  P.  Buckland,  of  Fre- 
mont. Here  he  remained  three  jears,  acquiring 
but  a  limited  practice,  and  apparentl}-  unambitious 
of  distinction  in  his  profession. 

In  1S49  he  moved  to  Cincinnati,  where  his  am- 
bition found  a  new  stimulus.  For  several  years, 
however,  his  progress  was  slow.  Two  events 
occurring  at  this  period  had  a  powerful  influence 
upon  his  subsequent  life.  One  of  these  was  his 
marriage  witli  Miss  Lucy  Ware  Webb,  daughter 
of  Dr.  James  Webb,  of  Chillicothe;  the  other  was 
his  introduction  to  the  Cincinnati  Literarj'  Club, 
a  body  embracing  among  its  members  such  men 
as  Chief  Justice  Salmon  P.  Chase,  Gen.  John 
Pope,  Gov.  Edward  F.  Noj-es,  and  manj'  others 
hardlj'  less  distinguished  in  after  life.  The  mar- 
riage was  a  fortunate  one  in  every  respect,  as 
ever\-body  knows.  Not  one  of  all  the  wives  of 
our  Presidents  was  more  universalh-  admired, 
reverenced  and  beloved  than  was  Mrs.  Hayes,  and 
no  one  did  more  than  she  to  reflect  honor  upon 
American  womanhood.  The  Literarj-Club  brought 
Mr.  Hayes  into  constant  association  with  young 
men  of  high  character  and  noble  aims,  and  lured 
him  to  display  the  qualities  so  long  hidden  by  his 
bashfulness  and  modestj-. 

In  1856  he  was  nominated  to  the  office  of  Judge 
of  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  but  he  decliiied  to 
accept  the  nomination.  Two  j'ears  later,  the  of- 
fice of  Cit}-  Solicitor  becoming  vacant,  the  City 
Council  elected  him  for  the  unexpired  term. 

In  1861,  when  the  Rebellion  broke  out,  he  was 
at  the  zenith  of  his  professional  life.     His  rank  at 


the  Bar  was  among  the  first.  But  the  news  of 
the  attack  on  Ft.  Sumter  found  him  eager  to 
take  up  arms  for  the  defense  of  his  countr\-. 

His  militan,-  record  was  bright  and  illustrious. 
In  October,  1861,  he  was  made  Lieu  tenant- Colo- 
nel, and  in  August,  1862,  promoted  Colonel  of 
the  Sevent3'-ninth  Ohio  Regiment,  but  he  refused 
to  leave  his  old  comrades  and  go  among  strangers. 
Subsequently,  however,  he  was  made  Colonel  of 
his  old  regiment.  At  the  battle  of  South  Moun- 
tain he  received  a  wound,  and  while  faint  and 
bleeding  displayed  courage  and  fortitude  that 
won  admiration  from  all. 

Col.  Hayes  was  detached  from  his  regiment, 
after  his  recoverj-,  to  act  as  Brigadier-General, 
and  placed  in  command  of  the  celebrated  Kanawha 
division,  and  for  gallant  and  meritorious  ser\-ices 
in  the  battles  of  Winchester,  Fisher's  HiU  and 
Cedar  Creek,  he  was  promoted  Brigadier-General. 
He  was  also  breveted  Major- General,  "for  gallant 
and  distinguished  ser\-ices  during  the  campaigns 
of  1864,  in  West  Virginia."  In  the  course  of  his 
arduous  ser\nces,  four  horses  were  shot  from  un- 
der him,  and  he  was  wounded  four  times. 

In  1864,  Gen.  Hayes  was  elected  to  Congress 
from  the  Second  Ohio  District,  which  had  long 
been  Democratic.  He  was  not  present  during  the 
campaign,  and  after  the  election  was  importuned 
to  resign  his  commission  in  the  army;  but  he  fi- 
nally declared,  "  I  shall  never  come  to  Washing- 
ton until  I  can  come  by  way  of  Richmond."  He 
was  re-elected  in  1866. 

In  1S67,  Gen.  Haj-es  was  elected  Governor  of 
Ohio,  over  Hon.  Allen  G.  Thurman,  a  popular 
Democrat,  and  in  1869  was  re-elected  over  George 
H.  Pendleton.  He  w-as  elected  Governor  for  the 
third  term  in  1875. 

In  1876  he  was  the  standard-bearer  of  the  Re- 
publican party  in  the  Presidential  contest,  and 
after  a  hard,  long  contest  was  chosen  President, 
and  was  inaugurated  Monday,  March  5,  1877. 
He  served  his  full  term,  not,  however,  with  satis- 
faction to  his  party,  but  his  administration  was  an 
average  one.  The  remaining  years  of  his  life 
were  passed  quietly  in  his  Ohio  home,  where  he 
passed  away  January  17,  1893. 


^   L-K^^ 


JAMES  A.  GARFIELD. 


(f  AMES  A.  GARFIELD,  twentieth  President 
I  of  the  United  States,  was  born  Xovember  ly, 
C2/  1831,  in  the  woods  of  Orange,  Cuyahoga 
County,  Ohio.  His  parents  were  Abram  and 
Eliza  (Ballouj  Garfield,  both  of  New  England 
ancestry,  and  from  families  well  known  in  the 
early  history  of  that  section  of  our  countrj-,  but  I 
who  had  moved  to  the  Western  Reser\'e,  in  Ohio, 
early  in  its  settlement.  1 

The  house  in  which  James  A.  was  born  was 
not  unlike  the  houses  of  poor  Ohio  fanners  of 
that  da}'.     It  was  about  20  x  30  feet,  built  of  logs,  1 
with  the  spaces  between  the  logs  filled  with  clay. 
His  father  was  a  hard-working  farmer,  and  he 
soon  had  his  fields  cleared,  an  orchard  planted, 
and  a  log  barn  built.     The  household  compri.sed 
the  father  and  mother  and  their  four  children, 
Mehetabel,  Thomas,  Marj-  and  James.     In  Ma}-, 
1823,  the  father  died  from  a  cold  contracted  in 
helping   to  put  out  a   forest  fire.     At  this  time 
James    was    about    eighteen    months    old,    and  j 
Thomas  about  ten  years  old.     No  one,  perhaps, 
can  tell  how  much  James  was  indebted  to  liis  I 
brother's  toil  and  self-sacrifice  during  the  twenty 
years   succeeding   his   father's  death.     He  now 
lives  in  Michigan,  and  the  two  sisters  live  in  Solon,  1 
Ohio,  near  their  birthplace. 

The  early  educational  advantages  young  Gar- 
field enjojed  were  very  limited,  yet  he  made  the 
most  of  them.  He  labored  at  farm  work  for 
others,  did  carpenter  work,  chopped  wood,  or  did  ; 
anything  that  would  bring  in  a  few  dollars  to  aid  ! 
his  widowed  mother  in  her  struggles  to  keep  the 
little  family  together.  Nor  was  Gen.  Garfield 
ever  ashamed  of  his  origin,  and  he  never  forgot 
the  friends  of  his  struggling  childhood,  youth  and 
manhood;  neither  did  they  ever  forget  him. 
When  in  the  highest  seats  of  honor,  the  humblest 
friend  of  his  boyhood  was  as  kindly  greeted  as 
ever.  The  poorest  laborer  was  sure  of  the  sym- 
pathy of  one  who  had  known  all  the  bitterness  of  I 


want  and  the  sweetness  of  bread  earned  by  the 
sweat  of  the  brow.  He  was  ever  the  simple, 
plain,  modest  gentleman.    . 

The  highest  ambition  of  young  Garfield  until 
he  was  about  sixteen  years  old  was  to  be  cap- 
tain of  a  vessel  on  Lake  Erie.  He  was  anxious 
to  go  aboard  a  vessel,  but  this  his  mother  strongly 
opposed.  She  finally  consented  to  his  going  to 
Cleveland,  with  the  understanding,  however,  that 
he  should  try  to  obtain  some  other  kind  of  em- 
ployment. He  walked  all  the  way  to  Cleveland. 
This  was  his  first  visit  to  the  city.  After  making 
many  applications  for  work,  and  trying  to  get 
aboard  a  lake  vessel  and  not  meeting  with  suc- 
cess, he  engaged  as  a  driver  for  his  cousin,  Amos 
Letcher,  on  the  Ohio  &  Pennsylvania  Canal. 
He  remained  at  this  work  but  a  short  time,  when 
he  went  home,  and  attended  the  seminary  at 
Chester  for  about  three  years.  He  then  entered 
Hiram  and  the  Eclectic  Institute,  teaching  a  few 
terms  of  school  in  the  mean  time,  and  doing  other 
work.  This  school  was  started  by  the  Disciples 
of  Christ  in  1850,  of  which  body  he  was  then  a 
member.  He  became  janitor  and  bell-ringer  in 
order  to  help  pay  his  way.  He  then  became  both 
teacher  and  pupil.  Soon  "  exhausting  Hiram," 
and  needing  a  higher  education,  in  the  fall  of  1854 
he  entered  Williams  College,  from  which  he  grad- 
uated in  1856,  taking  one  of  the  highest  honors  of 
his  class.  He  afterwards  returned  to  Hiram  Col- 
lege as  its  President.  As  above  stated,  he  early 
united  with  the  Christian,  or  Disciples,  Church  at 
Hiram,  and  was  ever  after  a  devoted,  zealous 
member,  often  preaching  in  its  pulpit  and  places 
where  he  happened  to  be. 

Mr.  Garfield  was  united  in  marriage,  Novem- 
ber II,  1858,  with  Miss  Lucretia  Rudolph,  who 
proved  herself  worthy  as  the  wife  of  one  whom 
all  the  world  loved.  To  them  were  bom  seven 
children,  five  of  whom  are  still  living,  four  boys 
and  one  girl. 


96 


JAMES  A.  GARFIELD. 


Mr.  Garfield  made  his  first  political  speeches  in 
1856,  in  Hiram  and  the  neighboring  villages,  and 
three  5-ears  later  he  began  to  speak  at  county 
mass-meetings,  and  became  the  favorite  speaker 
where\-er  he  was.  During  this  year  he  was 
elected  to  the  Ohio  Senate.  He  also  began  to 
study  law  at  Cleveland,  and  in  1861  was  admitted 
to  the  Bar.  The  great  Rebellion  broke  out  in  the 
early  part  of  this  year,  and  Mr.  Garfield  at  once 
resolved  to  fight  as  he  had  talked,  and  enlisted  to 
defend  the  Old  Flag.  He  received  his  commission 
as  Lieutenant- Colonel  of  the  Forty-second  Regi- 
ment of  Ohio  Infantry  August  14,  1861.  He 
was  immediately  put  into  active  ser\dce,  and  be- 
fore he  had  ever  seen  a  gun  fired  in  action,  was 
placed  in  command  of  four  regiments  of  infantrj' 
and  eight  companies  of  cavalry,  charged  with  the 
work  of  driving  out  of  his  native  State  the  able 
rebel  officer,  Humphrey  Marshall,  of  Kentucky. 
This  work  was  bravely  and  speedily  accomplished, 
although  against  great  odds,  and  President  Lin- 
coln commissioned  him  Brigadier- General,  Janu- 
arj-  10,  1862;  and  "as  he  had  bee^  the  youngest 
man  in  the  Ohio  Senate  two  years  before,  so  now 
he  was  the  3'oungest  General  in  the  arm}-."  He 
was  with  Gen.  Buell's  army  at  Shiloh,  in  its 
operations  around  Corinth  and  its  march  through 
Alabama.  He  was  then  detailed  as  a  member  of 
the  general  court  martial  for  the  trial  of  Gen. 
Fitz-John  Porter.  He  was  next  ordered  to  re- 
port to  Gen.  Rosecrans,  and  was  assigned  to  the 
"  Chief  of  Staff.  "•  The  militarj'  historj'  of  Gen. 
Garfield  closed  with  his  brilliant  ser\-ices  at  Chick- 
amauga,  where  he  won  the  rank  of  Major-General. 

Without  an  effort  on  his  part,  Gen.  Garfield 
was  elected  to  Congress  in  the  fall  of  1862,  from 
the  Nineteenth  District  of  Ohio.  This  section  of 
Ohio  had  been  represented  in  Congress  for  sixty 
years  mainly  by  two  men — Elisha  Whittlesey  and 
Joshua  R.  Giddings.  It  was  not  without  a  strug- 
gle that  he  resigned  his  place  in  the  armj'.  At 
the  time  he  entered  Congress  he  was  the  youngest 
member  in  that  body.  There  he  remained  by 
successive  re-elections  until  he  was  elected  Presi- 
dent, in  1880.  Of  his  labors  in  Congress,  Senator 
Hoar  says:  "Since  the  j'ear  1864  you  cannot 
think  of  a  question  which  has  been  debated  in 


Congress,  or  discussed  before  a  tribunal  of  the 
American  people,  in  regard  to  which  you  will  not 
find,  if  )-ou  wish  instruction,  the  argument  on 
one  side  stated,  in  almost  even-  instance  better 
than  by  anybody  else,  in  some  speech  made  in 
the  House  of  Representatives  or  on  the  hustings 
by  Mr.  Garfield." 

Upon  January  14,  1880,  Gen.  Garfield  was  elect- 
ed to  the  United  States  Senate,  and  on  the  8th  of 
June,  of  the  same  year,  was  nominated  as  the 
candidate  of  hife  party  for  President  at  the  great 
Chicago  Convention.  He  was  elected  in  the  fol- 
lowing November,  and  on  March  4,  1881,  was 
inaugurated.  Probabl}^  no  administration  ever 
opened  its  existence  under  brighter  auspices  than 
that  of  President  Garfield,  and  every  day  it  grew 
in  favor  with  the  people.  By  the  ist  of  July 
he  had  completed  all  the  initiatory  and  prelimi- 
nar>'  worts  of  his  administration,  and  was  prepar- 
ing to  leave  the  city  to  meet  his  friends  at  Will- 
iams College.  While  on  his  way  and  at  the 
depot,  in  company  with  Secretarj'  Blaine,  a  man 
stepped  behind  him,  drew  a  revolver,  and  fired 
directly  at  his  back.  The  President  tottered  and 
fell,  and  as  he  did  so  the  assassin  fired  a  second 
shot,  the  bullet  cutting  the  left  coat  sleeve  of  his 
victim,  but  inflicting  no  further  injury.  It  has 
been  verj'  truthfullj'  said  that  this  was  ' '  the  shot 
that  was  heard  around  the  world."  Never  before 
in  the  history  of  the  nation  had  anj-thing  occur- 
red which  so  nearly  froze  the  blood  of  the  people 
for  the  moment  as  this  awful  deed.  He  was 
smitten  on  the  brightest,  gladdest  day  of  all  his 
life,  at  the  summit  of  his  power  and  hope.  For 
eight\'  days,  all  during  the  hot  months  of  July 
and  August,  he  lingered  and  sufiered.  He,  how- 
ever, remained  master  of  himself  till  the  last,  and 
by  his  magnificent  bearing  taught  the  countrs- 
and  the  world  one  of  the  noblest  of  human  les- 
sons— how  to  live  grandly  in  the  verj-  clutch  of 
death.  Great  in  life,  he  was  surpassingly  great 
in  death.  He  passed  sereneh'  away  September 
19,  1883,  at  Elberon,  N.  J.,  on  the  very  bank  of 
the  ocean,  where  he  had  been  taken  shortly  be- 
fore. The  world  wept  at  his  death,  as  it  rarely 
ever  had  done  on  the  death  of  any  other  great 
and  noble  man. 


,,->«A«k^ 


CHESTER  A.  ARTHUR. 


E HESTER  A.  ARTHUR,  twentj'-first  Presi-  ! 
dent  of  the  United  States,  was  born  in  Frank-  | 
lin  County,  Vt.,  on  the  5th  day  of  October, 
1S30,  and  was  the  eldest  of  a  family  of  two  sons  ; 
and  five  daughters.     His  father  was  the  Rev.  Dr.  ! 
William  Arthur,  a  Baptist  clergyman,  who  emi- 
grated to  this  country'  from  County  Antrim,  Ire-  \ 
land,  in  his  eighteenth  3'ear,  and  died  in  1875,  in 
Newtonville,  near  Albany,  after  a  long  and  suc- 
cessful ministry. 

Young  Arthur  was  educated  at  Union  College, 
Schenectady,  where  he  excelled  in  all  his  studies. 
After  his  graduation  he  taught  school  in  Ver- 
mont for  two  years,  and  at  the  expiration  of  that 
time  came  to  New  York,  with  $500  in  his  pocket, 
and  entered  the  ofEce  of  ex -Judge  E.  D.  Culver 
as  a  student.  After  being  admitted  to  the  Bar,  he 
formed  a  partnership  with  his  intimate  friend  and 
room-mate,  Henrj'  D.  Gardiner,  with  the  inten- 
tion of  practicing  in  the  West,  and  for  three 
months  thej-  roamed  about  in  the  Western  States 
in  search  of  an  eligible  site,  but  in  the  end  re- 
turned to  New  York,  where  they  hung  out  their 
shingle,  and  entered  upon  a  successful  career  al- 
most from  the  start.  Gen.  Arthur  soon  after  mar- 
ried the  daughter  of  Lieut.  Herndon,  of  the 
United  States  Navy,  who  was  lost  at  sea.  Con- 
gress voted  a  gold  medal  to  his  widow  in  recog- 
nition of  the  bravery  he  displayed  on  that  occa- 
.sion.  Mrs.  Arthur  died  shortly  before  Mr. 
Arthur's  nomination  to  the  Vice-Presidency,  leav- 
ing two  children. 

Gen.  Arthur  obtained  considerable  legal  celeb- 
rity in  his  first  great  case,  the  famous  Lemmon 
suit,  brought  to  recover  possession  of  eight  slaves 
who  had  been  declared  free  by  Judge  Paine,  of 
the  Superior  Court  of  New  York  City.     It  was  in 


1852  that  Jonathan  Temmon,  of  Virginia,  went  to 
New  York  with  his  sla\-es,  intencUng  to  ship  them 
to  Texas,  when  they  were  discovered  and  freed. 
The  Judge  decided  that  they  could  not  be  held  by 
the  owner  under  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law.  A  howl 
of  rage  went  up  from  the  South,  and  the  Virginia 
Legislature  authorized  the  Attorney-General  of 
that  State  to  a.ssist  in  an  appeal.  William  M. 
Evarts  and  Chester  A.  Arthur  were  employed  to 
represent  the  people,  and  they  won  their  case, 
which  then  went  to  the  vSupreme  Court  of  the 
United  States.  Charles  O' Conor  here  espoused 
the  cause  of  the  slaveholders^  but  he,  too,  was 
beaten  by  Messrs.  Evarts  and  Arthur,  and  a  long 
step  was  taken  toward  the  emancipation  of  the 
black  race. 

Another  great  ser\-ice  was  rendered  by  Gen. 
Arthur  in  the  same  cause  in  1856.  Lizzie  Jen- 
nings, a  respectable  colored  woman,  was  put  off 
a  Fourth  Avenue  car  with  violence  after  she  had 
paid  her  fare.  Gen.  Arthur  .sued  on  her  behalf, 
and  secured  a  verdict  of  $500  damages.  The  next 
day  the  company  issued  an  order  to  admit  colored 
persons  to  ride  on  their  cars,  and  the  other  car 
companies  quickly  followed  their  example.  Be- 
fore that  the  Sixth  Avenue  Company  ran  a  few 
special  cars  for  colored  persons,  and  the  other  lines 
refused  to  let  them  ride  at  all. 

Gen.  Arthur  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention 
at  Saratoga  that  founded  the  Republican  party. 
Previous  to  the  war  he  was  Judge-Advocate  of 
the  Second  Brigade  of  the  State  of  New  York, 
and  Gov.  Morgan,  of  that  State,  appointed  him 
Engineer-in-Chief  of  his  staff.  In  1S61,  he  was 
made  In.spector-General,  and  soon  afterward  be- 
came Quartermaster-General.  In  each  of  these 
ofiices  he  rendered  great  service  to  the  Govern- 


CHESTER  A.  ARTHUR. 


ment  during  the  war.  At  the  end  of  Gov.  Mor- 
gan's term  he  resumed  the  practice  of  law,  form- 
ing a  partnership  with  Mr.  Ransom,  and  then 
Mr.  Phelps,  the  District  Attorney  of  New  York, 
was  added  to  the  firm.  The  legal  practice  of  this 
well-known  firm  was  verj'  large  and  lucrative, 
as  each  of  the  gentlemen  composing  it  was  an  able 
lawyer,  and  possessed  a  splendid  local  reputa- 
tion, if  not,  indeed,  one  of  national  extent. 

Mr.  Arthur  alwaj-s  took  a  leading  part  in  State 
and  city  politics.  He  was  appointed  Collector  of 
the  Port  of  New  York  by  President  Grant,  No- 
vember 21,  1872,  to  succeed  Thomas  Murphy, 
and  he  held  the  office  until  July  20,  1878,  when 
he  was  succeeded  by  Collector  Merritt. 

Mr.  Arthur  was  nominated  on  the  Presidential 
ticket,  with  Gen.  James  A.  Garfield,  at  the 
famous  National  Republican  Convention  held  at 
Chicago  in  June,  1880.  This  was  perhaps  the 
greatest  political  convention  that  ever  assembled 
on  the  continent.  It  was  composed  of  the  lead- 
ing politicians  of  the  Republican  party,  all  able 
men,  and  each  stood  firm  and  fought  vigorouslj- 
and  with  signal  tenacit}'  for  his  respective  can- 
didate that  was  before  the  convention  for  the 
nomination.  Finally  Gen.  Garfield  received  the 
nomination  for  President,  and  Gen.  Arthur  for 
Vice-President.  The  campaign  which  followed 
was  one  of  the  most  animated  known  in  the  his- 
tory of  our  country.  Gen.  Hancock,  the  stand- 
ard-bearer of  the  Democratic  partj',  was  a  popular 
man,  and  his  party  made  a  valiant  fight  for  his 
election. 

Finally  the  election  came,  and  the  country-' s 
choice  was  Garfield  and  Arthur.  They  were  in- 
augurated March  4,  1881,  as  President  and  Vice- 
President.  A  few  months  only  had  passed  ere 
the  newly-chosen  President  was  the  victim  of  the 
assassin's  bullet.  Then  came  terrible  weeks  of 
sufiering — those  moments  of  anxious  suspense, 
when  the  hearts  of  all  civilized  nations  were 
throbbing  in  unison,  longing  for  the  recovery  of 
the  noble,  the  good  President.  The  remarkable 
patience  that  he  manifested  during  those  hours 
and  weeks,  and  even  months,  of  the  most  terrible 
suffering  man  has  ever  been  called  upon  to  en- 
dure, was  seemingly  more  than  human.     It  was 


certainly  godlike.  During  all  this  period  of 
deepest  anxiety  Mr.  Arthur's  every  move  was 
watched,  and,  be  it  said  to  his  credit,  that  his  every 
action  displayed  onh-  an  earnest  desire  that  the 
suffering  Garfield  might  recover  to  ser\-e  the  re- 
mainder of  the  term  he  had  so  auspiciously  be- 
gun. Not  a  selfish  feeling  was  manifested  in 
deed  or  look  of  this  man,  even  though  the  most 
honored  position  in  the  world  was  at  any  moment 
likely  to  fall  to  him. 

At  last  God  in  his  mercy  relieved  President 
Garfield  from  further  suffering,  and  the  world,  as 
never  before  in  its  history  over  the  death  of  any 
other  man,  wept  at  his  bier.  Then  it  became  the 
duty  of  the  Vice-President  to  a.ssume  the  respon- 
sibilities of  the  high  office,  and  he  took  the  oath 
in  New  York,  September  20,  1881.  The  position 
was  an  embarrassing  one  to  him,  made  doubly  so 
from  the  fact  that  all  eyes  were  on  him,  anxious 
to  know  what  he  would  do,  what  policy  he  would 
pursue,  and  whom  he  would  select  as  advisers. 
The  duties  of  the  office  had  been  greatly  neglected 
during  the  President's  long  illness,  and  many  im- 
portant measures  were  to  be  immediately  decided 
by  him ;  and  to  still  further  embarass  him  he  did 
not  fail  to  realize  under  what  circumstances  he 
became  President,  and  knew  the  feelings  of  manj' 
on  this  point.  Under  these  trying  circumstances. 
President  Arthur  took  the  reins  of  the  Govern- 
ment in  his  own  hands,  and,  as  embarrassing  as 
was  the  condition  of  affairs,  he  happily  surprised 
the  nation,  acting  so  wisely  that  but  few  criticized 
his  administration.  He  ser\'ed  the  nation  well 
and  faithfully  until  the  close  of  his  administra- 
tion, March  4,  1885,  and  was  a  popular  candidate 
before  his  partj-  for  a  second  term.  His  name 
was  ably  presented  before  the  convention  at  Chi- 
cago, and  was  received  with  great  favor,  and 
doubtless  but  for  the  personal  popularity  of  one 
of  the  opposing  candidates,  he  would  have  been 
selected  as  the  standard-bearer  of  his  party  for 
another  campaign.  He  retired  to  private  life,  car- 
rying with  him  the  best  wishes  of  the  American 
people,  whom  he  had  served  in  a  manner  satisfac- 
tory to  them  and  with  credit  to  himself  One 
vear  later  he  was  called  to  his  final  rest. 


A' 


Isr^ 


"  /■  ' 


< 


-^1?^-^^  c/c^^/lAyU/ 


STEPHEN  GROVER  CLEVELAND. 


mTEPHEX  GROVER  CLEVELAND,  the 
2\  twenty-second  President  of  the  United  States, 
\~/  was  born  in  1837.  in  the  obscure  town  of 
Caldwell,  Essex  County,  X.  J.,  and  in  a  little 
two-and-a-half-stor\-  white  house,  which  is  still 
standing  to  characteristicalh-  mark  the  humble 
birthplace  of  one  of  America's  great  men,  in 
striking  contrast  with  the  Old  World,  where  all 
men  high  in  office  must  be  high  in  origin  and 
bom  in  the  cradle  of  wealth.  WTien  the  subject 
of  this  sketch  was  three  j-ears  of  age,  his  father, 
who  was  a  Presbyterian  minister  with  a  large 
family  and  a  small  salarj',  moved,  bj-  wa)-  of  the 
Hudson  River  and  Erie  Canal,  to  Fayette\-ille,  N. 
Y.,  in  search  of  an  increased  income  and  a  larger 
field  of  work.  Fayetteville  was  then  the  most 
straggling  of  countrj-  villages,  about  five  miles 
from  Pompey  Hill,  where  Governor  Seymour 
was  bom. 

At  the  last-mentioned  place  young  Grover  com- 
menced going  to  school  in  the  good,  old-fashioned 
waj',  and  presumably  distinguished  himself  after 
the  manner  of  all  village  boj-s — in  doing  the 
things  he  ought  not  to  do.  Such  is  the  dis- 
tinguishing trait  of  all  geniuses  and  independent 
thinkers.  When  he  arrived  at  the  age  of  four- 
teen j-ears,  he  had  outgrown  the  capacity  of  the 
village  school,  and  expressed  a  most  emphatic  de- 
sire to  be  sent  to  an  academj-.  To  this  his  fa- 
ther decidedlj-  objected.  Academies  in  those 
days  cost  money ;  besides,  his  father  wanted  him 
to  become  self-supporting  bj-  the  quickest  pos- 
sible means,  and  this  at  that  time  in  Fayetteville 
seemed  to  be  a  position  in  a  countrj-  store,  where 
his  father  and  the  large  family  on  his  hands  had 


considerable  influence.  Grover  was  to  be  paid 
$50  for  his  services  the  first  year,  and  if  he  proved 
trustworthj'  he  w'as  to  receive  $100  the  second 
year.  Here  the  lad  commenced  his  career  as 
salesman,  and  in  two  years  he  had  earned  so  good 
a  reputation  for  trustworthiness  that  his  employ- 
ers desired  to  retain  him  for  an  indefinite  length 
of  time. 

But  instead  of  remaining  with  this  firm  in 
Fayetteville,  he  went  with  the  family  in  their  re- 
moval to  Clinton,  where  he  had  an  opportunity 
of  attending  a  High  School.  Here  he  industri- 
ouslj-  pursued  his  studies  until  the  familj-  re- 
moved with  him  to  a  point  on  Black  River  known 
as  the  "Holland  Patent,"  a  village  of  five  or  six: 
hundred  people,  fifteen  miles  north  of  Utica,  N.  Y. 
At  this  place  his  father  died,  after  preaching  but 
three  Sundays.  This  event  broke  up  the  faniilj-, 
and  Grover  set  out  for  New  York  City  tD  accept, 
at  a  small  salarj-,  the  position  of  under- teacher 
in  an  a.sylum  for  the  blind.  He  taught  faithfullj' 
for  two  years,  and  although  he  obtained  a  good 
reputation  in  this  capacitj-,  he  concluded  that 
teaching  was  not  his  calling  in  life,  and,  revers- 
ing the  traditional  order,  he  left  the  citj-  to  seek 
his  fortune,  instead  of  going  to  the  citj-.  He  first 
thought  of  Cleveland,  Ohio,  as  there  was  some 
charm  in  that  name  for  him:  but  before  proceed- 
ing to  that  place  he  went  to  BuflTalo  to  ask  advice 
of  his  uncle,  Lewis  F.  Allan,  a  noted  stock- 
breeder of  that  place.  The  latter  did  not  speak 
enthusiasticalh'.  "What  is  it  you  want  to  do, 
my  bo}^?"  he  asked.  "Well,  sir,  I  want  to  stud^- 
law,"  was  the  replj'  "Good  gracious!"  remarked 
the  old  gentleman;  "do  j-ou,  indeed?    Whatever 


I04 


STEPHEN  GROVER  CLEVELAND. 


put  that  into  your  head  ?  How  much  money 
have  you  got?"  "Well,  sir,  to  tell  the  truth,  I 
haven't  got  any." 

After  a  long  consultation,  his  uncle  offered  him 
a  place  temporarily  as  assistant  herd-keeper,  at 
$50  a  year,  while  he  could  look  around.  One 
day  soon  afterward  he  boldly  walked  into  the  of- 
fice of  Rogers,  Bowen  &  Rogers,  of  Buffalo,  and 
told  them  what  he  wanted.  A  number  of  young 
men  were  already  engaged  in  the  office,  but  Gro- ' 
ver's  persistency  won,  and  he  was  finally  per- 
mitted to  come  as  an  office  boj'  and  have  the  use 
of  the  law  libran,-,  receiving  as  wages  the  sum  of 
$3  or  $4  a  week.  Out  of  this  he  had  to  pay  for  his 
board  and  wa.shing.  The  walk  to  and  from  his 
uncle's  was  a  long  and  rugged  one;  and  although 
the  first  winter  was  a  memorably  severe  one,  his 
shoes  were  out  of  repair,  and  as  for  his  overcoat  he 
had  none;  yet  he  was,  nevertheless,  prompt  and 
regular.  On  the  first  day  of  his  service  there,  his 
senior  emplojer  threw  down  a  copy  of  Black- 
stone  before  him,  with  a  bang  that  made  the  dust 
fly,  saying  "That's  where  they  all  begin."  A 
titter  ran  around  the  little  circle  of  clerks  and 
students,  as  they  thought  that  was  enough  to 
.scare  young  Grover  out  of  his  plans;  but  in  due 
time  he  mastered  that  cumbersome  volume. 
Then,  as  ever  afterward,  however,  Mr.  Cleve- 
land exhibited  a  talent  for  executiveness  rather 
than  for  chasing  principles  through  all  their 
metaphysical  possibilities.  "Let  us  quit  talking 
and  go  and  do  it, ' '  was  practically  his  motto. 

The  first  public  office  to  which  Mr.  Cleveland 
was  elected  was  that  of  Sheriff  of  Erie  County, 
N.  Y.,  in  which  Buffalo  is  situated;  and  in  such 
capacity  it  fell  to  his  duty  to  inflict  capital  punish- 
ment upon  two  criminals.  In  1881  he  was 
-elected  Mayor  of  the  City  of  Buffalo,  on  the 
Democratic  ticket,  with  especial  reference  to  bring- 
ing about  certain  reforms  in  the  administration 
of  the  municipal  affairs  of  that  city.  In  this  of- 
fice, as  well  as  in  that  of  Sheriff,  his  performance 
of  dutj'  has  generally  been  considered  fair,  witli 
possibly  a  few  exceptions,  which  were  ferreted 
out  and  magnified  during  his  Presidential  cam- 
paign. As  a  specimen  of  his  plain  language  in 
a  veto  message,  we  quote  from  one  vetoing  an 


iniquitous  street-cleaning  contract:  "This  is  a 
time  for  plain  speech,  and  my  objection  to  your 
action  .shall  be  plainly  stated.  I  re^^ard  it  as  the 
culmination  of  a  mo.st  bare-faced,  impudent  and 
shameless  scheme  to  betraj'  the  interests  of  the 
people  and  to  worse  than  squander  the  people's 
money."  The  New  York  Sim  afterward  verj- 
highly  commended  Mr.  Cleveland's  administra- 
tion as  Maj-or  of  Buffalo,  and  thereupon  recom- 
mended him  for  Governor  of  the  Empire  State. 
To  the  latter  office  he  was  elected  in  1882,  and 
his  administration  of  the  affairs  of  State  was 
generally  satisfactory-.  The  mistakes  he  made, 
if  an}-,  were  made  ver\-  public  throughout  the  na- 
tion after  he  was  nominated  for  President  of  the 
United  States.  For  this  high  office  he  was 
nominated  July  11,  1884,  by  the  National  Demo- 
cratic Convention  at  Chicago,  when  other  com- 
petitors were  Thomas  F.  Baj-ard,  Roswell  P. 
Flower,  Thomas  A.  Hendricks,  Benjamin  F. 
Butler,  Allen  G.  Thurman,  etc.;  and  he  was 
elected  by  the  people,  by  a  majority  of  about  a 
thou.sand,  over  the  brilliant  and  long-tried  Re- 
publican statesman,  James  G.  Blaine.  President 
Cleveland  resigned  his  office  as  Governor  of  New 
York  in  Januar)-,  1885,  in  order  to  prepare  for 
his  duties  as  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  United 
States,  in  which  capacity  his  term  commenced  at 
noon  on  the  4th  of  March,  1885. 

The  silver  question  precipitated  a  contro\ersy 
between  those  who  were  in  favor  of  the  continu- 
ance of  silver  coinage  and  those  who  were  op- 
posed, Mr.  Cleveland  answering  for  the  latter, 
even  before  his  inauguration. 

On  June  2,  1886,  President  Cleveland  married 
Frances,  daughter  of  his  deceased  friend  and  part- 
ner, Oscar  Folsom,  of  the  Buffalo  Bar.  Their 
union  has  been  blessed  by  the  birth  of  two  daugh- 
ters. In  the  campaign  of  1888,  President  Cleve- 
land was  renominated  bj'  his  party,  but  the 
Republican  candidate,  Gen.  Benjamin  Harrison, 
was  victorious.  In  the  nomination.'^  of  1892 
these  two  candidates  for  the  highest  position  in 
the  gift  of  the  people  were  again  pitted  again.st 
e\c\\  other,  and  in  the  ensuing  election  President 
Cleveland  was  victorious  by  an  overwhelming 
majority. 


^C4Af,    C^^ 


6t^7^^?\^L^U'^—tA^ 


BENJAMIN  HARRISON. 


QENJAMIN  HARRISON,  the  twenty-third 
IC\  President,  is  the  desceudant  of  one  of  the 
L/  historical  families  of  this  country.  The  first 
known  head  of  the  family  was  Maj.-Gen.  Harrison, 
one  of  Oliver  Cromwell's  trusted  followers  and 
fighters.  In  the  zenith  of  Cromwell' s  power  it  be- 
came the  duty  of  this  Harrison  to  participate  in 
the  trial  of  Charles  I.,  and  afterward  to  sign  the 
death  warrant  of  the  king.  He  subsequently 
paid  for  this  with  his  life,  being  hung  October  13, 
1660.  His  descendants  came  to  America,  and 
the  next  of  the  family  that  appears  in  history  is 
Benjamin  Harrison,  of  Virginia,  great-grandfa- 
ther of  the  subject  of  this  sketch,  and  after  whom 
he  was  named.  Benjamin  Harrison  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Continental  Congress  during  the  years 
1774,  1775  and  1776,  and  was  one  of  the  original 
signers  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence.  He 
was  three  times  elected  Governor  of  Virginia. 

Gen.  'Vl'^illiam  Henry  Harrison,  the  son  of  the 
di.stinguished  patriot  of  the  Revolution,  after  a 
successful  career  as  a  soldier  during  the  'V^'^ar  of 
18 1 2,  and  with  a  clean  record  as  Governor  of  the 
Northwestern  Territory,  was  electe'd  President  of 
the  United  States  in  1 840.  His  career  was  cut 
short  by  death  within  one  month  after  his  in- 
auguration. 

President  Harrison  was  born  at  North   Bend, 


Hamilton  County,  Ohio,  August  20,  1S33.  His 
life  up  to  the  time  of  his  graduation  from  Miami 
University,  at  Oxford,  Ohio,  was  the  uneventful 
one  of  a  countrj-  lad  of  a  familj'  of  small  means. 
His  father  was  able  to  give  him  a  good  education, 
and  nothing  more.  He  became  engaged  while  at 
college  to  the  daughter  of  Dr.  Scott,  Principal  of 
a  female  school  at  Oxford.  After  graduating,  he 
determined  to  enter  upon  the  study  of  law.  He 
went  to  Cinciiuiati  and  there  read  law  for  two 
years.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time  young  Har- 
rison received  the  only  inheritance  of  his  life — his 
aunt,  dying,  left  him  a  lot  valued  at  $800.  He 
regarded  this  legacy  as  a  fortune,  and  decided  to 
get  married  at  once,  take  this  money  and  go  to 
some  Eastern  town  and  begin  the  practice  of  law. 
He  sold  his  lot,  and,  with  the  money  in  his  pocket, 
he  started  out  with  his  young  wife  to  fight  for  a 
place  in  the  world.  He  decided  to  go  to  Indian- 
apolis, which  was  even  at  that  time  a  town  of 
promise.  He  met  with  slight  encouragement  at 
first,  making  scarcely  anything  the  first  j'ear. 
He  worked  diligently,  applying  himself  closely  to 
his  calling,  built  up  an  extensive  practice  and 
took  a  leading  rank  in  the  legal  profession. 

In  i860,  Mr.  Harrison  was  nominated  for  the 
position  of  Supreme  Court  Reporter,  and  then  be- 
gan his  experience  as  a  stump  speaker.     He  can- 


loS 


BENJAMIN   HARRISON. 


vassed  the  State  thoroughly,  and  was  elected  by 
a  handsome  majority.  In  1862  he  raised  the 
Seventeenth  Indiana  Infantry,  and  was  chosen  its 
Colonel.  His  regiment  was  composed  of  the  raw- 
est material,  but  Col.  Harrison  employed  all  his 
time  at  first  in  mastering  military  tactics  and  drill- 
ing his  men,  and  when  he  came  to  move  toward 
the  East  with  Sherman,  his  regiment  was  one  of 
the  best  drilled  and  organized  in  the  army.  At 
Resaca  he  especially  distinguished  himself,  and 
(br  his  bravery  at  Peachtree  Creek  he  was  made 
a  Brigadier-General,  Gen.  Hooker  speaking  of 
him  in  the  most  complimentary  terms. 

During  the  ab.sence  of  Gen.  Harrison  in  the 
field,  the  Supreme  Court  declared  the  ofSce  of 
Supreme  Court  Reporter  vacant,  and  another 
person  was  elected  to  the  position.  From  the 
time  of  leaving  Indiana  with  his  regiment  until 
the  fall  of  1864  he  had  taken  no  leave  of  absence, 
but  having  been  nominated  that  year  for  the  same 
office,  he  got  a  thirty-day  leave  of  absence,  and 
during  that  time  made  a  brilliant  canvass  of  the 
State,  and  was  elected  for  another  term.  He  then 
started  to  rejoin  Sherman,  but  on  the  way  was 
stricken  down  with  scarlet  fever,  and  after  a  most 
trying  attack  made  his  way  to  the  front  in  time  to 
participate  in  the  closing  incidents  of  the  war. 

In  1868  Gen.  Harrison  declined  a  re-election 
as  Reporter,  and  resumed  the  practice  of  law.  In 
1876  he  was  a  candidate  for  Governor.  Although 
defeated,  the  brilliant  campaign  he  made  won  for 
him  a  national  reputation,  and  he  was  much  sought 
after,  especially  in  the  East,  to  make  speeches. 
In  1880,  as  usual,  he  took  an  active  part  in  the 
campaign,  and  was  elected  to  the  United  States 
Senate.  Here  he  served  for  six  years,  and  was 
known  as  one  of  the  ablest  men,  best  lawyers  and 
strongest  debaters  in  that  body.  With  the  ex- 
piration of  his  senatorial  term  he  returned  to  the 
practice  of  his  profession,  becoming  the  head  of 
one  of  the  strongest  firms  in  the  State. 

The  political  campaign  of  1888  was  one  of  the 
most  memorable  in  the  history  of  our  country. 
The  convention  which  assembled  in  Chicago  in 
June  and  named  Mr.  Harrison  as  the  chief  .stmd- 
ard-bearer  of  the  Republican  party  was  great  in 
everj-  particular,  and  on  fiis  account,  and  the  at- 


titude it  assumed  upon  the  vital  questions  of  the 
day,  chief  among  which  was  the  tariff,  awoke  a 
deep  interest  in  the  campaign  throughout  the 
nation.  Shortly  after  the  nomination,  delegations 
began  to  visit  Mr.  Harrison  at  Indianapolis,  his 
home.  This  movement  became  popular,  and  from 
all  sections  of  the  country  societies,  clubs  and 
delegations  journej-ed  thither  to  pay  their  re- 
spects to  the  distinguished  .statesman. 

Mr.  Harrison  spoke  daily  all  through  the  sum- 
mer and  autumn  to  these  vLsiting  delegatior.s, 
and  so  varied,  masterly,  and  eloquent  were  his 
speeches  that  th®^'  at  once  placed  him  in  the  fore- 
most rank  of  American  orators  and  statesmen. 
Elected  by  a  handsome  majority,  he  served  his 
country  faithfully  and  well,  and  in  1892  was  nom- 
inated for  re-election;  but  the  people  demanded  a 
change  and  he  was  defeated  by  his  predecessor 
in  office,  Grover  Cleveland. 

On  account  of  his  eloquence  as  a  speaker  and 
his  power  as  a  debater.  Gen.  Harrison  was  called 
upon  at  an  early  age  to  take  part  in  the  dis- 
cussion of  the  great  questions  that  then  began  to 
agitate  the  country.  He  was  an  uncompromisir.g 
anti-slavery  man,  and  was  matched  against  some 
of  the  most  eminent  Democratic  speakers  of  his 
State.  No  man  who  felt  the  touch  of  his  blade 
desired  to  be  pitted  with  him  again.  With  all 
his  eloquence  as  an  orator  he  never  .spoke  for  ora- 
torical effect,  but  his  words  always  went  like  bul- 
lets to  the  mark.  He  is  purely  American  in  his 
ideas,  and  is  a  .splendid  type  of  the  American 
statesman.  Gifted  with  quick  perception,  a  logi- 
cal mind  and  a  ready  tongue,  he  is  one  of  the 
most  distinguished  impromptu  speakers  in  the 
nation.  Many  of  these  speeches  sparkled  with  the 
rarest  eloquence  and  contained  arguments  of  great 
weight,  and  many  of  his  terse  statements  have 
already  become  aphorisms.  Original  in  thought, 
precise  in  logic,  terse  in  statement,  yet  withal 
faultless  in  eloquence,  he  is  recognized  as  the 
sound  statesman  and  brilliant  orator  of  the  day. 
During  the  fast  days  of  his  administration  Presi- 
dent Harrison  suffered  an  irreparable  loss  in  the 
death  of  his  devoted  wife,  Caroline  (Scott)  Har- 
rison, a  lady  of  many  womanly  charms  and  vir- 
tues.    They  were  the  parents  of  two  children. 


*i.\\^^^CJ 


-^^^^s^^MM. 


1%) 


aoC-^^c^  ^^{T^^- 


GO  VERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


HADRACH  BOND,  the  first 
Governor  of  Illinois  after  its 
organization  us  a  State,  serving 
tioni  1818  to  1822,  was  born  in 
Frederick  County,  Maryland, 
in  tiie  year  1773,  and  was 
raised  a  farmer  on  his  father's 
plantation,  receiving  only  a  plain 
English  education.  He  emigrated 
to  this  State  in  t794,  when  it  was  a 
part  of  the  "Northwest  Territory," 
continuing  in  the  vocation  in  which 
he  had  been  brought  up  in  his  native 
State,  in  the  "  New  Design,"  near 
Eagle  Creek,  in  what  is  now  Monroe 
County.  He  served  several  terms  as 
a  member  of  the  General  Assembly 
of  Indiana  Territory,  after  it  was  organized  as  such, 
and  in  1812-14  he  was  a  Delegate  to  the  Twelfth 
and  Thirteenth  Congresses,  taking  his  seat  Dec.  3, 
1812,  and  serving  until  Oct.  3,  [814.  These  were 
the  times,  the  reader  will  recollect,  when  this  Gov- 
ernment had  its  last  struggle  with  Great  Britain. 
The  year  181 2  is  also  noted  in  the  history  of  this 
State  as  that  in  which  the  first  Territorial  Legislature 
was  held.  It  convened  at  Kaskaskia,  Nov.  25,  and 
adjourned  Dec.  26,  following. 

While  serving  as  Delegate  to  Congress,  Mt.  Bond 
was  instrumental  in  procuring  the  right  of  pre-emp- 
tion on  the  public  domain.  On  the  expiration  of  his 
term  at  Washington  he  was  appointed  Receiver  of 
Public  Moneys  at  Kaskaskia,  then  the  capital  of  tlie 
Territory       In    company    with  John   G.    Comyges, 


Thomas  H.  Harris,  Charles  Slade,  Michael  Jones, 
Warren  Brown.  Edward  Humphries  and  Charles  W 
Hunter,  he  became  a  proprietor  of  the  site  of  the 
initial  city  of  Cairo,  which  they  hoped,  from  its  favor- 
able location  at  the  junction  of  the  two  great 
rivers  near  the  center  of  the  Great  West,  would 
rapidly  develop  into  a  metropolis.  To  aid  the  enter- 
prise, they  obtained  a  special  charter  from  the  Legis- 
lature, incorporating  both  the  City  and  the  Bank  of 
Cairo. 

In  18 1 8  Mr.  Bond  was  elected  the  first  Governor 
of  the  State  of  Illinois,  being  inaugurated  Oct.  6 
that  year,  which  was  several  weeks  before  Illinois 
was  actually  admitted.  The  facts  are  these:  In 
January,  1S18,  the  Territorial  Legislature  sent  a  peti- 
tion to  Congress  for  the  admission  of  Illinois  as  a 
State,  Nathaniel  Pope  being  then  Delegate.  The 
petition  was  granted,  fixing  the  northern  line  of  the 
State  on  the  latitude  of  the  southern  extremity  of 
Lake  Michigan;  but  the  bill  was  afterward  so  amend- 
ed as  to  extend  this  line  to  its  present  latitude.  In 
July  a  convention  was  called  at  Kaskaskia  to  draft  a 
constitution,  which,  however,  was  not  submitted  to 
the  people.  By  its  provisions,  supreme  judges,  pros 
ecuting  attorneys,  county  and  circuit  judges,  record- 
ers and  justices  of  the  peace  were  all  to  be  appointed 
by  the  Governor  or  elected  by  the  Legislature.  This 
constitution  was  accepted  by  Congress  Dec.  30.  At 
that  time  Illinois  comprised  but  eleven  counties, 
namely,  Randolph,  Madison,  Gallatin,  Johnson, 
Pope,  Jackson,  Crawford,  Bond,  Union,  Washington 
and  Franklin,  the  northern  portion  of  the  State  be- 
ing mainly  in  Madison  County.  Thus  it  appears 
that  Mr.  Bond  was   honored  by    the    naming  of  a 


SHADRACH  BOND. 


county  before  he  was  elected  Governor.  The  present 
county  of  Bond  is  of  small  limitations,  about  60  to  80 
miles  south  of  Springfield.  For  Lieutenant  Governor 
the  oeople  chose  Pierre  Menard,  a  prominent  and 
worthy  Frenchman,  after  whom  a  county  in  this  State 
is  named.  In  this  election  there  were  no  opposition 
candidates,  as  the  popularity  of  these  men  had  made 
their  promotion  to  the  chief  offices  of  the  Siate,  even 
Oefore  the  constitution  was  drafted,  a  foregone  con- 
clusion. 

The  principal  points  that  excited  the  people  in 
reference  to  political  issues  at  this  period  were  local 
or  "  internal  improvements,"  as  they  were  called. 
State  banks,  location  of  the  capital,  slavery  and  the 
personal  characteristics  of  the  proposed  candidates. 
Mr.  Bond  represented  the  "  Convention  party,"  for 
introducing  slavery  into  the  State,  supiwrted  by  Elias 
Ke  It  Kane,  his  Secretary  of  State,  and  John  Mc- 
Lean, while  Nathaniel  Pope  and  John  P.  Cook  led 
the  anti-slavery  element.  The  people,  however,  did 
not  become  very  much  excited  over  this  issue  until 
1820,  when  the  fimjjs  Missouri  Compromise  was 
adopted  by  Congress,  limiting  slavery  to  the  south 
of  the  parallel  of  36°  30'  except  in  Missouri.  While 
this  measure  settled  the  great  slavery  controversy, 
so  far  as  the  average  public  sentiment  was  tempor- 
arily concerned,  until  1854,  when  it  was  repealed 
under  the  leadership  of  Stephen  A.  Douglas,  the  issue 
as  considered  locally  in  this  State  was  not  decided 
until  '824,  after  a  most  furious  campaign.  (See 
sketch  of  Gov.  Coles.)  The  ticket  of  1818  was  a 
compromise  one.  Bond  representing  (moderately)  the 
pro-slavery  sentiment  and  Menard  the  anti-slavery. 

An  awkward  element  in  the  State  government 
under  Gov.  Bond's  administration,  was  the  imperfec- 
tion of  the  State  constitution.  The  Convention 
wished  to  have  Elijah  C.  Berry  for  the  first  Auditor 
of  Public  Accounts,  but,  as  it  was  believed  that  the 
new  Governor  would  not  appoint  him  to  the  office, 
Uie  Convention  declared  in  a  schedule  that  "  an 
auditor  of  public  accounts,  an  attorney  general  and 
such  other  officers  of  the  State  as  may  be  necessary, 
may  be  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly."  The 
Constitution,  as  it  stood,  vested  a  very  large  appoint- 
ing power  in  the  Governor ;  but  for  the  purjxjse  of 
getting  one  man  into  office,  a  total  change  was  made, 
and  the  power  vested  in  the  Legislature.  Of  this 
provision  the  Legislature  took  advantage,  and  de- 


clared that  State's  attorneys,  canal  commissioners, 
bank  directors,  etc.,  were  all  '"  officers  of  the  State ' 
and  must  therefore  be  appointed  by  itself  independ- 
ently of  the  Governor. 

During  Gov.  Bond's  administration  a  general  law 
was  passed  for  the  incorporation  of  academies  and 
towns,  and  one  authorizing  lotteries.  The  session  of 
1822  authorized  the  Governor  to  appoint  commis- 
sioners, to  act  in  conjunction  with  like  commissioners 
appointed  by  the  State  of  Indiana,  to  report  on  the 
practicability  and  expediency  of  improving  the  navi- 
gation of  the  Wabash  River;  also  inland  navigation 
generally.  Many  improvements  were  recommended, 
some  of  which  have  been  feebly  worked  at  even  till 
the  present  day,  those  along  the  Wabash  being  of  no 
value.  Also,  during  Gov.  Bond's  term  of  office,  the 
capital  of  the  State  was  removed  from  Kaskaskia  to 
Vandalia.  In  1820  a  law  was  passed  by  Congress 
authorizing  this  State  to  open  a  canal  through  the 
public  lands.  The  State  appointed  commissioners 
10  explore  the  route  and  prepare  the  necessary  sur- 
veys and  estimates,  preparatory  to  its  execution ; 
but,  being  unable  out  of  its  own  resources  to  defray 
the  expenses  of  the  undertaking,  it  was  abandoned 
until  some  time  after  Congress  made  the  grant  of 
land  for  the  purpose  of  its  construction. 

On  the  whole.  Gov.  Bond's  administration  was 
fairly  good,  not  being  open  to  severe  criticism  from 
any  party.  In  1S24,  two  years  after  the  expiration 
of  his  term  of  office,  he  was  brought  out  as  a  candi- 
date for  Congress  against  the  formidable  John  P. 
Cook,  but  received  only  4,374  votes  tc  7,460  for  the 
latter.  Gov.  Bond  was  no  orator,  but  had  made 
many  fast  friends  by  a  judioioas  be::owment  of  his 
gubernatorial  patronage,  and  these  worked  zealously 
for  him  in  the  campaign. 

In  1827  ex-Gov.  Bond  was  appointed  by  the  Leg- 
islalure,  with  Wm.  P.  McKee  and  Dr.  Gershom 
Jayne,  as  Commissioners  to  locate  a  site  for  a  peni- 
tentiary on  the  Mississippi  at  or  near  Alton. 

Mr.  Bond  was  of  a  benevolent  and  convivial  dis- 
position, a  man  of  shrewd  observation  and  clear  ap- 
preciation of  events.  His  person  was  erect,  stand- 
ing six  feet  in  height,  and  after  middle  life  became 
portly,  weighing  200  pounds.  H's  features  were 
strongly  masculine,  complexion  dark,  hair  jet  and 
eyes  hazel ;  was  a  favorite  witli  the  ladies.  He  died. 
April  II,  1830,  in  peace  and  contentment 


Ld^\^<-Uyu)  Coxi<^ 


GO  VERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


"S 


E&\var&  Coles, 


DWARD  COLES,  second 
Governor  of  Illinois,  1823- 
6,  was  born  Dec.  15,  1786, 
in  Albemarle  Co.,  Va.,  on 
ihe  old  family  estate  called 
"Enniscorth y,"  on  the 
Green  Mountain.  His  fath- 
Li  I  mil  Coles,  was  a  Colonel  in  the 
Revolutionary  War.  Having  been  fit- 
ted lor  college  by  private  tutors,  he 
was  sent  to  Hampden  Sidney,  where 
he  remained  until  the  autumn  of  1805, 
when  he  was  removed  to  William  and 
Mary  College,  at  Williamsburg,  Va. 
This  college  he  left  in  the  summer  of 
I  Soy,  a  short  time  before  the  final  and  graduating 
examination.  Among  his  classmates  were  Lieut. 
Gen.  Scott,  President  John  Tyler,  Wni.  S.  Archer, 
United  States  Senator  from  Virginia,  and  Justice 
Baldwin,  of  the  United  States  Supreme  Court.  The 
President  of  the  latter  college,  Bishop  Madison,  was 
a  cousin  of  President  James  Madison,  and  that  cir- 
cumstance was  the  occasion  of  Mr.  Coles  becoming 
personally  acquainted  with  the  President  and  re- 
ceiving a  position  as  his  private  secretary,  1809-15. 
The  family  of  Coles  was  a  prominent  one  in  Vir- 
ginia, and  their  mansion  was  the  seat  of  the  old- 
fashioned  Virginian  hospitality.  It  was  visited  by 
such  notables  as  Patrick  Henry,  Jefferson,  Madison, 
Monroe,  the  Randolphs,  Tazewell,  Wirt,  etc.  At  the 
age  of  23,  young  Coles  founa  himself  heir  to  a  plant- 
ation and  a  considerable  number  of  slaves.  Ever 
since  his  earlier  college  days  his  attention  had  been 
drawo  13  tiie  question  of  slavery.      He    read    every- 


thing on  the  subject  that  came  in  his  way,  and 
listened  to  lectures  on  the  rights  of  man.  The  more 
he  reflected  upon  the  subject,  the  more  impossible 
was  it  for  hira  to  reconcile  the  immortal  declaration 
"that  all  men  are  born  free  and  equal  "  with  the 
practice  of  slave-holding.  He  resolved,  therefore,  to 
free  his  slaves  the  first  opportunity,  and  even  remove 
his  residence  to  a  free  State.  One  reason  which  de- 
termined him  to  accept  the  appointment  as  private 
secretary  to  Mr.  Midison  was  because  he  believed 
that  through  the  acquaintances  he  could  make  at 
Washington  he  could  better  determine  in  what  part 
of  the  non-slaveholding  portion  of  tne  Union  he  woulc 
prefer  to  settle. 

The  relations  between  Mr.  Coles  and  President 
Madison,  as  well  as  Jefferson  and  other  distinguished 
men,  were  of  a  very  friendly  character,  arising  from 
the  similarity  of  their  views  on  the  question  of  slavery 
and  their  sympathy  for  each  other  in  holding  doc- 
trines so  much  at  variance  with  the  prevailing  senti- 
ment in  their  own  State. 

In  1857,  he  resigned  his  secretaryship  and  spent  a 
portion  of  the  following  autumn  in  exploring  the 
Northwest  Territory,  for  the  purpose  of  finding  a  lo- 
cation and  purchasing  lands  on  which  to  settle  his 
negroes.  He  traveled  with  a  horse  and  buggy,  with 
an  extra  man  and  horse  for  emergencies,  through 
many  parts  of  Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois  and  Missouri, 
determining  finally  to  settle  in  Illinois.  At  this  time, 
however,  a  misunderstanding  arose  between  our 
Government  and  Russia,  and  Mr.  Coles  was  selected 
to  repair  to  St.  Petersburg  on  a  special  mission,  bear- 
ing important  papers  concerning  the  matter  at  issue 
The  result  was  a  conviction  of  the   Emperor   (Alex- 


(i6 


EDWARD  COLES. 


aiider)  of  the  error  committed  by  his  minister  at 
Wiishington,  and  tlie  consequent  withdrawal  of  the 
the  latter  from  the  post.  On  his  return,  Mr.  Coles 
visited  other  parts  of  Europe,  especially  Paris,  where 
he  was  introduced  to  Gen.  Lafayette. 

In  the  spring  of  1819,  he  removed  with  all  his 
negroes  from  Virginia  to  Edwardsville,  111.,  with  the 
intention  of  giving  them  their  liberty.  He  did  not 
inake  known  to  them  his  intention  until  one  beautiful 
morning  in  April,  as  they  were  descending  the  Ohio 
River.  He  lashed  all  tlie  boats  together  and  called 
all  the  negroes  on  deck  and  made  them  a  short  ad- 
dress, concluding  his  remarks  by  so  expressing  him- 
self that  by  a  turn  of  a  sentence  he  proclaimed  in 
the  shortest  and  fullest  manner  that  they  were  no 
longer  slaves,  but  free  as  he  was  and  were  at  liberty 
to  proceed  with  him  or  go  ashore  at  their  pleas- 
ure. A  description  of  the  effect  upon  the  negroes  is 
best  described  in  his  own  language  : 

"The  effect  upon  them  was  electrical.  They  stared 
at  n-.e  and  then  at  each  other,  as  if  doubting  the  ac- 
curacy or  reality  of  what  they  heard.  In  breathless 
silence  they  stood  before  me,  unable  to  utter  a  word, 
but  with  countenances  beaming  with  expression  which 
no  words  could  convey,  and  which  no  language 
can  describe.  As  they  began  to  see  the  truth  of 
what  they  had  heard,  and  realize  their  situation,  there 
came  on  a  kind  of  hysterical,  giggling  laugh.  After 
a  pause  of  intense  and  unutterable  emotion,  bathed 
in  tears,  and  with  tremulous  voices,  they  gave  vent  to 
their  gratitude  and  implored  the  blessing  of  God 
on  me." 

Before  landmg  he  gave  them  a  general  certificate 
of  freedom,  and  afterward  conformed  more  particu- 
lady  with  the  law  of  this  State  requiring  that  each 
individual  should  have  a  certificate.  This  act  of 
Mr.  Coles,  all  the  more  noble  and  heroic  considering 
the  overwhelming  pro-slavery  influences  surrounding 
him,  has  challenged  the  admiration  of  every  philan- 
thropist of  modern  times. 

March  5,  1819,  President  Monroe  appointed  Mr. 
Coles  Registrar  of  the  Land  Ofifice  at  EdwardsviLe, 
at  that  time  one  of  the  principal  land  offices  in  the 
State.  While  acting  in  this  capacity  and  gaining 
many  friends  by  his  ix)liteness  and  general  intelli- 
gwice,  the  greatest  struggle  that  ever  occurred  in 
Illinois  on  the  slavery  ques'ion  culminated  in  the 
furious  contest  characterizing  the  campaigns  and 
elections  of  1822-4.  In  the  summer  of  1823,  when  a 
new  Governor  was  to  be  elected  to  succeed  Mr. 
Bond,  the  pro-slavery  element  divided  into  factions, 
putting  forward  for  the  executive  office  Joseph 
Phillips,  Chief  Justice  of  the  State,  Thomas  C. 
Browne  and  Gen.  James  B.  Moore,  of  the  State  Mil- 
itia. The  anti-slavery  element  united  upon  Mr. 
Coles,  and,  after  one  of  the  most  bitter  campaigns, 
succeeded  in  electing  him  as  Governor.  His  pliiral- 
ity  over  Judge  PhilHps  was  only  59  in  a  total  vote  of 


over  8,000.  The  Lieutenant  Governor  was  elected 
by  the  slavery  men.  Mr.  Coles' inauguration  speech 
was  marked  by  calmness,  deliberation  and  such  a- 
wise  ex|)ression  of  appropriate  suggestions  as  to 
elicit  the  sanction  of  all  judicious  politicians.  But 
he  compromised  not  with  evil.  In  his  message  to 
the  Legislature,  the  seat  of  Government  being  then 
at  Vandalia,  he  strongly  urged  the  abrogation  of  the 
modified  form  of  slavery  whi';h  then  existed  in  this 
State,  contrary  to  the  Ordinance  of  1787.  His  posi- 
tion on  this  suliject  seems  the  more  remarkable,  when 
it  is  considered  that  he  was  a  minority  Governor,  the 
population  of  Illinois  being  at  that  time  almost  ex- 
clusively from  slave-holding  States  and  by  a  large 
majority  in  favor  of  the  perpetuation  of  that  old  relic 
of  barbarism.  The  Legislature  itself  was,  of  course, 
a  reflex  of  the  popular  sentiment,  and  a  majority  of 
them  were  led  on  by  fiery  men  in  denunciations  of 
the  conscientious  Governor,  and  in  curses  loud  and 
deep  upon  him  and  all  his  friends.  Some  of  the 
public  men,  indeed,  went  so  far  as  to  head  a  sort  of 
mob,  or  "  shiveree  "  party,  who  visited  the  residence 
of  the  Governor  and  others  at  Vandalia  and  yelled 
and  groaned  and  spat  fire. 

The  Constitution,  not  establishing  or  permitting 
slavery  in  this  State,  was  thought  therefore  to  be 
defective  by  the  slavery  politicians,  and  they  desired 
a  State  Convention  to  be  elected,  to  devise  and  sub- 
mit a  new  Constitution;  and  the  dominant  politics 
of  the  day  was  "Convention"  and  "anti-Conven- 
tion." Both  parties  issued  addresses  to  the  people. 
Gov.  Coles  himself  being  the  author  of  the  address 
published  by  the  latter  party.  This  address  revealed 
the  schemes  of  the  conspirators  in  a  masterly  man- 
ner. It  is  difficult  for  us  at  this  distant  day  to  esti- 
mate the  critical  and  extremely  delicate  situation  in 
which  the  Governor  was  placed  at  that  time. 

Our  hero  maintained  himself  honorably  and  with 
supreme  dignity  throughout  his  administration,  and 
in  his  honor  a  county  in  this  State  is  named.  He 
was  truly  a  great  man,  and  those  wlio  lived  in 
this  State  during  his  sojourn  here,  like  those  who 
live  at  the  base  of  the  mountain,  were  too  near  to  see 
and  recognize  the  greatness  that  overshadowed  ihem. 

Mr.  Coles  was  married  Nov.  28,  1833,  by  Bishop 
De  Lancey,  to  Miss  Sally  Logan  Roberts,  a  daughter 
of  Hugh  Roberts,  a  descendant  of  Welsh  ancestry, 
who  cam;  to  this  country  with  Wm.    Penn  in    1682. 

After  the  expiration  of  his  term  of  service,  Gk)v. 
Coles  continued  his  residence  in  Edwardsville,  sup- 
erintending his  farm  in  the  vicinity.  He  was  fond 
of  agriculture,  and  was  the  founder  of  the  first  agri- 
cultural society  in  the  State.  On  account  of  ill 
health,  however,  and  having  no  family  to  tie  him 
down,  he  spent  much  of  his  time  in  Eastern  cities. 
About  1832  he  changed  his  residence  10  Philadel- 
phia, where  he  died  July  7,  i868,  and  is  buried  at; 
Woodland,  near  that  city. 


'  o  c^-(/[yc^-iJL 


GO  VERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


119 


INI  .^N  EDWARDS,  Governor 
li  Irom  1827  to  1830,  was  a  sou 
'r  of  Benjamin  Edwards,  and 
was  born  in  Montgomery 
yo  County,  Maryland,  in  March, 
-^  1775-  His  domestic  train- 
''  ^  mg  was  well  fitted  to  give 
his  mmd  strength,  firmness  and 
ho  orable  principles,  and  a  good 
foundation  was  laid  for  the  elevated 
character  to  which  he  afterwards 
attained  His  parents  were  Bap- 
tists, and  very  strict  in  their  moral 
principles  His  education  in  early 
jouth  was  in  company  with  and 
partly  under  the  tuition  of  Hon,  Wm. 
Wirt,  whom  his  father  patronized 
and  who  was  more  than  two  years 
older.  An  intimacy  was  thus 
formed  between  them  which  was  lasting  for  life.  He 
was  further  educated  at  Dickinson  College,  at  Car- 
lisle, Pa.  He  next  commenced  the  study  of  law,  but 
before  completing  his  course  he  moved  to  Nelson 
County,  Ky.,  to  open  a  farm  for  his  father  and  to 
purchase  homes  and  locate  lands  for  his  brothers  and 
sisters.  Here  he  fell  in  the  company  of  dissolute 
companions,  and  for  several  years  led  the  life  of  a 
spendthrift.  He  was,  however,  elected  to  the  Legis- 
lature of  Kentucky  as  the  Representative  of  Nelson 
County  before  he  was  2  i  years  of  age,  and  was  re- 
jected by  an  almost  unanimous  vote. 


In  1798  he  was  licensed  to  practice  law,  and  the 
following  year  was  admitted  to  the  Courts  of  Tennes- 
see. About  this  time  he  left  Nelson  County  for 
Russellville,  in  Logan  County,  broke  away  from  his 
dissolute  companions,  commenced  a  reformation  and 
devoted  himself  to  severe  and  laborious  study.  He 
then  began  to  rise  rapidly  in  his  profession,  and  soon 
became  an  eminent  lawyer,  and  inside  of  four  years 
he  filled  in  succession  the  offices  of  Presiding  Judge 
of  the  General  Court,  Circuit  Judge,  fourth  Judge  of 
the  Court  of  Appeals  and  Chief  Justice  of  the  State, 
— all  before  he  was  32  years  of  age!  In  addition,  in 
1802,  he  received  a  commission  as  Major  of  a  battal- 
ion of  Kentucky  militia,  and  in  1804  was  chosen  a 
Presidential  Elector,  on  the  Jefferson  and  Clinton 
ticket.  In  1806  he  was  a  candidate  for  Congress, 
but  withdrew  on  being  promoted  to  the  Court  of 
Appeals. 

Illinois  was  organized  as  a  separate  Territory  in 
the  spring  of  1809,  when  Mr.  Edwards,  then  Chief 
Justice  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  in  Kentucky,  received 
from  President  Madison  the  appointment  as  Gover- 
nor of  the  new  Territory,  his  commission  bearing  date 
April  24,  1809.  Edwards  arrived  at  Kaskaskia  in 
June,  and  on  the  i  ith  of  that  month  took  the  oath  of 
office.  At  the  same  time  he  was  appointed  Superin- 
tendent of  the  United  States  Saline,  this  Government 
interest  then  developing  into  considerable  proportions 
in  Southern  Illinois.  Although  during  the  first  three 
years  of  his  administration  he  had  the  power  to  make 
new  counties  and  appoint  all  the  officers,  yet  he  always 
allowed  the  people  of  each  county,  by  an  informal 


NINIAN  ED  WARDS. 


vote,  to  select  their  own  officers,  both  civil  and  mili- 
tary. The  noted  John  J.  Crittenden,  afterward 
United  States  Senator  from  Kentucky,  was  appointed 
by  Gov.  Edwards  to  the  office  of  Attorney  General  of 
the  Territory,  which  office  was  accepted  for  a  short 
time  only. 

The  Indians  in  i8io  committing  sundry  depreda- 
tions in  the  Territory,  crossing  the  Mississippi  from 
the  Territory  of  Louisiana,  a  long  correspondence  fol- 
lowed between  the  respective  Governors  concerning 
the  remedies,  which  ended  in  a  council  with  the  sav- 
ages at  Peoria  in  1812,  and  a  fresh  interpretation  of 
the  treaties.  Peoria  was  depopulated  by  these  de- 
predations, and  was  not  re-settled  for  many  je.irs 
afterward. 

As  Gov.  Edwards'  term  of  office  expired  by  law  in 
181 2,  he  was  re-appointed  for  another  term  of  three 
years,  and  again  in  1815  for  a  third  term,  serving 
until  the  organization  of  the  State  in  the  fall  of  1818 
and  the  inauguration  of  Gov.  Bond.  At  this  time 
ex-Gov.  Edwards  was  sent  to  the  United  States 
Senate,  his  colleague  being  Jesse  B.  Thomas.  As 
Senator,  Mr.  Edwards  took  a  conspicuous  part,  and 
acquitted  himself  honorably  in  all  the  measures  that 
came  up  in  that  body,  being  well  posted,  an  able  de- 
bater and  a  conscientious  statesman.  He  thought 
ieriously  of  resigning  this  situation  in  1821,  but  was 
persuaded  by  his  old  friend,  Wm.  Wirt,  and  others  to 
continue  in  office,  which  he  did  to  the  end  of  the 
term. 

He  was  then  appointed  Minister  to  Mexico  by 
President  Monroe.  About  this  time,  it  appears  that 
Mr.  Edwards  saw  suspicious  signs  in  the  conduct  of 
VVm.  H.  Crawford,  Secretary  of  the  United  States 
Treasury,  and  an  ambitious  candidate  for  the  Presi- 
dency, and  being  implicated  by  the  latter  in  some  of 
his  statements,  he  resigned  his  Mexican  mission  in 
order  fully  to  investigate  the  charges.  The  result 
was  the  exculpation  of  Mr.  Edwards. 

Pro-slavery  regulations,  often  termed  "Black  Laws," 
disgraced  the  statute  books  of  both  the  Territory  and 
'.he  State  of  Illinois  during  the  whole  of  his  career  in 
ihis  commonwealth,  and  Mr.  Edwards  always  main- 
tained the  doctrines  of  freedom,  and  was  an  important 
rxtor  in  the  great  struggle  which  ended  in  a  victory 
for  his  parfy  in  1824. 

In  1826--7  the  Winnebago  and  other  Indians  com- 
mitted soire  depredations  in  the  northern  part  of  the 


State,  and  the  white  settlers,  who  desired  the  lands 
and  wished  to  exasperate  the  savages  into  an  evacu- 
ation of  the  country,  magnified  the  misdemeanors  of 
the  aborigines  and  thereby  produced  a  hostility  be- 
tween the  races  so  great  as  to  precipitate  a  little  war, 
known  in  history  as  the  "Winnebago  Wnr."  A  few 
chases  and  skirmishes  were  had,  when  Gen.  Atkinson 
succeeded  in  capturing  Red  Bird,  the  Indian  chief, 
and  putting  him  to  death,  thus  ending  the  contest,  at 
least  until  the  troubles  commenced  which  ended  in 
the  "  Black  Hawk  War  "  of  1832.  In  the  interpre- 
tation of  treaties  and  execution  of  their  provisions 
Gov.  Edwards  had  much  vexatious  work  to  do.  The 
Indians  kept  themselves  generally  within  the  juris- 
diction of  Michigan  Territory,  and  its  Governor, 
Lewis  Cass,  was  at  a  point  so  remote  that  ready  cor- 
respondence with  him  was  difficult  or  impossible. 
Gov.  Edwards'  administration,  however,  in  regard  to 
the  protection  of  the  Illinois  frontier,  seems  to  hav; 
been  very  efficient  and  satisfactory. 

For  a  considerable  portion  of  his  time  after  his  re- 
moval to  Illinois,  Gov.  Edwards  resided  upon  his 
farm  near  Kaskaskia,  which  he  had  well  stocked  with 
horses,  cattle  and  sheep  from  Kentucky,  also  with 
fruit-trees,  grape-vines  and  shrubbery.  He  estab- 
lished saw  and  grist-mills,  and  engaged  extensively 
in  mercantilebusiness,  having  no  less  than  eiglitorten 
stores  in  this  State  and  Missouri.  Notwithstanding 
the  arduous  duties  of  his  office,  he  nearly  always  pur- 
chased the  goods  himself  with  which  to  supply  the 
stores.  Although  not  a  regular  practitioner  of  medi- 
cine, he  studied  the  healing  art  to  a  considerable  ex- 
tent, and  took  great  pleasure  in  prescribing  for,  and 
taking  care  of,  the  sick,  generally  without  charge. 
He  was  also  liberal  to  the  poor,  several  widows  and 
ministers  of  the  gospel  becoming  indebted  to  hira 
even  for  their  homes. 

He  married  Miss  Elvira  Lane,  of  Maryland,  in 
1803,  and  they  became  the  affectionate  parents  of 
several  children,  one  of  whom,  especially,  is  welV 
known  to  the  people  of  the  "  Prairie  State,"  namely, 
Ninian  Wirt  Edwards,  once  the  Superintendent  c< 
Public  Instruction  and  still  a  resident  of  Springfield 
Gov.  Edwards  resided  at  and  in  the  vicinity  of  Kas- 
kaskia from  1809  to  1818;  in  Edwardsville  (named 
after  him)  from  tiiat  time  to  1824;  and  from  the  lat- 
ter date  at  Belleville,  St.  Clair  County,  until  his 
death,  July  20,  1833,  of  Asiatic  cholera.  Edwards 
County  is  also  named  in  his  honor. 


i^  M^t^-^^^-'^T'T^-Z/'t!-^-^^ 


GO  VERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


123 


o<a6-«i»^e>o — ^^-i*' 


%  ^/*f  (  "HN  REYNOLDS, Governor  1831- 
4,  was  born  in  Montgomery  Coun- 
ty, Pennsylvania,  Feb.  26,  1788. 
{'  W^^  *■  ^'^  fatter,  Robert  Reynolds  and 
%\  r  |;  his  mother,  nee  Margaret  Moore, 
~  '  were  botli  natives  of  Ireland,  from 
which  country  they  emigrated  to 
the  United  States  in  1785,  land- 
ing at  Philadelphia.  The  senior 
Reynolds  entertained  an  undying 
hostility  to  the  British  Govern- 
ment. When  the  subject  of  this 
sketch  was  about  six  months  old, 
his  parents  emigrated  with  him  to 
Tennessee,  where  many  of  their 
relatives  had  already  located,  at  the  base  of  the 
Copper  Ridge  Mountain,  about  14  miles  northeast  of 
the  present  city  of  Knoxville.  There  they  were  ex- 
posed to  Indian  depredations,  and  were  much  molest- 
ed by  them.  In  1794  they  moved  into  the  interior 
of  the  State.  They  were  poor,  and  brought  up  their 
children  to  habits  of  manual  industry. 

In  1800  the  family  removed  to  Kaskaskia,  111.,  with 
eight  horses  and  two  wagons,  encountering  many 
Hardships  on  the  way.  Here  young  Reynolds  passed 
the  most  of  his  childhood,  while  his  character  began 
to  develop,  the  most  prominent  traits  of  which  were 
ambition  and  energy.  He  also  adopted  the  princi|)le 
and  practice  of  total  abstinence  from  intoxicating 
liquors.     In  1807  the  family  made  another  removal. 


this  time  to  the  "  Goshen  Settlement,"  at  the  foot  of 
the  Mississippi  bluffs  three  or  four  miles  southwest 
of  Edwardsville. 

On  arriving  at  his  20th  year,  Mr.  Reynolds,  seeing 
that  he  must  look  about  for  his  own  livelihood  and 
not  yet  having  determined  what  calling  to  pursue, 
concluded  first  to  attend  college,  and  he  accordingly 
went  to  such  an  institution  of  learning,  near  Knox- 
ville, Tenn.,  where  he  had  relatives.  Imagine  his 
diffidence,  when,  after  passing  the  first  20  years  of 
his  life  without  ever  having  seen  a  carpet,  a  papered 
wall  or  a  Windsor  chair,  and  never  having  lived  in  a 
shingle-roofed  house,  he  suddenly  ushered  himself 
into  the  society  of  the  wealthy  in  the  vicinity  of 
Knoxville!  He  attended  college  nearly  two  years, 
going  through  the  principal  Latin  authors;  but  it 
seems  that  he,  like  the  rest  of  the  world  in  modem 
times,  had  but  very  little  use  for  his  Latin  in  after 
life.  He  always  failed,  indeed,  to  exhibit  any  good 
degree  of  literary  discipline.  He  commenced  the 
study  of  law  in  Knoxville,  but  a  pulmonary  trouble 
came  on  and  compelled  him  to  change  his  mode 
of  life.  Accordingly  he  returned  home  and  re- 
cuperated, and  in  18 12  resumed  his  college  and 
law  studies  at  Knoxville.  In  the  fall  of  1812  he  was 
admitted  to  the  Bar  at  Kaskaskia.  About  this  time 
he  also  learned  the  French  language,  which  he 
practiced  with  pleasure  in  conversation  with  his 
family  for  many  years.  He  regarded  this  language 
as  being  superior  to  all  others  for  social   intercourse. 


JOHN  REYNOLDS. 


From  his  services  in  the  West,  in  the  war  of  i8i  2, 
he  obtained  the  sobriquet  of  the  "  Old  Ranger."  He 
was  Orderly  Sergeant,  then  Judge  Advocate. 

Mr.  Reynolds  opened  his  first  law  office  in  the 
winter  and  spring  of  1814,  in  the  French  village  of 
Cahokia,  then  the  capital  of  St.  Clair  County. 

In  the  fall  of  181S  he  was  elected  an  Associate 
Justice  upon  the  Supreme  Bench  by  the  General 
Assembly.  In  1825  he  entered  more  earnestly  tlian 
ever  into  the  practice  of  law,  and  the  very  next  year 
was  elected  a  member  of  the  Legislature,  where  he 
acted  independently  of  all  cliques  and  private  inter- 
ests. In  1828  the  Whigs  and  Democrats  were  for 
the  first  time  distinctively  organized  as  such  in  Illi- 
nois, and  the  usual  party  bitterness  grew  up  and 
raged  on  all  sides,  while  Mr.  Reynolds  preserved  a 
"udicial  calmness  and  moderation.  The  real  animus 
if  the  campaign  was  "  Jackson  "  and  "  anti-Jackson," 
'he  former  party  carrying  the  State. 

In  August,  1830,  Mr.  Reynolds  was  elected  Gov- 
ernor, amid  great  excitement.  Installed  in  office,  he 
did  all  within  his  jxiwer  to  advance  the  cause  of  edu- 
cation, internal  improvements,  the  Illinois  &  Mich- 
igan Canal,  the  harbor  at  Chicago,  settling  the  coun- 
try, etc.;  also  reccmmended  the  winding  up  of  the 
State  Bank,  as  its  affairs  had  become  dangerously 
complicated.  In  his  n?,tional  politics,  hr  was  a 
moderate  supporter  of  General  Jackson.  But  the 
most  celebrated  event  of  his  gubernatcriai  admin- 
istration was  the  Black  Hawk  War,  which  occurred 
in  1832.  He  called  out  the  militia  and  prosecuted 
the  cont.'jst  with  commendable  diligence,  appearing 
in  person  on  the  battle-grounds  during  the  most 
critical  periods.  He  was  recognized  by  the  President 
as  Major-General,  and  authorized  by  him  to  make 
treaties  with  the  Indians.  By  the  assistance  of  the 
general  Government  the  war  was  terminated  without 
much  bloodshed,  but  after  many  serious  fights.  This 
war,  as  well  as  everything  else,  was  materially  re- 
tarded by  the  occurrence  of  Asiatic  cholera  in  the 
West.  This  was  its  first  appearance  here,  and  was 
the  next  event  in  prominence  during  Gov.  Reynolds' 
term. 

South  Carolina  nullification  coming  up  at  this  time, 
t  was  heartily  condemned  by  both  President  Jackson 
«nd  Gov.  Reynolds,  who  took  precisely  the  same 
grounds  as  the  Unionists  in  the  last  war. 

On  the  termination  of  his  gubernatorial  term  in 
..834,  Gov.  Reynolds  was  elected  a  Member  of  Con- 
gress, still  coi:sidering  himself  a  backwoodsman,  as 
^e  had  scarcely  been  outside  of  the  State  since  he 
became  of  age,  and  had  spent  nearly  all  his  youthful 
days  'u  the  wildest  region  of  the  frontier.  His  first 
move  in  Congress  was  to  adopt  a  resolution  that  in 
all  elections  made  by  the  House  for  officers  the  votes 
should  be  given  viva  voce,  each  member  in  his  place 
naming  aloud  the  person  for  whom  he  votes.  This 
created  considerable  heated  discussion,  but  was  es- 


sentially adopted,  and  remained  the  controiiing  prin- 
ciple for  many  years.  The  ex  Governor  was  scarcely 
absent  from  his  seat  a  single  day,  during  eight  ses- 
sions of  Congress,  covering  a  period  of  seven  years, 
and  he  never  vacillated  in  a  party  vote;  but  he  failed 
to  get  the  Democratic  party  to  foster  his  "  National 
Road"  scheme.  He  says,  in  "  My  Own  Times  "  (a 
large  autobiography  he  published),  that  it  was  only 
by  rigid  economy  that  he  avoided  insolvency  while  in 
VVashington.  During  his  sojourn  in  that  city  he  was 
married,  to  a  lady  of  the  place. 

In  1837,  while  out  of  Congress,  and  in  company 
with  a  few  others,  he  built  the  first  railroad  in  the 
Mississippi  Valley,  namely,  one  about  six  miles  long, 
leading  from  his  coal  mine  in  the  Mississippi  bluff  to 
the  bank  of  the  river  opposite  St.  Louis.  Having  not 
the  means  to  purchase  a  locomotive,  they  operated  it 
by  horse-power.  The  next  spring,  however,  the  com- 
pany sold  out,  at  great  sacrifice. 

In  1839  the  ex-Governor  was  appointed  one  of  the 
Canal  Commissioners,  and  authorized  to  borrow 
money  to  prosecute  the  enterprise.  Accord'ngly,  he 
repaired  to  Philadelphia  and  succeeding  in  obtaining 
a  million  dollars,  which,  however,  was  only  a  fourth 
of  what  was  wanted.  The  same  year  he  and  his 
wife  made  at  our  of  Europe.  This  year,  also,  Mr. 
Reynolds  had  the  rather  awkward  little  responsibility 
of  introducing  to  President  Van  Buren  the  noted 
Moiinon  Prophet,  Joseph  Smith,  as  a  "  Latter-Day 
Saint!" 

In  1846  Gov.  Reynolds  was  elected  a  member  of 
the  Legislature  from  St.  Clair  County,  more  particu 
larly  for  the  purix)se  of  obtaining  a  feasible  charter 
for  a  macadamized  road  from  Belleville  to  St.  Louis, 
a  distance  of  nearly  14  miles.  This  was  immediately 
built,  and  was  the  first  road  of  the  kind  in  the  State. 
He  was  again  elected  to  the  Legislature  in  1852,  when 
he  was  chosen  .Speaker  of  the  House.  In  i860,  aged 
and  infirm,  he  attended  the  National  Democratic 
Convention  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  as  an  anti-Douglas 
Delegate,  where  he  received  more  attention  from  the 
.Southern  Delegates  than  any  other  member.  He 
supported  Breckenridge  for  the  Presidency.  After 
the  October  elections  foreshadowed  the  success  of 
Lincoln,  he  published  an  address  urging  the  Demo- 
crats to  rally  to  the  support  of  Douglas.  Immedi- 
ately preceding  and  during  the  late  war,  his  corre- 
spondence evinced  a  clear  sympathy  for  the  Southern 
secession,  and  about  the  first  of  March,  1861,  he 
urged  upon  the  Buchanan  officials  the  seizure  of  the 
treasure  and  arms  in  the  custom-house  and  arsenal 
at  St.  Louis.  Mr.  Reynolds  was  a  rather  talkative 
man,  and  apt  in  all  the  Western  phrases  and  catch- 
words that  ever  gained  currency,  besides  many  cun- 
ning and  odd  ones  of  his  own  manufacture. 

He  was  married  twice,  but  had  no  children.  He 
died  in  Belleville,  in  May,  1865,  just  after  the  close 
of  the  war. 


\H 


^h^lzy^^^^'''^ 


GOVERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


.LIAM  LEE  I).  EWING, 
Governor  of  Illinois  Nov.  3 
^3  to  17,  1834,  was  a  native 
of  Kentucky,  and  probably 
of  Scotch  ancestry.  He  had 
a  fine  education,  was  a  gentle- 
man of  polished  manners  and 
refined  sentiment.  In  1830  John  Rey- 
nolds was  elected  Governor  of  the  State, 
and  Zadok  Casey  Lieutenant  Governor, 
and  for  the  principal  events  that  followed, 
and  the  characteristics  of  the  times,  see 
sketch  of  Gov.  Reynolds.  The  first  we 
see  in  history  concerning  Mr.  Ewing,  in- 
forms us  that  he  was  a  Receiver  of  Public 
Mor  eys  at  Vandalia  soon  after  the  organization  of 
Wii.s  State,  and  that  the  public  moneys  in  his  hands 
vere  deposited  in  various  banks,  as  they  are  usually 
'•■th.  -^Tesent  day.  In  1823  the  State  Bank  was 
obbed,  by  which  disaster  Mr.  Ewing  lost  a  thousand- 
dollar  deposit. 

The  subject  of  this  sketcli  had  a  commission  as 
Colonel  in  the  Black  Hawk  War,  and  in  emergencies 
nf  acted  also  as  Major.  In  the  summer  of  1832, 
■"/hen  c  was  rumored  among  the  whites  that  Block 
Hawk  and  nis  men  had  encamped  somewhere  on 
Rock  River,  Gen.  Henry  was  sent  on  a  tour  of 
reconnoisance,  and  with  orders  to  drive  the  Indians 
from  the  State.  After  some  opposition  from  his 
;ubordinate  officers,  Henry  resolved  to  proceed  up 
Rock  River  in  search  of  the  enemy.  On  the  19th  of 
tuly,   early  in  the   morning,   five   baggage    wagons, 


camp  equipage  and  all  heavy  and  cumbersome  arti- 
cles were  piled  up  and  left,  so  that  the  army  might 
make  speedy  and  forced  marches.  For  some  miles 
the  travel  was  exceedingly  bad,  crossing  swamps 
and  the  worst  thickets;  but  the  large,  fresh  trail 
g.ive  life  and  animation  to  the  Annericans.  Gen. 
Dodge  and  Col.  Ewing  were  both  actmg  as  Majors, 
and  composed  the  "  spy  corps  "  or  vanguard  of  the 
army.  It  is  supposed  the  army  marched  nearly  50 
miles  this  day,  and  the  Indian  trail  they  followed 
became  fresher,  and  was  strewed  with  much  property 
and  trinkets  of  the  red-skins  , that  they  had  lost  or 
thrown  away  to  hasten  their  march.  During  the 
following  night  there  was  a  terrific  thunder-storm,  and 
the  soldiery,  with  all  their  appurtenances,  were  thor- 
oughly drenched. 

On  approaching  nearer  the  Indians  the  next  day. 
Gen.  Dodge  and  Major  Ewing,  each  commanding  a 
battalion  of  men,  were  placed  in  front  to  bring  on  the 
battle,  but  the  savages  were  not  overtaken  this  day 
Forced  marches  were  continued  until  they  reached. 
Wisconsin  River,  where  a  veritable  battle  ensued, 
resulting  in  the  death  of  about  68  of  Black  Hawk's 
men.  The  next  day  they  continued  the  chase,  and 
as  soon  as  he  discovered  the  trail  of  the  Indians 
leading  ic-.vard  tlie  Mississippi,  Maj.  Ewing  formed 
his  battalion  in  orde*-  of  battle  and  awaited  the  order 
of  Gen.  Henry.  The  latter  soon  appeared  on  the 
ground  and  ordered  a  charge,  which  directly  resulted 
in  chasing  the  red  warriors  across  the  great  river. 
Maj.  Ewing  and  his  command  proved  particularly 
efficient  in  war,  as  it  seems  they  were  the  chief  actors 
in  driving  the  main  body  of  the  Sacs  and  Foxes,  in- 


WILLIAM  L.  D.  EWING. 


eluding  Black.  Hawk  himself,  across  the  Mississippi, 
while  Gen.  Atkinson,  commander-in-chief  of  the  ex- 
pedition, with  a  body  of  the  army,  was  hunting  for 
them  in  another  direction. 

In  the  above  affair  Maj.  Ewing  is  often  referred  to 
as  a  "  General,"  which  title  he  had  derived  from  his 
connection  with  the  militia. 

It  w^as  in  the  latter  part  of  the  same  year  (1832) 
that  Lieutenant  Governor  Casey  was  elected  to  Con- 
gress and  Gen.  Ewing,  who  had  been  elected  to  the 
Senate,  was  chosen  to  preside  over  that  body.  At 
the  August  election  of  1S34,  Gov.  Reynolds  was  also 
elected  to  Congress,  more  than  a  year  ahead  of  the 
time  at  which  he  could  actually  take  his  seat,  as  was 
then  the  law.  His  predecessor,  Charles  Slade,  had 
just  died  of  Asiatic  cholera,  soon  after  the  elec- 
tion, and  Gov.  Reynolds  was  chosen  to  serve  out  his 
unexpired  term.  Accordingly  he  set  out  for  Wash- 
ington in  November  of  that  year  to  take  his  seat  in 
Congress,  and  Gen.  Ewing,  by  virtue  of  his  office  as 
President  of  the  Senate,  became  Governor  of  the 
State  of  Illinois,  his  term  covering  only  a  period  of 
15  days  namely,  from  the  3d  to  the  17th  d-iys,  in- 
clusive, of  November.  Om  the  ryth  the  Legislature 
met,  and  Gov.  Ewing  transmitted  to  that  body  his 
message,  giving  a  statement  of  the  condition  of  the 
affairs  of  the  State  at  that  time,  and  urging  a  contin- 
uance of  the  policy  adopted  by  his  predecessor;  and 
on  the  same  day  Governor  elect  Joseph  Duncan 
was  sworn  into  office,  thus  relieving  Mr.  Ewing  from 


the  resjxjnsible  situation.  This  is  the  only  time  that 
such  a  juncture  has  happened  in  the  history  of  Illi- 
nois. 

On  the  29th  of  December,  1835,  Gen.  Ewing  was 
elected  a  United  States  Senator  to  serve  out  the 
unexpired  temi  of  Elias  Kent  Kane,  deceased.  The 
latter  gentleman  was  a  very  prominent  figure  in  the 
early  politics  of  Illinois,  and  a  county  in  this  State  is 
named  in  his  honor.  The  election  of  Gen.  Ewing  to 
the  Senate  was  a  protracted  struggle.  His  competi- 
tors were  James  Semple,  who  afterwards  held  several 
important  offices  in  this  State,  and  Richard  M. 
Young,  afterward  a  United  States  Senator  and  a 
Supreme  Judge  and  a  man  of  vast  influence.  On 
the  first  ballot  Mr.  Semple  had  25  votes.  Young  19 
•and  Ewing  18.  On  the  eighth  ballot  Young  was 
dropped  ;  the  ninth  and  tenth  stood  a  tie ;  but  on 
the  1 2th  Ewing  received  40,  to  Semple  37,  and  was 
accordingly  declared  elected.  In  1837  Mr.  Ewing 
received  some  votes  for  a  continuance  of  his  term  in 
Congress,  when  Mr.  Young,  just  referred  to,  was 
elected.  In  1842  Mr.  Ewing  was  elected  State 
Audit-'r  on  the  ticket  with  Gov.  Ford. 

Gen.  Ewing  was  a  gentleman  of  culture,  a  lawyer 
by  profession,  and  was  much  in  public  life.  In  person 
he  was  above  medium  height  and  of  heavy  build, 
with  auburn  hair,  blue  eyes,  large-sized  head  and 
short  face.  He  was  genial,  social,  friendly  and 
affable,  with  fair  talent,  though  of  no  high  degree  of 
originality.    He  died  March  25,  1846. 


^.i^iyvt^y^^^^^^-^^-- 


GO  VERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


131 


^<*X<^J  -J 


\\W\\\\\> 


OSEPH  DUNCAN,  Governor 
1834-8,  was  born  at  Paris, 
Ky.,  Feb.  23,  1794.  At  the 
tender  age  of  19  years  he  en- 
listed in  the  war  against  Great 
Britain,  and  as  a  soldier  he 
acquitted  himself  with  credit.  He 
was  an  Ensign  under  the  daunt- 
less Croghan  at  Lower  Sandusky, 
'\  or  Fort  Stiphenson.  In  Illinois 
lie  first  appeared  in  a  public  capa- 
city as  Major-General  of  the  Militia, 
a  position  which  his  military  fame 
liad  procured  him.  Subsequently 
he  became  a  State  Senator  from 
I  Jackson  County,  and  is  honorably 
mentioned  for  introducing  the  first  bill  providing  for 
a  free-school  system.  In  1826,  when  the  redoubt- 
able John  P.  Cook,  who  had  previously  beaten  such 
men  as  John  McLean,  Elias  Kent  Kane  and  ex- 
Gov.  Bond,  came  up  for  the  fourth  time  forCongress, 
Mr.  Duncan  was  brought  forward  against  him  by  his 
friends,  greatly  to  the  surprise  of  all  the  politicians. 
\«,  yet  he  was  but  little  known  in  the  State.  He  was 
an  original  Jackson  man  at  that  time,  being  attached 
to  his  political  fortune  in  admiration  of  the  glory  of 
his  militaiy  achievements.  His  chances  of  success 
against  Cook  were  generally  regarded  as  hopeless, 
but  he  entered  upon  the  campaign  undaunted.  His 
speeches,  though  short  and  devoid  of  ornament,  were 
fill  of  good  sense.  He  made  a  diligent  canvass  of 
the  State,  Mr.  Cook  being  hindered  by  the  condition  of 
his  health.  The  most  that  was  expected  of  Mr. 
Duncan,  under  the  circumstances,  was  that  he  would 


obtain  a  respectable  vote,  but  without  defeating  Mr 
Cook.  The  result  of  the  campaign,  however,  was  a 
source  of  surprise  and  amazement  to  both  friends 
and  foes,  as  Mr.  Duncan  came  <Jut  641  votes  ahead! 
He  received  6,321  votes,  and  Mr.  Cook  5,680.  Un- 
til this  denouement,  the  violence  of  party  feeling 
smoldering  in  the  breasts  of  the  people  on  account 
of  the  defeat  of  Jackson,  was  not  duly  appreciated, 
.Aside  from  the  great  convention  struggle  of  1824,  no 
other  than  mene  local  and  pergonal  considerations 
had  ever  before  controlled  an  election  in  Illinois. 

From  the  above  date  Mr.  Duncan  retained  his 
seat  in  Co.igress  until  his  election  as  Governor  in 
August,  1834.  The  first  and  bloodless  year  of  the 
Black  Hawk  War  he  was  appointed  by  Gov.  Rey- 
nolds to  the  position  of  Brigadier-General  of  the 
volunteers,  and  he  conducted  his  brigade  to  Rock 
Island.  But  he  was  absent  from  the  State,  in  Wash- 
ington, during  the  gubernatorial  campaign,  and  did 
not  personally  participate  in  it,  but  addressed  circu- 
lars to  his  constituents.  His  election  was,  indeed, 
attributed  to  the  circumstance  of  his  absence,  be- 
cause his  estrangement  from  Jackson,  formeriy  his 
political  idol,  and  also  from  the  Democracy,  largely 
in  ascendency  in  the  State,  was  complete;  but  while 
his  defection  was  well  known  to  his  Whig  friends, 
and  even  to  the  leading  Jackson  men  of  this  State, 
the  latter  were  unable  to  carry  conviction  of  that  fact 
to  the  masses,  as  mail  and  newspaper  facilities  at 
that  day  were  far  inferior  to  those  of  the  present 
time.  Of  course  the  Governor  was  much  abused 
afterward  by  the  fossilized  Jackson  men  who  re- 
garded party  ties  and  affiliations  as  nbove  all 
other  issues  that  could  arise;  but  he  was  douDtless 


132 


JOSEPH  DUNCAN. 


sincere  in  his  opposition  to  the  old  hero,  as  the  latter 
;iad  vetoed  several  important  western  measures 
which  were  dear  to  Mr.  Duncan.  In  his  inaugural 
message  he  threw  off  the  mask  and  took  a  bold  stand 
ngainst  the  course  of  the  President.  The  measures 
r.e  recommended  in  his  message,  however,  were  so 
desirable  that  the  Legislature,  although  by  a  large 
majority  consisting  of  Jackson  men,  could  not  refrain 
from  endorsing  them.  These  measures  related 
mainly  to  banks  and  internal  improvements. 

It  was  while  Mr.  Duncan  was  Governor  that  the 
people  of  Illinois  went  whirling  on  with  bank  and  in- 
ternal improvement  schemes  that  well  nigh  bank- 
nipted  the  State.  The  hard  times  of  1837  came  on, 
and  the  disasters  that  attended  the  inauguration  of 
Jiese  plans  and  the  operation  of  the  banks  were  mu- 
tually charged  upon  the  two  political  parties.  Had 
any  one  man  autocratic  power  to  introduce  and 
carry  on  any  one  01  these  measures,  he  would  proba- 
bly have  succeeded  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  public; 
but  as  many  jealous  men  had  hold  of  the  same  plow 
handle,  no  success  followed  and  each  blamed  the  other 
for  the  failure.  In  this  great  vortex  Gov.  Duncan 
was  carried  along,  suffering  the  like  derogation  of 
character  with  his  fellow  citizens. 

At  the  height  of  the  excitement  the  Legislature 
"  provided  for  "  railroads  from  Galena  to  Cairo,  Alton 
to  Shawneetown,  Alton  to  Mount  Carmel,  Alton  to  the 
eastern  boundary  of  the  State  in  the  direction  of 
Terre  Haute,  Quincy  via  Springfield  to  the  Wabash, 
Bloomington  to  Pekin,  and  Peoria  to  Warsaw, — in  all 
about  1,300  miles  of  road.  It  also  provided  for  the 
improvement  of  the  navigation  of  the  Kaskaskia, 
Illinois,  Great  and  Little  Wabash  and  Rock  Rivers  ; 
also  as  a  placebo,  $200,000  in  money  were  to  be  dis- 
.ributed  to  the  various  counties  wherein  no  improve- 
ments were  ordered  to  be  made  as  above.  The 
estimate  for  the  expenses  for  all  these  projects  was 
Jaced  at  a  little  over  $10,000,000,  which  was  not 
more  man  half  enough !  That  would  now  be  equal  to 
saddling  upon  the  State  a  debt  of  $225,000,000  !  It 
was  sufficient  to  bankrupt  the  State  several  times 
over,   even   counting  all  the  possible  benefits. 

One  of  the  most  exciting  events  that  ever  occurred 
in  this  fair  State  was  the  murder  of  Elijah  P.  Love- 
ioy  in  the  fall  of  1837,  at  Alton,  during  Mr.  Duncan's 
term  as  Governor.  Lovejoy  was  an  "  Abolitionist," 
editing  the  Observer  at  that  place,  and  the  pro- 
slavery  slums  there  formed  themselves  into  a  mob. 


and  after  destroying  successively  three  presses  be- 
longing to  Mr.  Lovejoy,  surrounded  the  warehouse 
where  the  fourth  press  was  stored  away,  endeavoring 
to  destroy  it,  and  where  Lovejoy  and  his  friends 
were  entrenching  themselves,  and  shot  and  killed  the 
brave  reformer! 

About  this  time,  also,  the  question  of  removing  the 
State  capital  again  came  up,  as  the  20  years'  limit  for 
its  existence  at  Vandalia  was  dravfing  to  a  close. 
There  was,  of  course,  considerable  excitement  over 
the  matter,  the  two  main  points  competing  for  it  be- 
ing Springfield  and  Peoria.  The  jealousy  of  the  lat- 
ter place  is  not  even  yet,  45  years  afterward,  fully 
allayed. 

Gov.  Duncan's  term  expired  in  1838.  In  1842 
he  was  again  proposed  as  a  candidate  for  the  Execu- 
tive chair,  this  time  by  the  AVhig  party,  against  Adam 
W.  Snyder,  of  St.  Clair  County,  the  nominee  of  the 
Democrats.  Charles  W.  Hunter  was  a  third  candi- 
date for  the  same  position.  Mr.  Snyder,  however,  died 
before  the  campaign  had  advanced  very  far,  and  his 
party  substituted  Thomas  Ford,  who  was  elected 
receiving  46,901  votes,  to  38,584  for  Duncan,  and 
909  for  Hunter.  The  cause  of  Democratic  success 
at  this  time  is  mainly  attributed  to  the  temporary 
support  of  the  Mormons  which  they  enjoyed,  and  the 
want  of  any  knowledge,  on  the  part  of  the  masses, 
that  Mr.  Ford  was  opposed  to  any  given  policy  en- 
tertained in  the  respective  localities. 

Gov.  Duncan  was  a  man  of  rather  limited  educa- 
tion, but  with  naturally  fine  abilities  he  profited 
greatly  by  his  various  public  services,  and  gathered 
a  store  of  knowledge  regarding  public  affairs  which 
served  him  a  ready  purpose.  He  possessed  a  clear 
judgment,  decision,  confidence  in  himself  and  moral 
courage  to  carry  out  his  convictions  of  right.  In  his 
deportment  he  was  well  adapted  to  gain  the  admira- 
tion of  the  people.  His  intercourse  with  them  was 
both  affable  and  dignified.  His  portrait  at  the  Gov- 
ernor's mansion,  from  which  the  accompanying  was 
made,  represents  him  as  having  a  swarthy  complex- 
ion, high  cheek  bones,  broad  forehead,  piercing  black 
eyes  and  straight  black  hair. 

He  was  a  liberal  patron  of  the  Illinois  ("ollege  at 
lacksonville,  a  member  of  its  Board  of  Trustees,  and 
died,  after  a  sliort  illness,  Jan.  15,  1844,  a  devoted 
member  of  tlie  Presbyterian  Church,  leaving  a  wife 
but  no  children.  Two  children,  born  to  them,  had 
died  in  infancy. 


rVgML^^^^^T^ 


GOVERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


r.  O"  '< 


i^^^p}  mx)''^^(^  4j|aijiii|^]>  I 


kJ 


S^^*^^^^HOMAS  CARLIN,  tlie  sixth 
"         '~ "  Governor  of  the    State   of 

Illinois,  serving  from   1838 
to   1842,  was   also   1   Ken- 
tuckian,    being    born    near 
Frankfort,  that  State,  July 
18,  1789,  of  Irish  paternity, 
le  opportunities  for  an  education 
jing    very   meager  in   his   native 
lace,  he,  on  approaching  years  of 
■ment    and    maturity,    applied 
iself  to  those  branches  of  learn- 
that  seemed  most  important, 
thus  became  a  self-made  man  ; 
his   taste    for     reading    and 
c'     xy    r-i  biiidv  remained  with  him   throuuh 

^Ji'^p)  life.     In  1803  his  father  removed 

10  Missouri,  then  a  part  of  "  New  Spain,"  where   he 
died  in  18 10. 

In  1S12  young  Carlin  came  to  Illinois  and  partici- 
pated in  all  the  "  ranging "  service  incident  to  the 
war  of  that  period,  proving  himself  a  soldier  of  un- 
daunted bravery.  In  1814  he  married  Rebecca 
Huitt,  and  lived  for  four  years  on  the  bank  of  the 
Mississippi  River,  opposite  the  mouth  of  the  Mis- 
souri, where  he  followed  farming,  and  then  removed 
to  Greene  County.  He  located  the  town  site  of  Car- 
t\>'ion,  in  that  county,  and  in  1825  made  a  liberal 
donation  of  land  for  county  building  purposes.  He 
was  the  first  Sheriff  of  that  county  after  its  separate 
organization,  and  afterward  was  twice  elected,  as  a 
Jackson  Democrat,  to  the  Illinois  Senate.  In  the 
Black  Hawk  War  he  commanded  a  spy  battalion,  a 
post  of  considerable  danger.  In  1834  he  was  ap- 
pointed by  President  Jackson  to  the  position  of 
Receiver  uf  Public  Moii-^ys,  and  to  fulfill  the  office 


more  conveniently  he  removed  to  the  city  of  Quincy. 

While,  in  1S38,  the  unwieldy  internal  improvement 
system  uf  the  State  was  in  full  operation,  with  all  its 
expensive  machinery,  amidst  bank  suspensions 
throughout  the  United  States,  a  great  stringency  in 
the  money  market  everywhere,  and  Illinois  bonds 
forced  to  sale  at  a  heavy  discount,  and  the  "  hardest 
times  "  existing  that  the  people  of  the  Prairie  State 
ever  saw,  the  general  election  of  State  officers  was 
ap[)roaching.  Discreet  men  who  had  cherished  the 
hope  of  a  speedy  subsidence  of  the  public  infatua- 
tion, met  witli  disappointment.  A  Governor  and 
Legislature  were  to  be  elected,  and  these  were  now 
looked  forward  to  for  a  repeal  of  the  ruinous  State 
policy.  But  the  grand  scheme  had  not  yet  lost  its 
dazzling  influence  upon  the  minds  of  the  people. 
Time  and  experience  had  not  yet  fully  demonstrated 
its  utter  absurdity.  Hence  the  question  of  arresting 
its  career  of  profligate  expenditures  did  not  become 
a  leading  one  with  the  dominant  party  during  the 
camp.iign,  and  most  of  the  old  members  of  the  Leg 
islatuie  were  returned  at  this  election. 

Under  these  circumstances  the  Democrats,  in  State 
Convention  assembled,  nominated  Mr.  Carlin  for  the 
office  of  Governor,  and  S.  H.  Anderson  for  Lieuten- 
ant Governor,  while  the  Whigs  nominated  Cyrus  Ed- 
wards, brother  of  Ninian  Edwards,  formerly  Governor, 
and  W.  H.  Davidson.  Edwards  came  out  strongly 
for  a  continuance  of  the  State  policy,  while  Carlir 
remained  non-committal.  This  was  the  first  time 
that  the  two  main  political  parties  in  this  State  were 
unembar'assed  i)y  any  third  party  in  the  field.  The 
result  of  the  election  was:  Carlin,  35,573;  Ander- 
son, 30,335;  Edwards,   29,629;  and   Davidson,  28,- 

Upon  the  meeting  of  the  sulisequent  Legislature 
(1839),  the  retiring  Governor  CDuncan")  in    his  mes- 


•36 


THOMAS  CARLIN. 


sage  spoke  in  emphatic  terms  of  the  impolicy  of  the 
internal  improvement  system,  presaging  the  evils 
threatened,  and  uiged  that  body  to  do  their  utmost 
to  correct  the  great  error ;  yet,  on  the  contrary,  the 
Legislature  not  only  decided  to  continue  the  policy 
but  also  added  to  its  burden  by  voting  more  appro- 
priations and  ordering  more  improvements.  Although 
the  money  market  was  still  stringent,  a  farther  loan 
of  $4,000,000  was  ordered  for  the  Illinois  &  Mich- 
igan Canal  alone.  Chicago  at  that  time  began  to 
loom  up  and  promise  to  be  an  important  city,  even 
the  great  emporium  of  the  West,  as  it  has  since  in- 
deed came  to  be.  Ex-Gov.  Reynolds,  an  incompe- 
tent financier,  was  commissioned  to  effect  the  loan, 
and  accordingly  hastened  to  the  East  on  this  respons- 
ible errand,  and  negotiated  the  loans,  at  considera- 
ble sacrifice  to  the  State.  Besides  this  embarrassment 
io  Carlin's  administration,  the  Legislature  also  de- 
clared that  he  had  no  authority  to  appoint  a  Secretary 
of  State  until  a  vacancy  existed,  and  A.  P.  Field,  a 
Whig,  who  had  already  held  the  post  by  apix)intment 
.hrough  three  administrations,  was  determined  to 
keep  the  place  a  while  longer,  in  spite  of  Gov.  Car- 
lin's preferences.  The  course  of  the  Legislature  in 
this  regard,  however,  was  finally  sustained  by  the 
Supreme  Court,  in  a  quo  ivarranio  case  brought  up 
before  it  by  John  A.  McClernand,  whom  the  Gov- 
ernor had  nominated  for  the  office.  Thereupon  that 
dignified  body  was  denounced  as  a  "Whig  Court!" 
endeavoring  to  establish  the  principle  of  life-tenure 
of  office. 

A  new  law  was  adopted  re-organizing  the  Judici- 
ary, and  under  it  five  additional  Supreme  Judges 
were  elected  by  the  Legislature,  namely,  Thomas 
Ford  (afterward  Governor),  Sidney  Breese,  Walter  B. 
Scales,  Samuel  H.  Treat  and  Stephen  A.  Douglas — 
all  Democrats. 

It  was  during  Gov.  Carlin's  administration  that  the 
noisy  campaign  of  "  Tippecanoe  and  Tyler  too  "  oc- 
curred, resulting  in  a  Whig  victory.  This,  however, 
did  net  affect  Illinois  politics  very  seriously. 

Another  prominent  event  in  the  West  during  Gov. 
Carlin's  term  of  office  was  the  excitement  caused  by 
the  Mormons  and  their  removal  from  Independence, 
Mo.7to  Nauvoo,  111.,  in  1840.  At  the  same  time 
they  began  to  figure  somewhat  in  State  politics.  On 
account  of  their  believing — as  they  thought,  accord- 
ing to  the  New  Testament — that  they  should   have 


"  all  things  common,"  and  that  consequently  "  all 
the  earth  "  and  all  that  is  upon  it  were  the"  Lord's  " 
and  therefore  the  property  of  his  "  saints,"  they 
were  suspected,  and  correctly,  too,  of  committing 
many  of  the  deeds  of  larceny,  robbery,  etc.,  that 
were  so  rife  throughout  this  country  in  those  days. 
Hence  a  feeling  of  violence  grew  up  between  the 
Mormons  and  "anti-Mormons."  In  the  State  of 
Missouri  the  Mormons  always  supix)rted  the  Dem- 
ocracy until  they  were  driven  out  by  the  Democratic 
government,  when  they  turned  their  support  to  the 
Whigs.  They  were  becoming  numerous,  and  in  the 
Legislature  of  1840-1,  therefore,  it  became  a  matter 
of  great  interest  with  both  parties  to  conciliate  these 
people.  Through  the  agency  of  one  John  C.  Ben- 
nett, a  scamp,  the  Mormons  succeeded  in  rushing 
through  the  Legislature  (both  parties  not  daring  to 
oppose)  a  charter  for  the  city  of  Nauvoo  which  vir- 
tually erected  a  hierarchy  co-ordinate  with  the  Fed- 
eral Government  itself.  In  the  fall  of  184 1  the 
Governor  of  Missouri  made  a  demand  upon  Gov. 
Carlin  for  the  body  of  Joe  Smith,  the  Mormon  leader, 
as  a  fugitive  from  justice.  Gov.  Carlin  issued  th; 
writ,  but  for  some  reason  it  was  returned  unserved. 
It  was  ag.iin  issued  in  1842,  and  Smith  was  arrested, 
but  was  either  rescued  by  his  followers  or  discharged 
by  the  municipal  court  on  a  writ  of  habeas  corpus. 

In  December,  i84r,  the  Democratic  Convention 
nominated  Adam  W.  Snyder,  of  Belleville,  for  Gov- 
ernor. As  he  had  been,  as  a  member  of  the  Legisla- 
ture, rather  friendly  to  the  Mormons,  the  latter 
naturally  turned  their  support  to  the  Democratic 
party.  The  next  spring  the  Whigs  nominated  Ex- 
Gov.  Duncan  for  the  same  office.  In  the  meantime 
the  Mormons  began  to  grow  more  odious  to  the 
masses  of  the  people,  and  the  comparative  prospects 
of  the  respective  parties  for  success  became  very 
problematical.  Mr.  Snyder  died  in  May,  and 
Thomas  Ford,  a  Supreme  Judge,  was  substituted  as 
a  candidate,  and  was  elected. 

At  the  close  of  his  gubernatorial  term,  Mr.  Carlin 
removed  back  to  his  old  home  at  Carrollton,  where 
he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life,  £,;  before  his  ele- 
vation to  office,  in  agricultural  pursuits.  In  1849 
he  served  out  the  unexpired  term  of  J.  D.  Fry  in  the 
Illinois  House  of  Representatives,  and  died  Feb.  4, 
1852,  at  his  residence  at  Carrollton,  leaving  a  wife 
and  seven  children. 


Oi 


^O^'^^y-^^'-^ 


GOVERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


139 


-sfeijCiju^     ->?=:S 


;  i'- 


THoimii 


>rj  jT^ 


-^3- 


1—T 


=ef- 


?.iiLLi^J 

jHOMAS    FORD,     Governor 

frum  1S42  to  1846,  and  au- 
thor of  a  very  interesting 
history  of  Illinois,  was  born 
at  Uniontown,  Pa.,  in  the 
year  1 800.  His  mother,  after 
the  death  of  her  first  hus- 
band (Mr.  Forquer),  married  Rob- 
ert Ford,  who  was  killed  in  1802, 
by  the  Indians  in  the  mountains 
of  Pennsylvania.  She  was  conse- 
quently left  in  indigent  circum- 
stances, with  a  large  family,  mostly 
l^^gsv  girls.  With  a  view  to  better  her 
condition,  she,  in  1804,  removed  to 
q^^^^'-Ak  Missouri,  where  it  had  been  cus- 
^W^  tomary  by  the  Spanish  Govern- 
ment to  give  land  to  actual  settlers;  but  upon  her 
arrival  at  St.  Louis  she  found  the  country  ceded  to 
the  United  States,  and  the  liberal  policy  toward  set- 
tlers changed  by  the  new  ownership.  After  some 
sickness  to  herself  and  family,  she  finally  removed  to 
Illinois,  and  settled  some  three  miles  south  of  Water- 
loo, but  the  following  year  moved  nearer  the  Missis- 
sippi   bluffs.     Here    young    Ford    received    his  fir^t  I 


schooling,  under  the  instructions  of  a  M  •,  Humphrey, 
for  which  he  had  to  walk  three  miles.  His  mother, 
though  lacking  a  thorough  education,  was  a  woman 
of  superior  mental  endoivments,  joined  to  energy 
and  determination  of  character.  She  inculcated  in 
her  children  those  high-toned  principles  which  dis- 
tinguished her  sons  in  public  life.  She  exercised  a 
rigid  economy  to  provide  her  children  an  education ; 
but  George  Forquer,  her  oldest  son  (six  years  older 
than  Thomas  Ford),  at  an  early  age  had  to  quit 
school  to  aid  by  his  labor  in  the  support  of  the  family. 
He  afterward  became  an  eminent  man  in  Illinois 
affairs,  and  but  for  his  early  death  would  probably 
have  been  elected  to  the  United  States  Senate. 

Young  Ford,  with  somewhat  better  opportunities, 
received  a  better  education,  though  limited  to  the 
curriculum  of  the  common  school  of  those  pioneer 
times.  His  mind  gave  eariy  promise  of  superior  en- 
dowments, with  an  inclination  for  mathematics.  His 
proficiency  attracted  the  attention  of  Hon.  Daniel  P. 
Cook,  wlic^  became  his  efficient  patron  and  friend. 
The  latter  gentleman  was  an  eminent  iiunois  states- 
man who,  as  a  Member  of  Congress,  obtained  a  grant 
of  300,000  acres  of  land  to  aid  in  completing  the 
lUi.iois  &  Michigan  Canal,  and  after  whom  the 
county  of  Cook  was  named.     Tnrough  the  advice  oi 


THOMAS  FORD. 


this  gentleman,  Mr.  Ford  turned  his  attention  to  the 
study  of  law;  but  Forquer,  theu  merchandising,  re- 
garding his  education  defective,  sent  him  to  Transyl- 
vania University,  where,  however,  he  remained  but 
one  term,  owing  to  Forquer's  failure  in  business.  On 
his  return  he  alternated  his  law  reading  with  teach- 
ir.g  school  for  support. 

In  1829  Gov.  Edwards  appointed  him  Prosecuting 
Attorney,  and  in  1831  he  was  re-appointed  by  Gov. 
Reynolds,  and  after  that  he  was  four  times  elected  a 
Judge  by  the  Legislature,  without  opposition,  twice  a 
Circuit  Judge,  once  a  Judge  of  Chicago,  and  as  As- 
sociate Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court,  when,  in  1841, 
the  latter  tribunal  was  re-organized  by  the  addition 
of  five  Judges,  all  Democrats.  Ford  was  assigned  to 
the  Ninth  Judicial  Circuit,  and  while  in  this  capacity 
he  was  holding  Court  in  Ogle  County  he  received  a 
notice  of  his  nomination  by  the  Democratic  Conven- 
tion for  the  office  of  Governor.  He  immediately  re- 
signed his  place  and  entered  upon  the  canvass.  In 
August,  1842,  he  was  elected,  and  on  the  Sth  of  De- 
cember following  he  was  inaugurated. 

All  the  offices  which  he  had  held  were  unsolicited 
by  him.  He  received  them  upon  the  true  Jefferson- 
ian  principle, — Never  to  ask  .md  never  to  refuse 
office.  Both  as  a  lawyer  and  as  a  Judge  he  stood 
deservedly  high,  but  his  cast  of  intellect  fitted  him 
rather  for  a  writer  upon  law  than  a  practicing  advo- 
cate in  the  courts.  In  the  latter  capacity  he  was  void 
of  the  moving  power  of  eloquence,  so  necessary  to 
success  with  juries.  As  a  Judge  his  opinions  were 
•ound,  lucid  and  able  expositions  of  the  law.  In 
practice,  he  was  a  stranger  to  the  tact,  skill  and  in- 
sinuating address  of  the  politician,  but  he  saw  through 
;he  arts  of  demagogues  as  well  as  any  man.  He  was 
plain  in  his  demeanor,  so  much  so,  indeed,  that  at 
one  time  after  the  expiration  of  his  term  of  office, 
during  a  session  of  the  Legislature,  he  was  taken  by 
a  stranger  to  be  a  seeker  for  the  position  of  door- 
keeper, and  was  waiied  upon  at  his  hotel  near  mid- 
night by  a  knot  of  small  office-seekers  with  the  view 
of  effecting  a  "  combination  !  " 

Mr.  Ford  had  not  the  "  brass  "  of  the  ordinary 
politician,  nor  that  impetuosity  which  characterizes  a 
jx)litical  leader.  He  cared  little  for  money,  and 
hardly  enough  for  a  decent  support.  In  person  he 
was  of  small  stature,  slender,  of  dark  complexion, 
with  black  hair,  sharp  features,  deep-set  eyes,  a 
pointed,  aquiline  nose  having  a  decided  twist  to  one 
side,  and  a  small  mouth. 

The  three  most  important  events  in  Gov.  Ford's 
administration  were  the  establishment  o£  the  high 
financial  credit  of  the  State,  the  "  Mormon  War  "and 
;he  Mexican  War. 

In  the  first  of  these  the  Governor  proved  himself 
to  be  eminently  wise.  On  coming  into  office  he  found 
the  State  liadly  paralyzed  by  the  ruinous  effects  of 
the   notorious  "internal  improvement"   schemes   of 


the  preceding  decade,  with  scarcely  anything  to 
show  by  w.ay  of  "improvement."  The  enterprise 
that  seemed  to  be  getting  ahead  more  than  all  the 
rest  was  the  Illinois  &  .Michigan  Canal.  As  this 
promised  to  be  the  most  imixirtant  tlioroughfare, 
feasible  to  the  people,  it  was  well  under  headway  in 
its  construction.  Therefore  the  State  policy  was 
almost  concentrated  upon  it,  in  order  to  rush  it  on  tc 
completion.  The  bonded  indebtedness  of  the  State 
was  growing  so  large  as  to  frighten  the  people,  and 
they  were  about  ready  to  entertain  a  proposition  for 
repudiation.  But  the  Governor  had  the  foresight  to 
recommend  such  measures  as  would  maintain  the 
public  credit,  for  which  every  citizen  to-day  feels 
thankful. 

But  perhaps  the  Governor  is  remembered  more  for 
his  connection  with  the  Mormon  troubles  than  for 
anything  else;  for  it  was  during  his  term  of  office 
that  the  "  Latter-Day  Saints "  became  so  strong  at 
Nauvoo,  built  their  temple  there,  increased  their  num- 
bers throughout  the  count-y,  committed  misdemean- 
ors, taught  dangerous  doctrines,  suffered  the  loss  of 
their  leader,  Jo  Smith,  by  a  violent  death,  were  driven 
out  of  Nauvoo  to  the  far  West,  etc.  Having  been  a 
Judge  for  so  many  years  previously,  Mr.  Ford  of 
course  was  no  i-committal  concerning  Mormon  affairs, 
and  was  therefore  claimed  by  both  parties  and  also 
accused  by  each  of  sympathizing  too  greatly  with  the 
other  side.  Mormonism  claiming  to  be  a  system  of 
religion,  the  Governor  no  doubt  was  "  between  two 
fires,"  and  felt  compelled  to  touch  the  matter  rather 
"  gingerly,"  and  doubtless  felt  greatly  relieved  when 
that  pestilential  peoj)le  left  the  State.  Such  compli- 
cated matters,  especially  when  religion  is  mixed  up 
with  them,  expose  every  person  participating  in 
them  to  criticism  from  all  parties. 

The  Mexican  War  was  begun  in  the  spring  of 
1845,  and  was  continued  into  the  gubernatorial  term 
of  Mr.  Ford's  suxessor.  The  Governor's  connection 
with  this  war,  however,  was  not  conspicuous,  as  it 
was  only  administrative,  commissioning  officers,  etc. 

Ford's  "  History  of  Illinois  "  is  a  very  readable  and 
entertaining  work,  01450  small  octavo  pages,  and  is 
destined  to  increase  in  value  with  the  lapse  of  time. 
It  exhibits  a  natur.il  flow  of  compact  and  forcible 
thought,  never  failing  to  convey  the  nicest  sense.  In 
tracing  with  his  trenchant  pen  the  devious  operations 
of  the  professional  politician,  in  which  he  is  inimit- 
able, his  account  is  open,  perhaps,  to  the  objection 
that  all  his  contem[X)raries  are  treated  as  mere  place- 
seekers,  while  many  of  them  have  since  been  judged 
by  the  people  to  be  worthy  statesmen.  His  writings 
seem  slightly  open  to  the  criticism  that  they  exhibit 
a  little  splenetic  partiality  against  those  of  his  con- 
temporaries who  were  prominent  during  his  term  of 
office  as  Governor. 

The  death  of  Gov.  Ford  took  place  at  Peoria,  111., 
Nov.  2,  1850. 


GO  VERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


143 


_^^^^/y<MV^ 


;.^;:?fAi;iS^S:S^S^f^*«iS*«iS*S;g* 


AtigustUH  O.  French 


■i'*:;S^s«*;:ir>s*sig-^»$;;s-'^-S;s^ 


^^^v^y^^ 


^i^—.^^ — o<s6<lilSH<! 


7/^"^UGUSTUS  C.    FRENCH, 
Governor  of  Illinois  from 
1846   to   1852,  was  born  in 
the    town   of  Hill,   in    the 
State  of    New  Hampshire, 
Aug.  2,  1808.     He  was  a 
descendant    in    the   fourth 
generation  ot  Nathaniel 
French,  who  emigrated  from   England 
in  16S7  and  settled  in  Saybury,  Mass. 
In  early  life  young  French  lost  his 
father,   but  continued    to   receive   in- 
struction   from    an     exemplary     and 
Christian  mother  until  he  was  19  years 
old,  when  she  also  died,  confiding  to 
his  care  and  trust  four  younger  broth- 
ers and   one  sister.     He  discharged   his  trust  with 
parental  devotion.     His  education  in  early  life  was 
such  mainly  as  a  common  school   afforded.     For  a 
Srief  period   he    attended    Dartmouth   College,   but 
from   pecuniary  causes  and  the  care  of  his  brothers 
and  sister,  he  did  not  graduate.     He  subsequently 
read  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  Bar  in   1831,  and 
shortly  afterward  removed  to  Illinois,  settling  first  at 
Albion,  Edwards  County,  where  he  established  him- 
self in  the  practice  of  law.     The  following  year   he 
removed  to  Paris,  Edgar  County.     Here  he  attained 
eminence  in  his  profession,  and  entered  public  life 
by  representing  that  county  in  the  Legislature.     A 
strong  attachment  sprang  up  between  him  and  Ste- 
phen .\.  Douglas. 

In  1839.  Mr.  French  was  appointed  Receiver  of 
the  Uiiieil  States  Land  Office  at  Palestine,  Craw- 
ford County,  at  which  place  he  was  a  resident   when 


elevated  to  the  gubernatorial  chair.  In  1844  he  was 
a  Presidential  Elector,  and  as  such  he  voted  for 
James  K.  Polk. 

The  Democratic  State  Convention  of  1846,  meet- 
ing at  Springfield  Feb.  10,  nominated  Mr.  French 
for  Governor.  Other  Democratic  candidates  were 
Lyman  Trumbull,  John  Calhoun  (subsequently  of 
Lecompton  Constitution  notoriety),  Walter  B.  Scates. 
Richard  M.  Young  and  A.  W.  Cavarly,— an  array  of 
very  able  and  prominent  names.  Trumbull  was  per- 
haps defeated  in  the  Convention  by  the  rumor  that 
he  was  opposed  to  the  Illinois  and  Michigan  Canal, 
as  he  had  been  a  year  previously.  For  Lieutenant 
Governor  J.  B.  Wells  was  chosen,  while  other  candi- 
dates were  Lewis  Ross,  Wm.  McMurtry,  Newton 
Cloud,  J.  B.  Hamilton  and  W.  W.  Thompson.  The 
resolutions  declared  strongly  against  the  resuscita- 
tion of  the  old  State  Banks. 

The  Whigs,  who  were  in  a  hopeless  minority,  held 
their  convention  June  8,  at  Peoria,  and  selected 
Thomas  M.  Kilpatrick,  of  Scott  County,  for  Governor, 
and  Gen.  Nathaniel  G.  Wilcox,  of  Schuyler,  for 
Lieutenant  Governor. 

In  the  campaign  the  latter  exposed  Mr.  French's 
record  and  connection  with  the  passage  of  the  in- 
ternal improvement  system,  urging  it  against  his 
election;  but  in  the  meantime  the  war  with  Mexico 
broke  out,  regarding  which  the  Whig  record  was  un- 
popular in  this  State.  The  war  was  the  absorbing 
and  dominating  question  of  the  period,  sweeping 
every  other  political  issue  in  its  course.  The  elec- 
tion in  August  gave  Mr.  French  58,700  votes,  and 
Kilpatrick  only  36,775.  Richard  Eells,  .Abolitionist 
candidate  for  the  same  office,  received  5,152    vot»«s 


AUGUSTUS  C.  FRENCH: 


By  the  new  Constitution  of  1848,  a  new  election  for 
State  officers  was  ordered  in  November  of  that  year, 
before  Gov.  French's  terra  was  half  out,  and  he  was 
re-elected  for  the  term  of  four  years.  He  was  there- 
fore the  incuaibe.it  for  six  consecutive  years,  the 
only  Governor  of  this  State  who  has  ever  served  in 
that  capacity  so  long  at  one  time.  As  there  was  no 
organized  opposition  to  his  election,  he  received  67,- 
453  votes,  to  5,639  for  Pierre  Menard  (son  of  the 
first  Lieutenant  Governor),  4,748  for  Charles  V. 
Dyer,  3,834  for  W.  L.  D.  Morrison,  and  1,361  for 
James  L.  D.  Morrison.  But  Wm.  McMurtry,  of 
Knox  County,  was  elected  Lieutenant  Governor,  in 
place  of  Joseph  B.  Wells,  who  was  before  elected 
ai7.d  did  not  run  again. 

Governor  French  was  inaugurated  into  office  dur- 
ing the  progress  of  the  Me.^ican  War,  which  closed 
during  the  summer  of  1847,  although  the  treaty  of 
Guadalupe  Hidalgo  was  not  made  until  Feb.  2, 
1848.  The  iX)licy  of  Gov.  French's  party  was  com- 
mitted to  that  war,  but  in  connection  with  that  affair 
he  was,  of  course,  only  an  administrative  officer. 
During  his  term  of  office,  Feb.  19,  1847,  the  Legisla- 
ture, by  special  perinission  of  Congress,  declared  that 
all  Government  lands  sold  to  settlers  should  be  im- 
mediately subject  to  State  taxation;  before  this  they 
were  exempt  for  five  years  after  sale.  By  this  ar- 
rangement the  revenue  was  materially  increased. 
About  the  same  time,  the  distribution  of  Government 
.and  warrants  among  the  Mexican  soldiers  as  bounty 
threw  upon  the  market  a  great  quantity  of  good 
lands,  and  this  enhanced  the  settlement  of  the  State. 
The  same  Legislature  authorized,  with  the  recom- 
mendation of  the  Governor,  the  sale  of  the  Northern 
Cross  Railroad  (from  Springfield  to  Meredosia,  the 
first  in  the  State  and  now  a  section  of  the  Wabash, 
St.  Louis  &  Pacific)  It  sold  for  $100,000  in  bonds, 
ulthough  it  had  cost  the  State  not  less  than  a  million. 
The  salt  wells  and  canal  lands  in  the  Saline  reserve- 
in  Gallatin  County,  granted  by  the  general  Govern- 
ment to  the  State,  were  also  authorized  by  the 
Governor  to  be  sold,  to  apply  on  the  State  debt.  In 
1850,  for  the  first  time  since  1839,  the  accruing  State 
revenue,  exclusive  of  specific  appropriations,  was 
sufficient  to  meet  the  current  demands  upon  the 
treasury.  The  aggregate  taxable  property  of  the 
State  at  this  time  was  over  $100,000,000,  and  the 
population  851,470. 


In  1849  the  Legislature  adopted  the  township  or- 
ganization law,  which,  however,  proved  defectiKe, 
and  was  properly  amended  in  185 1.  At  its  session 
in  the  latter  year,  the  General  Assembly  also  passed 
a  law  to  exempt  homesteads  from  sale  011  executions 
This  beneficent  measure  had  been  repeatedly  oiged 
upon  that  body  by  Gov.  French. 

In  1850  some  business  men  in  St.  Louis  com- 
menced to  build  a  dike  opposite  the  lower  part  of 
their  city  on  the  Illinois  side,  to  keep  the  Mississippi 
in  its  channel  near  St.  Louis,  instead  of  breaking 
away  from  them  as  it  sometimes  threatened  to  do. 
This  they  undertook  without  permission  from  the 
Legislature  or  Executive  authority  of  this  State  ;  and 
as  many  of  the  inhabitants  tliera  complained  that 
the  scheme  would  inundate  and  ruin  much  valuable 
land,  there  was  a  slight  conflict  of  jurisdictions,  re- 
sulting in  favor  of  the  St.  Louis  project;  .nd  since 
then  a  good  site  has  existed  there  for  a  city  (East  St. 
Louis),  and  now  a  score  of  railroads  center  there. 

It  was  in  September,  1850,  that  Congress  granted 
to  this  State  nearly  3,000,000  acres  of  land  in  aid  of 
the  completion  of  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad, 
which  constituted  the  most  important  epoch  in  the 
railroad — we  might  say  internal  improvement — his- 
tory of  the  State.  The  road  was  rushed  on  to  com- 
pletion, which  accelerated  the  settlement  of  the  in- 
terior of  the  State  by  a  good  class  of  industrious  citi- 
zens, and  by  the  charter  a  good  income  to  the  State 
Treasury  is  paid  in  from  the  earnings  of  the  road. 

In  1851  the  Legislature  passed  a  law  authorizing 
free  stock  banks,  which  was  the  source  of  much  leg- 
islative discussion  for  a  number  of  years. 

But  we  have  not  space  further  to  particularize 
concerning  legislation.  Gov.  French's  administra- 
tion was  not  marked  by  any  feature  to  be  criticised, 
while  the  country  was  settling  up  as  never  before. 

In  stature,  Gov.  French  was  of  medium  height, 
squarely  built,  light  complexioned,  with  ruddy  face 
and  pleasant  countenance.  In  manners  he  was 
plain  and  agreeable.  By  nature  he  was  somewhat 
diffident,  but  he  was  often  very  outspoken  in  his  con- 
victions of  duty.  In  public  speech  he  was  not  an 
orator,  but  was  chaste,  earnest  and  persuasive.  In 
business  he  was  accurate  and  methodical,  and  in  his; 
administration  he  kept  up  the  credit  of  the  State. 

He  died  in  1865,  at  his  home  in  Lebanon,  Sr. 
Clair  Co.,  V.\. 


GOVERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


|(0el  3-V.  3-Ua-Mts 


a 


lli|'%i^/lf"  V'KL  A.  MATTESON,  Governor 
w'  '''''^l^L^  f^**  'S5 3-6,  was  burn  Aug.  8,  1S08, 
''3  J' i^ilr'T  '  ^'  ''^  Jefferson  County,  New  York, 
'  'X.'>i\^  f  to  which  place  his  father  had  re- 
moved from  Vermont  three  years 
before.  His  father  was  a  f;irmer 
in  fair  circumstances,  but  a  com- 
mon English  education  w;is  all 
that  his  only  son  received.  Young 
Joel  first  tempted  fortune  as  a 
small  tradesman  in  Prescott, 
Canada,  before  he  was  of  age. 
He  returned  from  that  place  to 
his  home,  entered  an  academy, 
taught  school,  visited  the  prin- 
cipal Eastern  cities,  improved  a  farm  his  father  had 
given  him,  made  a  tour  in  the  South,  worked  there 
in  building  railroads,  experienced  a  storm  on  the 
Gulf  of  Mexico,  visited  the  gold  diggings  of  Northern 
Georgia,  and  returned  via  Nashville  to  St.  Louis  and 
through  Illinois  to  his  fatlier's  home,  when  he  mar- 
ried. In  1833,  having  sold  his  farm,  he  removed, 
with  his  wife  and  one  child,  to  Illinois,  and  entered 
a  claim  on  Government  land  near  the  head  of  Au 
Saljle  River,  in  wliat  is  now  Kendall  County.  At 
ihat  time  there  were  not  more  than  two  neighbors 
within  a  range  of  ten  miles  of  his  place,  and  only 
liree  or  fo  ir  houses  betweeii  him  and  Chicago.  He 
opened  a  l.irge  farm,     His  family   was  buardtd   12 


miles  away  while  he  erected  a  house  on  his  claim, 

sleeping,  daring  this  time,  under  a  rude  pole  shed. 
Here  his  life  was  once  placed  in  imminent  peril  by 
a  huge  prairie  rattlesnake  sharing  his  bed. 

In  1835  he  bought  largely  at  the  Government  land 
sales.  During  the  speculative  real-estate  mania  which 
broke  out  in  Chicago  in  1836  and  spread  over  the  State, 
he  sold  his  lands  under  the  inflation  of  that  period 
and  removed  to  Joliet.  In  1838  he  became  a  heavy 
contractor  on  the  Illinois  &  Michigan  Canal.  Upon 
the  completion  of  his  job  in  1841,  when  hard  times 
prevailed,  business  at  a  stand,  contracts  paid  in  State 
scrip;  when  all  the  public  works  except  the  canal 
were  abandoned,  the  State  offered  for  sale  700  tons 
of  railroad  iron,  which  was  purchased  by  Mr.  Mat- 
teson  at  a  bargain.  This  he  accepted,  shipped  and 
sold  at  Detroit,  realizing  a  very  handsome  profit, 
enough  to  pay  off  all  his  canal  debts  and  leave  him  a 
surplus  of  several  thousand  dollars.  His  enterprise 
next  prompted  him  to  start  a  woolen  mill  at  Joliet, 
in  which  he  prospered,  and  which,  after  successive 
enlargements,  became  an  enormous  establishment. 

In  1842  he  was  first  elected  a  State  Senator,  but, 
by  a  bungling  apportionment,  jc  in  Pearson,  a  Senator 
holding  over,  was  found  to  be  in  the  same  distrlc;, 
and  decided  to  be  entitled  to  represent  it.  Mat- 
teson's  seat  was  declared  vacant.  Pearson,  however 
with  a  nobleness  difficult  to  appreciate  in  this  day  of 


148 


JOEL  A.  MATTESON. 


greed  for  office,  unwilling  to  represent  his  district 
under  the  circumstances,  immediately  resigned  his 
unexpired  term  of  two  years.  A  bill  was  passed  in  a 
few  hours  ordering  a  new  election,  and  in  ten  days' 
time  Mr.  Matteson  was  returned  re-elected  and  took 
his  seat  as  Senator.  From  his  well-known  capacity 
as  a  business  man,  he  was  made  Chairman  of  the 
Committee  on  Finance,  a  position  he  held  during 
tliis  lialf  and  two  full  succeeding  Senatorial  terms, 
discharging  its  imiMrtant  duties  with  ability  and  faith- 
fulness. Besides  his  extensive  woolen-mill  interest, 
when  work  was  resumed  on  the  canal  under  the  new 
loan  of  $[,600,000  he  again  became  a  heavy  con- 
tractor, and  also  subsequently  operated  largely  in 
building  railroads.  Thus  he  showed  himself  a  most 
energetic  and  thorough  business  man. 

He  was  nominated  for  Governor  by  the  Demo- 
cratic State  Convention  which  met  at  Springfield 
April  20,  1852.  Other  candidates  before  the  Con- 
vention were  D.  L.  Gregg  and  F.  C.  Sherman,  of 
Cook ;  John  Dement,  of  Lee  ;  Thomas  L.  Harris,  of 
Menard;  Lewis  W.  Ross, of  Fulton ;  and  D.  P.  Bush, 
of  Pike.  Gustavus  Koerner,  of  St.  Clair,  was  nom- 
inated for  Lieutenant  Governor.  For  the  same  offices 
the  Whigs  nominated  Edwin  B.  Webb  and  De-xter  A. 
Kiiowlton.  Mr.  Matteson  received  80,645  votes  at 
the  election,  while  Mr.  Webb  received  64,408.  Mat- 
teson's  forte  was  not  on  the  stump;  he  had  not  cul- 
tivated the  art  of  oily  flattery,  or  the  faculty  of  being 
all  tilings  to  all  men.  His  intellectual  qualities  took 
rather  the  direction  of  efficient  executive  ability.  His 
turn  consisted  not  so  much  in  the  adroit  manage- 
ment of  party,  or  the  [wwerful  advocacy  of  great  gov- 
ernmental principles,  as  in  those  more  solid  and 
enduring  operations  which  cause  the  physical  devel- 
opment and  advancement  of  a  State, — of  commerce 
and  business  enterprise,  into  which  he  labored  with 
success  to  lead  the  people.  As  a  politician  he  was 
just  and  liberal  in  his  views,  and  both  in  official  and 
private  life  he  then  stood  untainted  and  free  from 
blemish.  As  a  man,  in  active  benevolence,  social 
rirtues  and  all  the  amiable  qualities  of  neighbor  or 
citizen,  he  had  few  superiors.  His  messages  present 
a  perspicuous  array  of  facts  as  to  the  condition  of  the 
State,  and  are  often  couched  in  forcible  and  elegant 
diction. 

The  greatest  excitement  during  his  term  of  office 
was  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  Compromise,  by  Con- 


gress, under  the  leadership  of  Stephen  A.  Douglas  in 
1854,  when  the  bill  was  passed  organizing  ilie  Teni 
tory  of  Kansas  and  Nebraska.  A  large  portion  of 
the  Whig  party  of  the  North,  through  their  bitter  op 
position  to  the  Democratic  party,  naturally  drifted 
into  the  doctrine  of  anti-slavery,  and  thus  led  to  what 
was  temporarily  called  the  "Anti-Nebraska"  party, 
while  the  followers  of  Douglas  were  known  as  "  Ne- 
braska or  Douglas  Democrats."  It  was  during  this 
embryo  stage  of  the  Republican  party  that  Abraham 
Lincoln  was  brought  forward  as  the  "Anti-Nebraska  " 
candidate  for  the  United  States  Senatorship,  while 
Gen.  James  Shields,  the  incumbent,  was  re-noni- 
inated  by  the  Democrats.  But  after  a  few  ballotings 
in  the  Legislature  (1855),  these  men  were  dropped, 
and  Lyman  Trumbull,  an  Anti-Nebraska  Democrat, 
was  brought  up  by  the  former,  and  Mr.  Matteson, 
then  Governor,  by  the  latter.  On  the  irth  ballot 
Mr.  Trumbull  obtained  one  majority,  and  was  ac- 
cordingly declared  elected.  Before  Gov.  Matteson 's 
term  expired,  the  Republicans  were  fully  organized 
as  a  national  party,  and  in  1856  put  into  the  field  a 
full  national  and  State  ticket,  carrying  the  State,  but 
not  the  nation. 

The  Legislature  of  r855  passed  two  very  import- 
ant measures, — the  present  free-school  system  and  a 
submission  of  the  Maine  liquor  law  to  a  vote  of  the 
people.  The  latter  was  defeated  by  a  small  majority 
of  the  popular  vote. 

During  the  four  years  of  Gov.  Matteson 's  admin- 
istration .the  taxable  wealth  of  the  State  was  about 
trebled,  from  $137,8 r 8,07 9  to  $349,95  1,272;  the  pub- 
lic debt  w:is  reduced  from  $17,398,985  to  $[2,843,- 
144;  taxation  was  at  the  same  time  reduced,  and  the 
State  resumed  paying  interest  on  its  debt  in  New 
York  as  fast  as  it  fell  due ;  railroads  were  increased 
in  their  mileage  from  something  less  than  400  to 
about  3.000 ;  and  the  population  of  Chicago  was 
nearly  doubled,  and  its  commerce  more  than  quad- 
rupled. 

Before  closing  this  account,  we  regret  that  we  have 
to  say  that  Mr.  Matteson,  in  all  other  respects  an 
upright  man  and  a  good  Governor,  was  implicated 
in  a  false  re-issue  of  redeemed  canal  scrio,  amount- 
ing to  $224,182.66.  By  a  suit  in  the  Sangamon  Cir- 
cuit Court  the  State  recovered  the  principal  and  all. 
the  interest  excepting  $27,500. 

He  died  in   the  winter  of  1872-3,  at  Chicago., 


'.■''-'S. 


\ 


GO  VEMNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


151 


"""^l^ 


1 1  LIAM  H.  BISSELL,  Gov- 
ernor 1857-60,  was  born 
Ajjril  25,  iSii,  in  the 
State  of  New  York,  near 
Painted  Post,  Yates  County. 
His  parents  were  obscure, 
honest,  God-fearing  people, 
u  lio  re  ired  their  children  under  the  daily 
example  of  iiidustiy  and  frugality,  accord- 
ing to  the  custom  of  that  class  of  Eastern 
society.  Mr.  Bissell  received  a  respecta- 
ble but  not  thorough  academical  education. 
By  assiduous  application  he  acquired  a 
knowledge  of  medicine,  and  in  his  early 
manhood  came  West  and  located  in  Mon- 
roe County,  this  State,  where  he  engaged  in  the 
practice  of  that  profession.  But  he  was  not  enam- 
ored of  his  calling:  he  was  swayed  by  a  broader 
ambition,  to  such  an  extent  that  the  mysteries  of  the 
healing  art  and  its  arduous  duties  failed  to  yield  him 
further  any  cliarms.  In  a  few  years  he  discovered 
his  choice  of  a  profession  to  be  a  mistake,  and  when 
he  approached  the  age  of  30  he  sought  to  begin 
anew.  Dr.  Bissell,  no  doubt  unexpectedly  to  him- 
self, discovered  a  singular  facility  and  charm  of 
speech,  the  exercise  of  which  acquired  for  him  a 
ready  local    notoriety.     It   soon   came  to   be   under- 


stood that  he  desired  to  abandon  his  profession  and 
take  up  tliat  of  the  law.  During  terms  of  Court  he 
would  spend  his  time  at  the  county  seat  among  the 
members  of  the  Bar,  who  extended  to  him  a  ready 
welcome. 

It  was  not  strange,  therefore,  that  he  should  drift 
into  public  life.  In  r84o  he  was  elected  as  a  Dem- 
ocrat to  the  Legislature  from  Monroe  County,  and 
was  an  efficient  member  of  that  body.  On  his  re- 
turn home  he  qualified  himself  for  admission  to  the 
Bar  and  speedily  rose  to  the  front  rank  as  an  advo- 
cate. His  powers  of  oratory  were  captivating.  With  a 
pure  diction,  charming  and  inimitable  gestures, 
clearness  of  statement,  and  a  remarkable  vein  of  sly 
humor,  his  efforts  before  a  jury  told  with  irresistible 
effect.  He  was  chosen  by  the  Legislature  Prosecut- 
ing Attorney  for  the  Circuit  in  which  he  lived,  and 
in  tliat  position  he  fully  discharged  his  duty  to  the 
State,  gained  the  esteem  of  the  Bar,  and  seldom 
failed  to  convict  the  offender  of  the  law. 

In  stature  he  was  somewhat  tall  and  slender,  and 
with  a  straight,  military  bearing,  he  presented  a  dis- 
tinguished appearance.  His  complexion  was  dark, 
his  head  well  poised,  though  not  large,  his  address 
pleasant  and  manner  winning.  He  was  exemplary 
in  his  habits,  a  devoted  husband  and  kind  parent. 
He  was  twice  married,  the  first  time  to  Miss  James, 


'52 


WILLIAM  H.  BISSELL. 


ot  Monroe  County,  by  whom  he  had  two  children, 
both  daughters.  She  died  soon  after  the  year  1840, 
and  Mr.  B.  married  for  his  second  wife  a  daughter 
of  Elias  K.  Kane,  previously  a  United  States  Senator 
from  this  State.  She  survived  hi•l^  but  a  short  time, 
and  died  without  issue. 

When  the  war  with  Mexico  was  declared  in  1846, 
Mr.  Bissell  enlisted  and  was  elected  Colonel  of  his 
rcgi'iient,  over  Hon.  Don  Morrison,  by  an  almost 
unanimous  vote, — 807  to  6.  Considering  the  limited 
opportunities  he  had  had,  he  evinced  a  high  order  of 
military  talent.  On  tlie  bloody  field  of  Buena  Vista 
he  acquitted  himself  with  intrepid  and  distinguished 
ability,  contributing  with  his  regiment,  the  Second 
Illinois,  in  no  small  degree  toward  saving  the  waver- 
ing fortunes  of  our  arms  during  that  long  and  fiercely 
contested  battle. 

After  his  return  home,  at  the  close  of  the  war,  he 
was  elected  to  Congress,  his  opponents  being  the 
Hons.  P.  B.  Fouke  and  Joseph  Gillespie.  He  served 
two  terms  in  Congress.  He  was  an  ardent  politician. 
During  the  great  contest  of  1850  he  voted  in  favor 
of  the  adjustment  measures;  but  in  1854  he  opposed 
the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  Compromise  act  and 
therefore  the  Kansas-Mebraska  bill  of  Douglas,  and 
thus  became  identified  with  the  nascent  Republican 
party. 

During  his  first  Cuiigressioaal  term,  while  the 
Southern  members  were  following  their  old  practice 
of  intimidating  the  North  by  bullying  language, 
and  claiming  most  of  the  credit  for  victories  in  the 
Mexican  War,  and  Jefferson  Davis  claiming  for  the 
Mississippi  troops  all  the  credit  for  success  at  Buena 
Vista,  Mr.  Bissell  bravely  defended  the  Northern 
troops  ;  whereupon  Davis  challenged  Bissell  to  a  duel, 
which  was  accepted.  This  matter  was  brought  up 
against  Bissell  when  he  was  candidate  for  Governor 
and  during  liis  term  of  office,  as  the  Constitution  of 
this  State  forbade  any  duelist  from  holding  a  State 
office. 

In  1856,  when  tlie  Republican  party  first  put  fortii 
a  candidate,  John  C.  Fremont,  for  President  of  the 
United  States,  the  same  party  nominated  Mr.  Bissell 
for  Governor  of  Illinois,  and  John  Wood,  of  Quincy, 
for  Lieutenant  Governor,  while  the  Democrats  nomi- 
nated Hon.  W.  A.  Richardson,  of  Adams  County, 
for  Governor,  and  Col.  R.  J.  Hamilton,  of  Cook 
Countv,  for  Lieutenant  Governor.     The  result  of  the 


election  was  a  plurality  of  4,729  votes  over  Richard- 
son. The  American,  or  Know-Nothing,  party  had  a 
ticket  in  the  field.  The  Legislature  was  nearly  bal- 
anced, but  was  politically  opposed  to  the  Governor. 
His  message  to  the  Legislature  was  short  and  ratheJ 
ordinary,  and  was  criticised  for  expressing  the  sup- 
posed obligations  of  the  people  to  the  incorporators 
of  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad  Company  and  for  re- 
opening the  slavery  question  by  allusions  to  the 
Kansas  troubles.  Late  in  the  session  an  apportion- 
ment bill,  based  upon  the  State  census  of  1855,  was 
passed,  amid  much  partisan  strife.  The  Governor 
at  first  signed  the  bill  and  then  vetoed  it.  A  furious 
debate  followed,  and  the  question  whether  the  Gov- 
ernor h;id  the  authority  to  recall  a  signature  was 
referred  to  the  Courts,  that  of  last  resort  deciding  in 
favor  of  the  Governor.  Two  years  afterward  another 
outrageous  attempt  was  made  for  a  re-apportionment 
and  to  gerrymander  the  State,  but  the  Legislature 
failed  to  pass  the  bill  over  the  veto  of  the  Governor. 

It  was  during  Gov.  Bissell's  administration  that 
the  notorious  canal  scrip  fraud  was  brought  to  light, 
implicating  ex-Gov.  Matteson  and  other  prominent 
State  officials.  The  principal  and  interest,  aggregat- 
ing $255,500,  was  all  recovered  by  the  State  except- 
ing $27,500.     (See  sketch  of  Gov.  Matteson.) 

In  1859  an  attempt  was  discovered  to  fraudu- 
lently refund  the  Macalister  and  Stebbins  bonds  and 
thus  rob  the  State  Treasury  of  nearly  a  quarter  of  a 
million  dollars.  The  State  Government  was  impli- 
cated in  this  affair,  and  to  this  day  remains  unex- 
plained or  unatoned  for.  For  the  above,  and  other 
matters  previously  mentioned.  Gov.  Bissell  has  been 
severely  criticised,  and  he  has  also  been  most  shame- 
fully libelled  and  slandered. 

On  account  of  exposure  in  the  army,  the  remote 
cause  of  a  nervous  form  of  disease  gained  entrance 
into  his  system  and  eventually  developed  paraplegia, 
affecting  his  lower  extremities,  which,  while  it  left 
his  body  in  comparative  health,  deprived  him  of  loco- 
motion e.^ccept  by  the  aid  of  crutches.  While  he  was 
generally  hopeful  of  ultimate  recovery,  this  myste- 
rious disease  pursued  him,  without  once  relaxing  its 
stealthy  hold,  to  the  close  of  his  life,  March  18, 
i860,  over  nine  months  before  tlie  expiration  o'  hi-, 
gubernatorial  term,  at  the  early  age  of  48  years.  He 
died  in  the  faith  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church.  o< 
which  he  har*  been  a  member  since  1854. 


/^ 


^ 


Go  VERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


155 


iHNWOOD,  Governo/  i86o-i,and 
i\  ''  ^'^^  the  first  settler  of  Quincy,   III., 
was  born  in  the  town  of  Sempro- 
<»;  ll'vt*/      ^'^      nius  (now  Moravia),  Cayuga  Co., 

'via.t'  ..^ei  I^  .>■  N.  Y.,  Dec.  20,  1798.  He  was 
the  second  child  and  only  son  of 
Dr.  Daniel  Wood.  His  mother, 
nee  Catherine  Crause,  was  of 
German  parentage,  and  died 
while  he  was  an  infant.  Dr. 
Wood  was  a  learned  and  skillful 
physician,  of  classical  attain- 
ments and  proficient  in  several 
modern  lai.guages,  who,  after 
serving  throughout  the  Revolu- 
tionary War  as  a  Surgeon,  settled  on  the  land  granted 
him  by  the  Government,  and  resided  there  a  re- 
spected and  leading  influence  in  his  section  until  his 
death,  at  the  ripe  age  of  92  years. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch,  impelled  by  the  spirit 
of  Western  adventure  then  pervading  everywhere, 
left  his  home,  Nov.  2,  1818,  and  passed  the  succeed- 
ing winter  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  The  following  sum- 
mer he  pushed  on  to  Illinois,  landing  at  Shawneetown, 
and  spent  the  fall  and  following  winter  in  Calhoun 
County.  In  1820,  in  company  with  Willard  Keyes, 
he  settled  in  Pike  County,  about  30  miles  southeast 
of  Quincy,  where  for  the  ne.xt  two  years  he  pursued 
farming.  In  1821  he  visited  "the  Bluffs"  (as  the 
present  site  of  Quincy  was  called,  then  uninhabited) 
and,  pleased  with  its  prospects,  soon  after  purchased 
a  quarter-section  of  land  near  by,  and  in  the  follow- 
ing fall  (1822)  erected  near  the  river  a  small  cabin. 


18  X  20  feet,  the  first  building  in  Quincy,  of  which 
he  then  became  the  first  and  for  some  months  the 
only  occupant. 

About  this  time  he  visited  his  old  friends  in  Pike 
County,  chief  of  whom  was  William  Ross,  the  lead- 
ing man  in  building  up  the  village  of  Atlas,  of  that 
county,  which  was  thought  then  to  be  the  possible 
commencement  of  a  city.  One  day  they  and  others 
were  traveling  together  over  the  country  between  the 
two  points  named,  making  observations  on  the  com- 
parative merits  of  the  respective  localities.  On  ap- 
proaching the  Mississippi  near  Mr.  Wood's  place, 
the  latter  told  his  companions  to  follow  him  and  he 
would  show  them  where  he  was  going  to  build  a  city. 
They  went  about  a  mile  off  the  main  trail,  to  a  high 
pwint,  from  which  the  view  in  every  direction  was 
most  magnificent,  as  it  had  been  for  ages  and  as  yet 
untouched  by  the  hand  of  man.  Before  them  swept 
by  the  majestic  Father  of  Waters,  yet  unburdened  by 
navigation.  After  Mr.  Wood  had  expatiated  at 
length  on  the  advantages  of  the  situation,  Mr.  Ross 
replied,  "  But  it's  too  near  Atlas  ever  to  amount  to 
anything!" 

Atlas  is  still  a  cultivated  farm,  and  Quincy  is  a 
city  of  over  30,000  population. 

In  1824  Mr.  Wood  gave  a  newspaper  notice, 
as  the  law  then  prescribed,  of  his  intention  to  apply 
to  the  General  Assembly  for  the  formation  of  a  new 
county.  This  was  done  the  following  winter,  result- 
ing in  the  establishment  of  the  present  Adams 
County.  During  the  next  summer  Quincy  was  se- 
lected as  the  county  seat,  it  and  the  vicinity  then 
containing  but  four  adult  male   residents  and   half 


*S0 


JOHN  WOOD. 


that  number  of  females.  Sinoe  that  period  Mr. 
Wood  resided  at  the  place  of  his  early  adoption  un- 
til his  death,  and  far  more  tlian  any  other  man  was 
he  identified  with  every  measure  of  its  progress  and 
history,  and  almost  continuously  kept  in  public  posi- 
tions. 

He  was  one  of  the  early  town  Trustees,  and  after 
the  place  became  a  city  he  was  often  a  member  of 
the  City  Council,  many  times  elected  Mayor,  in  the 
face  of  a  constant  large  opposition  political  majority. 
In  1850  he  was  elected  to  the  State  Senate.  In  1856, 
on  the  organization  of  the  Republican  party,  he  was 
chosen  Lieutenant  Governor  of  the  State,  on  the 
ticket  with  Wm.  H.  Bissell  for  Governor,  and  on  the 
death  of  the  latter,  March  18,  i860,  he  succeeded  to 
the  Chief  Executive  cliair,  which  he  occupied  until 
Gov.  Yates  was  inaugurated  nearly  ten  months  after- 
ward. 

Nothing  very  marked  characterized  the  adminis- 
tration of  Gov.  Wood.  The  great  anti-slavery  cam- 
paign of  i860,  resulting  in  tlie  election  of  the  honest 
Illinoisan,  Abraham  Lincoln,  to  the  Presidency  of  the 
United  States,  occurred  during  the  short  period 
while  Mr.  Wood  was  Governor,  and  tiie  excitement 
and  issues  of  that  struggle  dominated  over  every 
other  consideration, — indeed,  supplanted  them  in  a 
great  measure.  The  people  of  Illinois,  during  all 
that  time,  were  passing  tlie  comparatively  petty  strifes 
under  Bissell's  administration  to  the  overwhelming 
issue  of  preserving  the  whole  nation  from  destruction. 

In  1861  ex-Gov.  Wood  was  one  of  the  five  Dele- 
gates from  Illinois  to  the  "  Peace  Convention  "  at 
Washingtoti,  and  in  April  of  the  san.e  year,  on  the 
breaking  opt  of  the    Rebellion,   he   was    appointed 


Quartermaster-General  of  the  State,  which  position 
he  held  throughout  the  war.  In  1864  he  took  com- 
mand as  Colonel  of  the  137th  111.  Vol.  Inf,  with 
whom  he  served  until  the  period  of  enlistment  ex- 
pired. 

Politically,  Gov.  Wood  was  always  actively  identi- 
fied with  tlie  Whig  and  Republican  parties.  Few 
men  have  in  personal  experience  comprehended  so 
many  surprising  and  advancing  local  changes  as 
vested  in  the  more  than  half  century  recollections  of 
Gov.  Wood.  Sixty-four  years  ago  a  solitary  settler 
on  the  "Bluffs,"  with  no  family,  and  no  neighbor 
within  a  score  of  miles,  the  world  of  civilization  away 
behind  him,  and  the  strolling  red-man  almost  his 
only  visitant,  he  lived  to  see  growing  around  him, 
and  under  his  auspices  and  aid,  overspreading  the 
wild  hills  and  scraggy  forest  a  teaming  city,  second 
only  in  size  in  the  State,  and  surpassed  nowhere  in 
beauty,  prosperity  and  promise;  whose  people  recog- 
nize as  with  a  single  voice  the  proverbial  honor  and 
liberality  that  attach  to  the  name  and  lengthened 
life  of  their  pioneer  settler,  "the  old  Governor." 

Gov.  Wood  was  twice  married, — first  in  January, 
1826,  to  Ann  M.  Streeter,  daughter  of  Joshua  Streeter, 
formerly  of  Salem,  Washington  Co.,  N.  Y.  They  had 
eight  children.  Mrs.  W.  died  Oct.  8,  1863,  and  in 
June,  1S65,  Gov.  Wood  married  Mrs.  Mary  A.,  widow 
of  Rev.  Joseph  T.  Holmes.  Gov.  Wood  died  June  4, 
1880,  at  his  residence  in  Quincy.  Four  of  his  eight 
children  are  now  living,  namely:  Ann  E.,  wife  of 
Gen.  John  Tillson;  Daniel  C,  who  married  Mary  J. 
.'Vbernethy;  John,  Jr.,  who  married  Josephine  Skinner, 
and  Joshua  S.,  who  married  Annie  Bradley.  The 
last  mentioned  now  resides  at  Atchison,  Kansas,  and 
all  the  rest  are  still  at  Quincy. 


m' 


'HICHARD  YATES,  the   "War 
'     Governor,"  1861-4,  was  bom 
Jan.  18,  1818,  on  the  banks  of 
the   Ohio   River,   at    Warsaw, 
Gallatin  Co.,  Ky.     His  lather 
moved  in  1831  to  Illinois,  and 
fi-s    ^ Uc    "-^^    ^^"^"^   stopping   for   a   time  in 
ijTg^^^^  Springfield,  settled  at    Island 

^^ij^'T'V  Grove,  Sangamon  County.  Here, 
s4.*'«Slii»  ^fti^r  attending  school,  Richard  joined 
the  family.  Subsequently  he  entered 
'^^^^^  Illinois  College  at  Jacksonville, 
J^^nL  where,  in    1837,  he  graduated  with 

first  honors.  He  chose  for  his  pro- 
fession the  law,  the  Hon.  J.  J.  Har- 
din being  his  instructor.  After  ad- 
mission to  the  Bar  he  soon  rose  to  distinction  as  an 
advocate. 

Gifted  witli  a  fluent  and  ready  oratory,  he  soon 
appeared  in  the  political  hustings,  and,  being  a 
passionate  admirer  of  the  great  Whig  leader  of  the 
West.  Henry  Clay,  he  joined  his  political  fortunes  to 
he  par.ty  of  his  idol.  In  1840  he  engaged  with  great 
■■'dor  in  the  exciting  "hard  cider"  campaign  for 
-.'arrison.  Two  years  later  he  was  elected  to  the 
Legislature  from  Morgan  County,  a  Democratic 
nronghold.  He  served  three  or  four  terms  in  the 
I^egislature,  and  such  was  the  fascination  of  his  ora- 
ry  that  by  1850  his  large  Congressional  District, 
I  ^tending  from  Morgan  and  Sangamon  Counties 
.  jrth  to  include  LaSalle,  unanimously  tendered  htm 
t'i»  Whig  nomination  for  Congress.  His  Democratic 
opponent  was  Maj.  Thomas  L.  Harris,  a  very  pop- 
.  'ar  man  who  had  won  distinction  at  the  battle  of 
^erro  Gordo,  in  the  Mexican  War,  and  who  had 
jeater.  Mun.  Stephen  T.  Logan  for  the  same  position. 


two  years  before,  by  a  large  majority.  Yates  waj 
elected.  Two  years  later  he  was  re-elected,  over 
John  Calhoun. 

It  was  during  Yates  second  term  in  Congress  that 
the  great  question  of  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  Com- 
promise was  agitated,  and  the  bars  laid  down  for  re- 
opening the  dreaded  anti-slavery  question.  He  took 
strong  grounds  against  the  repeal,  and  thus  became 
identified  with  the  rising  Republican  party.  Conse- 
quently he  fell  into  the  minority  in  his  district,  which 
was  pro-slavery.  Even  then,  in  a  third  contest,  he 
fell  behind  Major  Harris  only  200  votes,  after  the 
district  had  two  years  before  given  Pierce  2,000 
majority  for  President. 

The  Republican  State  Convention  of  1S60  met  at 
Decatur  May  9,  and  nominated  for  the  office  of  Gov- 
ernor Mr.  Yates,  in  preference  to  Hon.  Norman  B. 
Judd,  of  Chicago,  and  Leonard  Swett,  of  Blnoming- 
ton,  two  of  the  ablest  men  of  the  State,  who  were 
also  candidates  before  the  Convention.  Francis  A. 
Hoffman,  of  DuPage  County,  was  nominated  fot 
Lieutenant  Governor.  This  was  the  year  when  Mr. 
Lincoln  was  a  candidate  for  President,  a  period  re- 
membered as  characterized  by  the  great  whirlpool 
which  precipitated  the  bloody  War  of  the  Rebellion. 
The  Douglas  Democrats  nominated  J.  C.  Allen  of 
Crawford  County,  for  Governor,  and  Lewis  W.  Ro-s, 
of  Fulton  County,  for  Lieutenant  Governor.  The 
Breckenridge  Democrats  and  the  Bell-Everett  party 
had  also  full  tickets  in  the  field.  After  a  most  fear- 
ful campaign,  the  result  of  the  election  gave  Mr. 
Yates  172,196  votes,  and  Mr  Allen  159,253.  Mr. 
Yates  received  over  a  thousand  more  votes  than  did 
Mr.  Lincoln  himself. 

Gov.  Yates  occupied  the  chair  of  State  during  cne 


l6o 


RICHARD    YATES. 


most  critical  period  of  our  country's  history.  In  the 
fate  of  the  nation  was  involved  that  of  each  State. 
The  life  struggle  of  the  former  derived  its  sustenance 
from,  the  loyalty  of  the  latter;  and  Gov.  Yates 
seemed  to  realize  the  situation,  and  proved  himself 
both  loyal  and  wise  in  upholding  the  Government. 
He  had  a  deep  hold  upon  the  affections  of  the 
people,  won  by  his  moving  eloquence  and  genial 
manners.  Erect  and  symmetrical  in  person,  of  pre- 
possessing appearance,  with  a  winning  address  and  a 
magnetic  power,  few  men  possessed  more  of  the  ele- 
ments of  popularity.  His  oratory  was  scholarly  and 
captivating,  his  hearers  hardly  knowing  why  they 
were  transixjrted.  He  was  social  and  convivial.  In 
the  latter  respect  he  was  ultimately  carried  too  far. 

The  very  creditable  military  efforts  of  this  State 
during  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  in  putting  into  the 
field  the  enormous  number  of  about  200,000  soldiers, 
were  ever  promptly  and  ably  seconded  by  his  excel- 
lency; and  the  was  ambitious  to  deserve  the  title  of 
"the  soldier's  friend."  Immediately  after  the  battle  of 
Shiloh  he  repaired  to  the  field  of  carnage  to  look 
after  the  wounded,  and  his  appeals  for  aid  were 
promptly  responded  to  by  the  people.  His  procla- 
mations calling  for  volunteers  were  impassionatc 
appeals,  urging  upon  the  people  the  duties  and  rer 
quirements  of  patriotism ;  and  his  special  message 
in  iS6_^  to  the  Democratic  Legislature  of  this  State 
pleading  for  material  aid  for  the  sick  and  wounded 
soldiers  of  Illinois  regiments,  breathes  a  deep  fervor 
of  noble  sentiment  and  feeling  rarely  equaled  in 
beauty  or  felicity  of  expression.  Generally  his  mes- 
sages on  political  and  civil  affairs  were  able  and  com- 
prehensive. During  his  administration,  however, 
there  were  no  civil  events  of  an  engrossing  character, 
although  two  years  of  his  time  were  replete  wiih 
partisan  quarrels  of  great  bitterness.  Military  ar- 
rests. Knights  of  the  Golden  Circle,  riot  in  Fulton 
County,  attempted  suppression  of  the  Chicago  Times 
and  the  usurping  State  Constitutional  Convention  of 
1862,  were  the  chief  local  topics  that  were  exciting 
during  the  Governor's  term.  This  Convention  assem- 
bled Jan.  7,  and  at  once  took  the  high  position  that 
'he  law  calling  it  was  no  longer  binding,  and  that  it 
.'.ad  supreme  power;  that  it  represented  a  virtual 
assemblage  of  the  whole  people  of  the  State,  and  was 
sovereign  in  the  exercise  of  all  power  necessary  lo 
effect  a  peaceable  revolution  of  the  State  Government 


and  to  the  re-establishment  of  one  for  the  "happiness, 
prosperity  and  freedom  of  the  citizens,"  limited  only 
by  the  Federal  Constitution.  Notwithstanding  the 
law  calling  the  Convention  required  its  members  to 
take  an  oath  to  support  the  Constitution  of  the  State 
as  well  as  that  of  the  general  Government,  they 
utterly  refused  to  take  such  oath.  They  also  as- 
sumed legislative  powers  and  passed  several  import- 
ant "laws!"  Interfering  with  the  (tlien)  present 
executive  duties.  Gov.  Yates  was  -rovoked  to  tell 
them  plainly  that  "  he  did  not  acknowledge  the  right 
of  the  Convention  to  instruct  him  in  the  performance 
of  his  duty." 

In  1863  the  Governor  astonished  the  Democrats 
by  "  proroguing  "  their  Legislature.  This  body,  after 
a  recess,  met  June  2,  that  year,  and  soon  began  to 
waste  time  upon  various  partisan  resolutions;  and, 
while  the  two  houses  were  disagreeing  upon  the 
question  of  adjourning  .{/«<■  die,  the  Governor,  having 
the  authority  in  such  cases,  surprised  them  all  by 
adjourning  them  "  to  the  Saturday  next  i)receding  the 
first  Monday  in  January,  1865  !  "  This  led  to  great 
excitement  and  confusion,  and  to  a  reference  of  the 
Governor's  act  to  the  Supreme  Court,  who  decided  ir. 
his  favor.  Then  it  was  the  Court's  turn  to  receive 
abuse  for  weeks  and  months  afterward. 

During  the  autumn  of  1864  a  conspiracy  was  de- 
tected at  Chicago  which  had  for  its  object  the  liber- 
ation of  the  prisoners  of  war  at  Camp  Douglas,  the 
burning  of  the  city  and  the  inauguration  of  rebellioi 
in  the  North.  Gen.  Sweet,  who  had  charge  of  the 
camp  at  the  time,  firs',  liad  his  suspicions  of  danger 
aroused  by  a  number  of  enigmatically  worded  letters 
which  passed  through  the  Camp  postoffice.  .A  de- 
tective afterward  discovered  that  the  rebel  Gen. 
Marmaduke  was  in  the  city,  under  an  assumed 
name,  and  he,  with  other  rebel  officers — Grenfell, 
Morgan,  Cantrell,  Buckner  Morris,  and  Charles 
Walsh — was  arrested,  most  of  whom  were  convicted 
by  a  court-martial  at  Cincinnati  and  sentenced  to 
imprisonment, — Grenfell  to  be  hung.  The  sentence 
of  the  latter  was  afterward  commuted  to  imprison- 
ment for  life,  and  all  the  otliers,  after  nine  months' 
imprisonment,  were  pardoned. 

In  March,  1873,  Gov.  Yates  was  appointed  a  Gov 
ernment  Director  of  the  Union  Pacific  Railroad,  in 
which  office  he  continued  until  his  decease,  at  St. 
Louis,  Mo.,  on  the  27th  of  Novemlier  following. 


GOVERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


163 


RieJiard  J.  Oglesi 


#># 


-i— 


lICHARD  J.  OGLESBY,  Gov- 
ernor 1865-8,  and  re-elected 
in  1872  and  1884,  was  born 
July  25,  1824,  in  Oldham  Co., 
Ky., — the  State  which  might 
be  considered  the  "  mother  of 
Illinois  Gijvernors."  Bereft  of 
his  parents  at  the  tender  age 
of  eight  years,  his  early  education 
was  neglected.  When  12  years  of 
age,  and  after  he  had  worked  a  year 
and  a  half  at  the  carpenter's  trade, 
he  removed  with  an  uncle,  Willis 
Oglesby,  into  whose  care  he  had 
been  committed,  to  Decatur,  this 
State,  where  he  continued  his  ap- 
prenticeship as  a  mechanic,  working  six  months  for 
Hon.  E.  O.  Smith. 

In  1844  he  commenced  studying  law  at  Spring- 
field, with  Judge  Silas  Robbins,  and  read  with  him 
one  year.  He  was  admitted  to  the  Bar  in  1845,  and 
commenced  the  practice  of  his  chosen  profession  at 
Sullivan,  the  county  seat  of  Moultrie  County. 

The  next  year  the  war  with  Mexico  was  com- 
menced, and  in  June,  1846,  Mr.  Oglesby  volunteered, 
was  elected  First  Lieutenant  of  Co.  C,  Fourth  Illinois 
Regiment  of  Volunteers,  and  participated  in  the  bat- 
tles of  Vera  Cruz  and  Cerro  Gordo. 

On  his  return  he  sought  to  perfect  his  law  studies 
by  attending  a  course  of  lectures  at  Louisville,  but 
on  the  breaking  out  of  the  California  "gold  fever  "  in 
1849,  lie  crossed  the  plains  and  mountains  to  the 
new  Eldorado,  driving  a  six-mule  team,  with  a  com- 


pany of  eight  men,  Henry  Prather  being  the  leader. 

In  1852  he  returned  home  to  Macon  County,  and 
was  placed  that  year  by  the  Whig  party  on  the  ticket 
of  Presidential  Electors.  In  1856  he  visited  Europe, 
Asia  and  Africa,  being  absent  20  months.  On  his 
return  home  he  resumed  the  practice  of  law,  as  a 
member  of  the  firm  of  Gallagher,  Wait  &  Oglesby. 
In  1858  he  was  the  Republican  nominee  for  the 
Lower  House  of  Congress,  but  was  defeated  by  the 
Hon.  James  C.  Robinson,  Democrat.  In  i860  he 
was  elected  to  the  Illinois  State  Senate ;  and  on  the 
evening  the  returns  of  this  election  were  coming  in. 
Mr.  Oglesby  had  a  fisticuff  encounter  with  "  Cerro 
Gordo  Williams,"  in  which  he  came  out  victorious, 
and  which  was  regarded  as  "  the  first  fight  of  the 
Rebellion."  The  following  spring,  when  the  war 
had  commenced  in  earnest,  his  ardent  nature 
quickly  responded  to  the  demands  of  patriotism  and 
he  enlisted.  Tlie  extra  session  of  the  Legislature 
elected  him  Colonel  of  the  Eighth  Illinois  Infantry, 
the  second  one  in  the  State  raised  to  suppress  the 
great  Rebellion. 

He  was  shortly  entrusted  with  imiwrtant  com- 
mands. For  a  time  he  was  stationed  at  Bird's  Point 
and  Cairo;  in  April  he  was  promoted  Brigadier  Gen- 
eral; at  Fort  Donelson  his  brigade  was  in  the  van, 
being  stationed  on  the  right  of  General  Grant's  army 
and  the  first  brigade  to  be  attacked.  He  lost  500 
men  before  re-inforcements  arrived.  Many  of  these 
men  were  from  Macon  County.  He  was  engaged  in 
the  battle  of  Corinth,  and,  in  a  brave  charge  at  this 
place,  was  shot  in  the  left  lung  with  an  ounce  ball, 
and  was  carried  from  the  field  in  expectation  of  ina- 


164 


RICHARD  J.    OGLESBY. 


mediate  death.  That  rebel  ball  he  carries  to  this 
day.  On  his  partial  recovery  he  was  promoted  as 
Major  General,  for  gallantry,  his  commission  to  rank 
from  November,  1862.  In  the  spring  of  1863  he 
was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  i6th  Army 
Corps,  but,  owing  to  inability  from  the  effects  of  his 
wound,  he  relinquished  this  command  in  July,  that 
year.  Gen.  Grant,  however,  refused  to  accept  his 
resignation,  and  he  was  detailed,  in  December  follow- 
ing, to  court-martial  and  try  the  Surgeon  General  of 
the  Army  at  Washington,  where  he  remained  until 
May,  1864,  when  he  returned  home. 

The  Republican,  or  Union,  State  Convention  of 

1864  was  held  at  Springfield,  May  25,  when  Mr. 
Oglesby  was  nominated  for  the  office  of  Governor, 
while  other  candidates  before  the  Convention  were 
Allen  C.  Fuller,  of  Boone,  Jesse  K.  Dubois,  of  Sanga- 
mon, and  John  M.  Palmer,  of  Macoupin.  VVm. 
Bross,  of  Chicago,  was  nominated  for  Lieutenant 
Governor.  On  the  Democratic  State  ticket  were 
James  C.  Robinson,  of  ("lark,  for  Governor,  and  S. 
Corning  Judd,  of  Fulton,  for  Lieutenant  Governor. 
The  general  election  gave  Gen.  Oglesby  a  majority 
of  about  31,000  votes.  The  Republicans  had  also  a 
majority  in  both  the  Legislature  and  in  the  repre- 
sentation in  Congress. 

Gov.  Oglesby  was  duly  inaugurated  Jan.  17,  1865. 
The  day  before  the  first  time  set  for  his  installation 
death  visited  his  home  at  Decatur,  and  look  from  it 
his  only  son,  an  intelligent  and  sprightly  lad  of  si.ic 
years,  a  great  favorite  of  the  bereaved  parents.  This 
caused  the  inauguration  to  be  postponed  a  week. 

The  political  events  of  the  Legislative  session  of 

1865  were  the  election  of  ex-Gov.  Yates  to  the 
United  States  Senate,  and  the  ratification  of  the  13th 
amendment  to  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States, 
abolishing  slavery.  This  session  also  signalized 
itself  by  repealing  the  notorious  "  black  laws,"  part 
of  which,  although  a  dead  letter,  had  held  their  place 
upon  the  statute  books  since  1819.  Also,  laws  re- 
quiring the  registration  of  voters,  and  establishing  a 
State  Board  of  Equalization,  were  passed  by  this  Leg- 
islature. But  the  same  body  evinced  that  it  was  cor- 
ruptly influenced  by  a  mercenary  lobby,  as  it  adopted 
some  bad  legislation,  over  the  Governor's  veto,  nota- 
bly an  amendment  to  a  charter  for  a  Chicago  horse 
railway,  granted  in  1859  for  25  years,  and  now 
sought  to  be  extended  99  years.  As  this  measure 
was  promptly  passed  over  his  veto  by  both  branches 
of  the  Legislature,  he  deemed  it  useless  further  to 
attempt  to  check  their  headlong  career.  At  this 
session  no  law  of  a  general  useful  character  or  public 
interest  was  perfected,  unless  we  count  such  the 
turning  oVer  of  the  canal  to  Chicago  to  be  deepened. 
The  session  of  1867  was  still  more  productive  of 
private  and  special  acts.  Many  omnibus  bills  were 
proposed,  and  some  passed.  The  contests  over  tlie 
^Dcation  of  the    Industrial  College,  the  Capital,  tlie 


Southern  Penitentiary,  and  the  canal  enlargement 
and  Illinois  River  improvement,  dominated  every- 
thing  else. 

During  the  year  1872,  it  became  evident  that  if 
the  Republicans  could  re-elect  Mr.  Oglesby  to  the 
office  of  Governor,  they  cotild  also  elect  him  to  the 
United  States  Senate,  which  they  desired  to  do. 
Accordingly  they  re-nominated  him  for  the  Execu- 
tive chair,  and  placed  upon  the  ticket  with  him  for 
Lieutenant  Governor,  John  L.  Beveridge,  of  Cook 
County.  On  the  other  side  the  Democrats  i)ut  into 
the  field  Gustavus  Koerner  for  Governor  and  John 
C.  Black  for  Lieutenant  Governor.  The  election 
gave  the  Republican  ticket  majorities  ranging  from 
3S'334  to  56,174, — the  Democratic  defection  being 
caused  mainly  by  their  having  an  old-time  Whig  and 
Abolitionist,  Horace  Greeley,  on  the  national  ticket 
for  President.  According  to  the  general  understand- 
ing had  beforehand,  as  soon  as  the  Legislature  met 
it  elected  Gov.  Oglesby  to  the  United  States  Senate, 
whereupon  Mr.  Beveridge  became  Governor.  Sena- 
tor Oglesby 's  term  expired  March  4,  1S79,  having 
served  his  party  faithfully  and  exhibited  an  order  of 
statesmanship  beyond  criticism. 

During  the  campaign  of  1884  Mr.  Oglesby  was 
nominated  for  a  "third  term"  as  Executive  of  the 
State  of  Illinois,  against  Carter  H.  Harrison,  Mayor 
of  Chicago,  nominated  by  the  Democrats.  Both 
gentlemen  "stumped  "  the  State,  and  while  the  peo- 
ple elected  a  Legislature  which  was  a  tie  on  a  joiiv; 
ballot,  as  between  the  two  parties,  they  gave  tlie 
jovial  "  Dick"  Oglesby  a  majority  of  15,018  for  Gov- 
ernor, and  he  was  inaugurated  Jan.  30,  1S85.  The 
Legislature  did  not  fully  organize  until  this  date,  on 
account  of  its  equal  division  between  the  two  main 
parties  and  the  consequent  desperate  tactics  of  eacl: 
party  to  checkmate  the  latter  in  the  organization  of 
the  House. 

Gov.  Oglesby  is  a  fine-appearing,  affable  man,  with 
regular,  well  defined  features  and  rotund  face.  In 
stature  he  is  a  little  above  medium  height,  of  a  large 
frame  and  somewhat  fleshy.  His  physical  appear- 
ance is  striking  and  prepossessing,  while  his  straight- 
out,  not  to  say  bluff,  manner  and  speech  are  wel. 
calcuL^Ued  favorably  to  impress  the  average  masses. 
Ardent  in  feeling  and  strongly  committed  to  the  pol- 
icies of  his  party,  he  intensifies  Republicanisn: 
among  Republicans,  while  at  the  same  time  his  jovia. 
and  liberal  manner  prevents  those  of  the  opposite 
party  from  hating  him. 

He  is  quite  an  effective  stump  orator.  With  vehe- 
ment, passionate  and  scornful  tone  and  gesture'., 
tremendous  physical  power,  which  in  speak'ng  ho 
exercises  to  the  utmost ;  with  frequent  descents  to 
the  grotesque;  and  with  abundant  homely  compari- 
sons or  frontier  figures,  expressed  in  the  broadest 
vernacular  and  enforced  with  stentorian  e::ii;hasis, 
he  delights  a  promiscuous  audience  beyond  measure 


cm^k  (Pa 


&_£-''^u^ 


GO  VER  IVORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


10/ 


./ 0 HS  M.  Fal mer 


■'.;  l'.^'^^'l'»;"l'.;  i'd'.v  i'h^ji'^;^'  ;  i' :  i' /:^i 


^..'^^..'l':^.'^a^'^a»'^^l^^^tggi^^'^,.' 


:=:s;SN: 


■f^s 


9^ 


>'^. 


-f)HN  Mc  AULEY  PALMER,  Gov- 
[%*■    eriior     1869-72,    was     born    on 
','j  E:igle    Creek,    Scott    Co.,    Ky  , 

t"  \t^\'  Sept.   13,   1817.     During   his  in- 

"W.""^  •  »l%d!l  r-  fancy,  his  father,  who  had  been 
a  soldier  in  the  wur  of  1812,  re- 
moved to  Christian  Co.,  Ky., 
wliere  lands  were  cheap.  Here 
the  future  Governor  of  the  great 
'Jm^  Prairie  State  spent  his  childliood 

and  received  such  meager  school 
ing  as  the  new  and  sparsely  set- 
tled country  afforded.  To  this 
he  added  materially  by  diligent 
reading,  for  which  he  evinced  an 
eaily  aptitude.  His  father,  an  ardent  Jackson  man, 
was  also  noted  for  his  anti-slavery  sentiments,  which 
he  thoroughly  impressed  upon  his  children.  In  1831 
he  emigrated  to  Illinois,  settling  in  Madison  Comity. 
Hltc  the  labor  of  improving  a  farm  was  pursued  for 
abiiut  two  years,  when  the  death  of  Mr.  Palmer's 
nioiher  broke  up  the  family.  About  this  time  Alton 
College  was  opened,  on  the  "manual  labor  "  system, 
and  in  the  spring  of  1834  young  Palmer,  with  his 
elder  lirother,  Elilui,  entered  this  school  and  remained 
18  months.  Next,  for  over  three  years,  he  tried 
variously  coopering,  peddling  and  school-teaching. 

Duiing    the    summer  of    1838  he  formed  the  ac- 
quain?;ince  of  Siei^ilien  A    Douglas,  then  making  his 


first  canvass  for  Congress.  Young,  eloquent  and  in 
political  accord  with  Mr.  Palmer,  he  won  his  confi- 
dence, Sred  his  ambition  and  fixed  his  purpose.  The 
following  winter,  while  teaching  near  Canton,  he  be- 
gan to  devote  his  spare  time  to  a  desultory  reading 
of  la.v,  and  in  the  spring  entered  a  law  office  at  Car- 
liiiville,  making  his  home  with  his  elder  brother, 
Elihu.  (The  latter  was  a  learned  clergyman,  of  con- 
siderable orginaliiy  of  thought  and  doctrine.)  On 
the  next  meeting  of  the  Supreme  Court  he  was  ad- 
mitted to  the  Bar,  Douglas  being  one  of  his  examiners. 
He  was  not  immediately  successful  in  his  profession, 
and  would  have  located  elsewhere  than  Carlinville 
had  he  the  requisite  means.  Thus  his  early  poverty 
was  a  blessing  in  disguise,  for  to  it  he  now  attributes 
the  success  of  his  life. 

From  1839  on,  while  he  diligently  pursued  his 
profession,  he  participated  more  or  less  in  local 
politics.  In  1843  he  became  Probate  Judge.  Ir 
1847  he  was  elected  to  the  State  Constitutional  Con 
vention,  where  he  took  a  leading  part.  In  1852  ht, 
was  elected  to  the  State  Senate,  and  at  the  special 
session  of  February,  1854,  true  to  the  anti-slaverj 
sentiments  bred  in  him,  he  took  a  firm  stand  in  op 
position  to  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  Compromise, 
and  when  the  Nebraska  question  became  a  part; 
issue  he  refused  to  receive  a  re-nomination  for  tin 
Senatorship  at  the  hands  of  the  Democracy,  issuinj, 
a  circular  to  that  efTect,     A    few   weeks   afterward 


i68 


JOHN  MC  AULEY  PALMER. 


however,  hesitating  to  break  with  his  party,  he  par- 
ticipated in  a  Congressional  Convention  which  nouii- 
T.  L.  Harris  against  Richard  Yates,  and  which 
unqualifiedly  approved  the  principles  of  the  Kansas- 
Nebraska  act.  But  later  in  the  campaign  he  made 
the  plunge,  ran  for  the  Senate  as  an  Anti-Nebraska 
Democrat,  and  was  elected.  The  following  winter 
ne  put  in  nomination  for  the  United  States  Senate 
Mr.  Trumbull,  and  was  one  of  the  five  steadfast  men 
who  voted  for  him  until  all  the  Whigs  came  to  their 
support  and  elected  their  man. 

In  1856  he  was  Chairman  of  the  Republican  State 
Convention  at  Bloomington.  He  ran  for  Congress  in 
1859,  but  was  defeated.  In  i860  he  was  Republican 
Presidential  Elector  for  the  State  at  large.  In  1861 
ne  was  appointed  one  of  the  five  Delegates  (all  Re- 
publicans) sent  by  Illinois  to  the  peace  congress  at 
'•Vashington. 

When  the  civil  conflict  broke  out,  he  offered  his 
services  to  his  country,  and  was  elected  Colonel  of  the 
•4th  111.  Vol.  Inf,  and  participated  in  the  engagements 
at  Island  No.  10  ;  at  Farmington,  where  he  skillfully 
extricated  his  command  from  a  dangerous  position  ; 
at  Stone  River,  where  his  division  for  several  hours, 
Dec.  31,  1862,  held  the  advance  and  stood  like  a 
rock,  and  for  his  gallantry  there  he  was  made  M;ijor 
General;  at  Chickamauga,  where  his  and  Van  Cleve's 
divisions  for  two  hours  maintained  their  position 
when  they  were  cut  off  by  overpowering  numbers 
Under  Gen.  Sherman,  he  was  assigned  to  the  i4lh 
Army  Corps  and  participat:d  in  the  .Atlanta  campaign. 
At  Peach-Tree  Creek  his  prudence  did  much  to  avert 
disaster.  In  February,  1865,  Gen.  Palmer  was  as- 
signed to  the  military  administration  of  Kentucky, 
which  was  a  delicate  post.  That  State  was  about 
half  rebel  and  half  Union,  and  those  of  tlio  latter 
element  were  daily  fretted  by  the  loss  of  their  slaves. 
He,  who  had  been  bred  to  the  rules  of  common  law, 
trembled  at  the  contemplation  of  his  extraordinary 
power  ovjr  the  persons  and  property  of  his  fellow 
men,  with  which  he  was  vested  in  his  capacity  as 
military  Governor;  and  he  exhibited  great  caution  in 
the  execution  of  the  duties  of  his  post. 

Gen.  Palmer  was  nominated  for  Governor  of  Illi- 
nois Ijy  the  Republican  State  Convention  which  met 
at  Peori  I  May  6,  1868,  and  his  nomination  would 
probably  liave  been  made  by  acclamation  had  he  not 
persistently  declared  that  he  could  not  accept  a  can- 


didature for  the  office.  The  result  of  the  ensuing 
election  gave  Mr.  Palmer  a  m.ijjrity  of  44,707  over 
John  R.  Eden,  the  Dvjmocratic  nominee. 

Oi  the  meeting  of  the  Legislature  in  January, 
1869,  the  first  thing  to  arrest  public  attention  was 
that  portion  of  tlie  Governor's  message  which  took 
broad  Slate's  rights  ground.  This  and  some  minor 
pjints,  which  were  more  in  keeping  with  the  Demo- 
cratic sentiment,  constituted  the  entering  wedge  f)r 
the  criticisms  and  reproofs  he  afterward  received 
f  10  n  the  Republican  party,  and  ultimuely  resulted 
in  his  entire  aleniaMon  from  the  litter  element.  The 
Legislature  just  referred  to  was  r.oted  for  the  intro- 
duction of  numerous  bills  in  the  interest  of  private 
parties,  whicli  were  embarrassing  to  the  Governor. 
Among  the  public  acts  passed  was  that  which  limited 
railroad  charges  for  passenger  travel  to  a  maximum 
of  three  cents  per  mile;  aid  it  was  passed  over  the 
Governor's  veto.  Also,  they  passed,  over  his  veto, 
the  "tax-grabbing  law"  to  pay  r^.ilroed  subscriptions, 
the  Chicago  Lake  Front  bill,  etc.  The  sew  State 
Constitution  of  [870,  far  superior  to  the  old,  was  a 
peaceful  "  revolution"  which  took  place  during  Gov. 
Palmer's  term  of  office.  The  suffering  caused  by  the 
great  Chicago  Fire  of  October,  1871,  was  greatly 
alleviated  by  the  prompt  responses  of  his  excellency. 

Since  the  expiration  of  Gov.  Palmers 's  term,  he  has 
been  somewhat  prominent  in  Illinois  politics,  and 
h.is  been  talked  of  by  many,  especially  in  the  Dem- 
ocratic party,  as  the  best  man  in  the  State  for  a 
United  States  Senator.  His  business  during  life  has 
been  that  of  tlie  law.  Few  excel  him  in  an  accurate 
appreciation  of  the  depth  and  scope  of  its  principles- 
The  great  number  of  his  able  veto  messages  abun- 
dantly testify  not  only  this  but  also  a  rare  capacity  to 
|)oint  them  out.  He  is  a  logical  and  cogent  reasoner 
arid  an  interesting,  forcible  and  convincing  speaker, 
though  not  fluent  or  ornate.  Without  brilliancy,  his 
dealings  are  rather  with  facts  and  ideas  than  with 
appeals  to  passions  and  prejudices.  He  is  a  patriot 
and  a  statesman  of  very  high  order.  Physically  lie  is 
above  the  medium  height,  of  robust  frame,  ruddy 
complexion  and  sanguine-nervous  temperament  He 
has  a  large  cranial  development,  is  vivacious,  social 
in  disposition,  easy  of  approach,  unostentatious  in  his 
habits  of  life,  democratic  in  liis  habits  and  manners 
and  is  a  true  American  in  liis  fundamental  princi[)le' 
of  statesmansliii . 


Jlr^^^X^^  /Ju^v^^^oUc^ 


Gi,'VER.yORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


17' 


X^A  f ®l\«|.    %.    jPf f^f fltlgf 


.a'  •a'iSi'^'^^'^'a? 


OHN  LOWRiE  BEVER- 
IDGE,  Governor  187 3-6,  was 
born  in  the  town  of  Green- 
wich, Washington  Co.,  N.  Y., 
July  6,  1824.  His  parents 
were  George  and  Ann  Bever- 
•',)  idge.  His  father's  parents,  An- 
drew and  Isabel  Beveridge,  be- 
fore their  marriage  emigrated 
from  Scotland  just  before  the 
Revolutionary  War,  settling  in 
Washington  County.  His  father 
-  '  >|  was  the  eldest  of  eight  brothers,  the 
^  _^j  voungest  of  whom  was  60  years  of 
age  when  the  first  one  of  the  num- 
ber died.  His  mother's  parents, 
James  and  Agnes  Hoy,  emigrated 
from  Scodand  at  the  close  of  the 
Revolutionary  War,  settling  also  in 
;itl  Washington  Co.,  N.  Y.,  with  their 
first-born,  whose  "  native  land  "was 
the  wild  ocean.  His  parents  and 
grandparents  lived  beyond  the  time 
allotted  to  man,  their  average  age 
being  over  80  years.  They  belonged  to  the  "  .Asso- 
ciate  Church,"   a   seceding   Presbyterian    body     of 


.\merica  from  the  old  Scotch  school ;  and  so  rigid 
was  the  training  of  young  Beveridge  that  he  neve: 
heard  a  sermon  from  any  other  minister  except  that 
of  his  own  denomination  until  he  was  in  his  19th 
year.  Later  in  life  he  became  a  member  of  the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  which  relation  he  still 
holds. 

Mr.  Beveridge  received  a  good  common-school  ed- 
ucation, but  liis  parents,  who  could  obtain  a  livelihood 
only  by  rigid  economy  and  industry,  could  not  send 
him  away  to  college.  He  was  raised  ujxsn  a  farm, 
and  was  in  his  i8th  year  when  the  family  removed 
to  De  Kalb  County,  this  State,  when  that  section  was 
very  sparsely  settled.  Chicago  had  less  than  7,000 
inhabitants.  In  this  wild  West  he  continued  as  a 
farm  laborer,  teaching  school  during  the  winter 
months  to  supply  the  means  of  an  education.  In  the 
fall  of  1842  he  attended  one  term  at  the  academy  at 
Granville,  Putnam  Co.,  111.,  and  subsequently  several 
terms  at  the  Rock  River  Seminary  at  Mount  Morris, 
Ogle  Co.,  III.,  completing  the  academic  course.  At 
this  time,  the  fall  of  1845,  his  parents  and  brothers 
were  anxious  to  have  him  go  to  college,  even  though 
he  had  not  money  sufficient;  but,  n  .t  willing  to  bur- 
den the  family,  he  packed  his  trunk  and  with  only 
$40   in  money   sUrted   South    to  seek    his  fortune 


IT?. 


JOHAf  L.  Bh  VE RIDGE. 


Poor,  alone,  without  friends  and  influence,  he  thus 
entered  upon  the  battle  of  life. 

First,  he  taught  school  in  Wilson,  Overton  and 
Jackson  Cos.,  Tenn.,  in  which  experience  he  under- 
went considerable  mental  drill,  both  in  book  studies 
and  in  the  ways  of  the  world.  He  read  law  and  was 
admitted  to  the  Bar,  in  the  South,  but  did  not  learn 
to  love  the  institution  of  slavery,  although  he  ad- 
mired many  features  of  Southern  character.  In  De- 
cember, 1847,  he  returned  North,  and  Jan.  20,  1848, 
he  married  Miss  Helen  M.  Judson,  in  the  old  Clark- 
Street  M.  E.  church  in  Chicago,  her  father  at  that 
time  being  Pastor  of  the  society  there.  In  the  spring 
of  1848  he  returned  with  his  wife  to  Tennessee, 
where  his  two  children.  Alia  May  and  Philo  Judson, 
were  born. 

in  the  fall  of  1849,  through  the  mismanagement 
of  an  associate,  he  lost  what  little  he  had  accumu- 
lated and  was  left  in  debt.  He  soon  managed  to 
earn  means  to  pay  his  debts,  returned  to  De  Kalb 
Co.,  111.,  and  entered  upon  the  practice  of  his  pro- 
fession at  Sycamore,  the  county  seat.  On  arrival 
from  the  South  he  had  but  one-quarter  of  a  dollar  in 
money,  and  scanty  clothing  and  bedding  for  himself 
and  family.  He  borrowed  a  little  money,  pnicticed 
^aw,  worked  ill  public  offices,  kept  books  for  some  of 
the  business  men  of  the  town,  and  soine  railroad  en- 
gineering, till  the  spring  of  1854,  when  he  removed 
to  Evanston,  12  miles  north  of  Chicago,  a  place  then 
but  recently  laid  out,  under  the  supervision  of  the 
Northwestern  University,  a  Methodist  institution. 
Of  the  latter  his  father-in-law  was  then  financial 
agent  and  business  manager.  Here  Mr.  Beveridge 
prospered,  and  the  next  year  (1855)  opened  a  law 
office  in  Chicago,  where  he  found  the  battle  some- 
what hard;  but  he  persevered  with  encouragement 
and  increasing  success. 

Aug.  12,  1861,  his  law  partner.  Gen.  John  F. 
Farnsworth,  secured  authority  to  raise  a  regiment  of 
cavalry,  and  authorized  Mr.  Beveridge  to  raise  a 
company  forit.  He  succeeded  in  a  few  days  in  rais- 
ing the  company,  of  course  enlisting  himself  along 
with  it.  The  regiment  rendezvoused  at  St.  Charles, 
m.,  was  mustered  in  Sept.  18,  and  on  its  organiza- 
tion Mr.  B.  was  elected  Second  Major.  It  was  at- 
tached, Oct.  II,  to  the  Eighth  Cav.ilry  and  to  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  served  with  the  regiment 
until  November,  1863,  participating  in  some  40  bat- 


tles and  skirmishes  :  was  a\  Fair  Oaks,  llie  seven  days 
fight  around  Riclimond,  Fredericksburg,  Chancellors- 
ville  and  Gettysburg.  He  commanded  tlie  regiment 
the  greater  part  of  the  summer  of  1863,  and  it  was  while 
lying  in  camp  this  year  that  he  originated  the  policy 
of  encouraging  recruits  as  well  as  the  fighting  capac- 
ity of  the  soldiery,  by  the  wholesale  furlough  system 
It  worked  so  well  that  many  other  officers  adopted 
it.  In  the  fall  of  this  year  he  recruited  anothercom- 
pany,  against  heavy  odds,  in  January,  1864,  was 
commissioned  Colonel  of  the  17th  111.  Cav.,  and 
skirmished  around  in  Missouri,  concluding  with  the 
reception  of  the  surrender  of  Gen.  Kirby  Smith's 
army  in  Arkansas.  In  1865  he  commanded  various 
sub-districts  in  the  Southwest.  He  was  mustered 
out  Feb.  6,  1866,  s:ife  from  the  casualties  of  war  and 
a  stouter  man  than  when  he  first  enlisted.  His  men 
idolized  him. 

He  then  returned  to  Chicago,  to  practice  law,  with 
no  library  and  no  clienla-e,  and  no  political  experi- 
ence except  to  help  others  iito  office.  In  the  fall  of 
1866  he  was  elected  Sheriff  of  Cook  County,  serving 
one  term;  next,  until  November,  1870,  he  practiced 
law  and  closed  up  the  unfinishtd  business  of  his 
office.  He  was  then  elected  State  Senator;  in  No- 
vember, 187  I,  he  was  elected  Congressman  at  large; 
in  November,  1872,  he  was  elected  Lieutenant  Gov- 
ernor on  the  ticket  with  Gov.  Oglesby  ;  the  latter  be- 
ing elected  to  the  U.  S.  Senate,  Mr.  Beveridge  became. 
Governor,  Jan.  21,  1873  Thus,  inside  of  a  few 
weeks,  he  was  Congressma  1  at  large.  Lieutenant 
Governor  and  Governor.  The  principal  events  oc- 
curring during  Gov.  Beveridge 's  administration  were: 
The  completion  of  the  revision  of  tlie  statutes,  begun 
in  1869;  the  partial  success  of  t'v;  "  farmers'  move- 
ment;" "  Haines'  Legislature  "  a  id  IlUiiois'  exhibit  at 
the  Centennial. 

Since  the  close  of  his  gubernatorial  term  ex-Gov 
Beveridge  has  been  a  member  of  tlie  firm  of  Bever- 
idge &  Dewey,  bankers  and  dealers  in  commercial 
paper  at  71  Dearborn  Street  (McCormick  Block), 
Chicago,  and  since  November,  iSSi,  he  has  also  been 
-Assistant  United  States  Treasurer-  office  in  the 
Government  Building.  His  residence  is  still  at  Ev- 
anston. 

He  has  a  brother  and  two  sisters  yet  residing  in 
De  KaU)  County — James  H.  Beveridge,  Mrs.  Jennet 
Henry  and  Mrs   Isabel  French. 


GO  VERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


'71 


Shelby  M.  €ii.]a)m. 


HELBV  M.  CULLOM,  Gover- 
nor 1877-83,  ib  the  sixLh  child 
of  the  late  Richard  N.  Cullom, 
and  was  born  Nov.  22,  1829,111 
Wayne  Co.,  Ky.,  wliere  his  fa- 
ther then  resided,  and  whence 
both  the  Ilhnois  and  Tennessee 
branches  of  the  family  originated.  In 
the  following  year  the  family  emi- 
grated to  the  vicinity  of  Washington, 
Tazewell  Co.,  111.,  when  that  section 
was  very  sparsely  settled.  They  lo- 
cated on  Deer  Creek,  in  a  grove  at 
the  time  occupied  by  a  party  of  In- 
dians, attracted  there  by  the  superior 
hunting  and  fishing  afforded  in  that 
vicinity.  The  following  winter  was 
known  as  the  "  hard  winter,"  the  snow  being  very 
deep  and  lasting  and  the  weather  severely  cold;  and 
the  family  had  to  subsist  mainly  on  boiled  corn  or 
hominy,  and  some  wild  game,  for  several  weeks.  In 
the  course  of  time  Mr.  R.  N.  Cullom  became  a  prom- 
inent citizen  and  was  several  times  elected  to  the 
Legislature,  both  before  and  after  the  removal  of  the 
caviital  from  Vandalia  to  Springfield.  He  died  about 
'873- 

Until  about  19  years  of  age  young  Cullom  grew  up 

tc  agricultural  pursuits,  attending  school  as  he  had 

'DDortunity  during   the    winter.     Within    this    time, 

ov/ever,  lie  spent   several   months  teaching  ^rhool. 


and  m  the  following  summer  he  "broke  prairie  "with 
an  ox  team  for  the  neighbors.  With  the  money  ob- 
tained by  these  various  ventures,  he  undertook  a 
course  of  study  at  the  Rock  River  Seminary,  a 
Methodist  institution  at  Mt.  Morris,  Ogle  County: 
but  the  sudden  change  to  the  in-door  life  of  a  stu- 
dent told  severely  upon  his  health,  and  he  was  taken 
home,  being  considered  in  a  hopeless  condition.  While 
at  Mt.  Morris  lie  heard  Hon.  E.  B.  V/ashburne  make 
his  first  speech. 

On  recovering  health,  Mr.  Cullom  concluded  to 
study  law,  under  the  instruction  of  Abraham  Lincoln, 
at  Springfield,  who  had  by  this  time  attained  some 
notoriety  as  an  able  lawyer;  but  the  latter,  being  ab- 
sent from  his  office  most  of  the  time,  advised  Mr. 
Cullom  to  enter  the  office  of  Stuart  &  Edwards. 
After  about  a  year  of  study  there,  however,  his  healtb 
failed  again,  and  he  was  obliged  to  return  once  more 
to  out-door  life.  Accordingly  he  bought  hogs  for 
packing,  for  A.  G.  Tyng,  in  Peoria,  and  while  he  re- 
gained his  health  he  gained  in  purse,  netting  $400  in 
a  few  weeks.  Having  been  admitted  to  the  B.ir,  he 
went  to  Springfield,  where  he  was  soon  elected  City 
Attorney,  on  the  .\nti-Nebraska  ticket. 

In  1856  he  ran  on  the  Fillmore  ticket  as  a  Presi- 
dential Elector,  and,  although  failing  to  be  elected  as 
such,  he  was  at  the  same  time  elected  a  Representa- 
tive in  the  Legislature  from  Sangamon  County,  by  a 
local  coalition  of  the  American  and  Republican  par- 
ties. On  the  organization  of  the  House,  he  received 
the  vote  of  the  Fillmore  men  for  Speaker.    Practictr^ 


176 


SHELB  Y  M.    CULLOM. 


law  uiiiil  iS6o,  he  was  again  elected  to  the  Legisla- 
ture, as  a  Republican,  while  the  county  went  J)emo- 
tr.itic  on  the  Presidential  ticket.  In  January  foUow- 
inji  he  was  elected  Speaker,  probably  th^  youngest 
man  who  had  ever  presided  over  an  Illinois  Legis- 
lature. After  the  session  of  1861,  he  was  a  candidate 
for  the  State  Constitutional  Convention  called  for 
that  year,  but  was  defeated,  and  thus  escaped  the 
disgiace  of  being  connected  with  that  abortive  party 
scheme  to  revolutionize  the  State  Government.  In 
1862  he  was  a  candidate  for  the  State  Senate,  but 
was  defeated.  The  same  year,  however,  he  was  ap- 
pointed by  President  Lincoln  on  a  Government 
Commission,  in  company  with  Gov.  Boutwell  of 
Massachusetts  and  Cnarles  A.  Dana,  since  of  the 
Ntw  York  Sun,  to  investigate  the  affairs  of  the 
Quartermaster's  and  Commissary  Departments  at 
Cairo.     He  devoted  several  months  to  this  duty. 

In  1864  he  entered  upon  a  larger  political  field, 
being  nominated  as  the  Republican  candidate  for 
Congress  from  the  Eighth  (Springfield)  District,  in 
opposition  to  the  incumbent,  JohnT.  Stuart,  who  had 
been  elected  in  1862  by  about  1,500  majority  over 
Leonard  Swett,  then  of  Bloomington,  now  of  Chicago. 
The  result  was  the  election  of  Mr.  Cullom  in  Novem- 
ber following  by  a  majority  of  1,785.  In  1866  he 
was  re-elected  to  Congress,  over  Dr.  E.  S.  Fowler,  by 
the  magnificent  majority  of  4,103!  In  1868  he  was 
again  a  candidate,  defeating  the  Hon.  B.  S.  Edwards, 
anr)tlier  of  his  old  preceptors,  by  2,884  votes. 

During  his  first  term  in  Congress  he  served  on  the 
Committee  on  Foreign  Affairs  and  Expenditures  in 
the  Treasury  Department;  in  his  second  term,  on 
the  Committees  on  Foreign  Affairs  and  on  Territories ; 
and  in  his  third  term  he  succeeded  Mr.  Ashley,  of 
Oliio,  to  the  Chairmanship  of  the  latter.  He  intro- 
duced a  bill  in  the  House,  to  aid  in  the  execution  of 
law  ill  Utah,  which  caused  more  consternation  among 
the  Mormons  than  any  measure  had  previously,  but 
'.vhicli,  though  it  passed  the  House,  failed  to  pass  the 
Senate. 

The  Republican  Convention  which  met  May  25, 
1876,  nominated  Mr.  Cullom  for  Governor,  while  the 
other  contestant  was  Gov.  Beveridge.  For  Lieuten- 
ant-Governor they  nominated  Andrew  Shuman,  editor 
of  the  Chicago  Journal.  For  the  same  offices  the 
Democrats,  combining  with  the  Anti-Monopolists, 
Dlaced    in    nomination    Lewis   Steward,    a  wealthy 


farmer  and  manufacturer,  and  A.  A.  Glenn.  The 
result  of  the  election  was  rather  close,  Mr.  Cullom 
obtaining  only  6,800  majority.  He  was  inaugurated 
Jan.  8,  1877. 

Great  depression  prevailed  in  financial  circles  at 
this  time,  as  a  consequence  of  the  heavy  failures  of 
1873  and  afterward,  the  effect  of  wliich  had  seemed 
to  gather  force  from  that  time  to  the  end  of  Gov. 
CuUom's  first  administration.  This  unspeculative 
period  was  not  calculated  to  call  forth  any  new 
issues,  but  the  Governors  energies  were  at  one  time 
put  to  task  to  quell  a  spirit  of  insubordination  that 
had  been  begun  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  among  the  laboring 
classes,  and  transferred  to  Illinois  at  Chicago,  East 
St.  Louis  and  Braidwood,  at  which  places  laboring 
men  for  a  short  tune  refused  to  work  or  allow  others 
to  work.  These  disturbances  were  soon  quelled  and 
the  wheels  of  industry  again  set  in  motion. 

In  May,  1880,  Gov.  Cullom  was  re-nominated  by 
the  Republicans,  against  Lyman  Trumbull,  by  tlie 
Democrats;  and  although  theformer  party  was  some- 
what handicapped  in  the  campaign  by  a  zealous 
faction  opposed  to  Grant  for  President  and  to  Grant 
men  for  office  generally,  Mr.  Cullom  was  re-elected 
by  about  314,565,  to  277,532  forthe  Democratic  State 
ticket.  The  Greenback  vote  at  the  same  tmie  was 
about  27,000.  Both  Houses  of  the  Legislature  again 
became  Republican,  and  no  representative  of  the 
(jreenback  or  Socialist  parties  were  elected.  Gov. 
Cullom  was  inaugurated  Jan.  10,  iS8t.  In  his  mes- 
sage he  announced  that  the  last  dollar  of  the  State 
debt  had  been  provided  for. 

March  4,  1883,  the  term  of  David  Davis  as  United 
States  Senator  from  Illinois  expired,  and  Gov.  Cul- 
lo  n  was  cliosen  to  succeed  him.  This  promoted 
Lieutenant-Governor  John  M.  Hamilton  to  the  Gov- 
ernorship. Senator  CuUom's  term  in  tlie  United 
St.-ttes  Senate  will  expire  March  4,  1889. 

As  a  practitioner  oflaw  Mr.  C.  has  been  a  member 
of  the  firm  of  Cullom,  Scholes  &  Mather,  at  Spring- 
field; and  he  has  also  been  President  of  the  State 
National  Bank. 

He  has  been  married  twice, — the  first  time  Dec. 
1 1!,  1855,  to  Miss  Hannah  Fisher,  by  whom  he  had 
t\*o  daughters;  and  the  second  time  May  5,  1863, 
to  Julia  Fisher.  Mrs.  C  is  p.  member  of  the  Method - 
isl  Episcopal  Church,  with  which  religious  body  Mi. 
C.  is  also  in  sympathy. 


GO  VERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


179 


•i<*:t&*?"'?-#^ 


i^T$*5";^^srir<=»*;"$4'$;:S^ss^-S;s-#$"g-<s^:!S«^;;:$«^;g<& 


-":. — S'JisHJi^'^ 


OHN  MARSHALL  HAMIL- 
TON, Governor  1883-5,  ^^^ 
born  May  28,  1847,  in  a  log 
house  upon  a  farm  about  two 
miles  from  Richwood,  Union 
County,  Ohio.  His  father  was 
Samuel  Hamilton,  the  eldest  son 
of  Rev.  Wni.  Hamilton,  who,  to- 
gether with  his  brother,  the  Rev. 
Samuel  Hamilton,  was  among  the 
early  pioneer  Methodist  preachers  in 
Ohio.  The  mother  of  the  subject  of 
this  sketch  was,  before  her  marriage, 
Mrs.  Nancy  McMorris,  who  was 
born  and  raised  in  Fauquier  or  Lou- 
doun County,  Va.,  and  related  to  the 
two  large  families  of  Youngs  and  Marshalls,  well 
known  in  that  commonwealth;  and  from  the  latter 
family  name  was  derived  the  middle  name  of  Gov. 
Hamilton. 

In  March,  1854,  Mr.  Hamilton's  tether  sold  out 
his  little  pioneer  forest  home  in  Union  County,  O., 
and,  loading  his  few  household  effects  and  family 
(of  six  children)  into  two  emigrant  covered  wagons, 
moved  to  Roliens  Township.  Marshall  Co.,  111.,  being 
21  days  on  the  route.  Swamps,  unbridged  streams 
and  innumerable  hardships  and  privations  met  them 
on  their  way.  Their  new  home  had  been  previously 
selected  by  the  faiher.  Here,  after  many  long  years 
oftoil,  tliey  succeeded  in  paying  for  the  land  and 
.nakir.g  a  comfort''''-^  home.     John  was,  of  course, 


brought  up  to  hard  manual  labor,  with  no  schooling 
except  three  or  four  months  in  the  year  at  a  common 
country  school.  However,  he  evinced  a  capacity 
and  taste  for  a  high  order  of  self-education,  by 
studying  or  reading  what  books  be  could  borrow,  as 
the  family  had  but  very  few  in  the  house.  Much  of 
his  study  he  prosecuted  by  the  light  of  a  log  fire  in 
the  old-fashioned  chimney  place.  The  financial 
panic  of  1857  caused  the  family  to  come  near  losing 
their  liome,  to  pay  debts ;  but  the  father  and  two 
sons,  William  and  John,  "buckled  to"  and  perse- 
vered in  hard  labor  and  economy  until  they  redeemed 
their  place  from  the  mortgage. 

When  the  tremendous  excitement  of  the  political 
campaign  of  i860  reached  the  neighborhood  of  Rob- 
erts Township,  young  Hamilton,  who  had  been 
brought  up  in  the  doctrine  of  anti-slavery,  took  a  zeal- 
ous part  in  favor  of  Lincoln's  election.  Making  special 
efforts  to  procure  a  little  money  to  buy  a  uniform,  he 
joined  a  company  of  Lincoln  Wide-Awakes  at  Mag- 
nolia, a  village  not  far  away.  Directly  after  the 
ensuing  election  it  became  evident  that  trouble 
would  ensue  with  the  South,  and  this  Wide-Awake 
company,  like  many  others  throughout  the  country, 
kept  up  its  organization  and  transformed  itself  into  a 
military  company.  During  the  ensuing  summer  they 
met  often  for  drill  and  became  proficient;  but  when 
they  offered  themselves  for  the  v.-ar,  young  Hamilton 
was  rejected  on  account  of  his  youth,  he  being  then 
but  14  years  of  age.  During  the  winter  of  1863-4  he 
attended  an  academy  at   Henry,   Marshall  County, 


i8o 


JOHN  MARSHALL  HAMILTON. 


and  in  the  following  May  he  again  enlisted,  for  the 
fourth  time,  when  he  was  placed  in  the  141st  111. 
Vol.  Inf.,  a  regiment  then  being  raised  at  Elgin,  111., 
for  the  100-day  service.  He  took  with  him  13  other 
lads  from  his  neighborhood,  for  enlistment  in  the 
service.  This  regiment  operated  in  Southwestern 
Kentucky,  for  about  five  months,  under  Gen.  Paine. 

The  following  winter,  1864-5,  Mr.  Hamilton  taught 
school,  and  during  the  two  college  years  1865-7,  he 
went  through  three  years  of  the  curriculum  of  the 
Ohio  Wesleyan  University  at  Delaware,  Ohio.  The 
third  year  he  graduated,  the  fourth  in  a  class  of  46, 
in  the  classical  deparutient.  In  due  time  he  received 
the  degree  of  M.  A.  For  a  few  months  he  was  the 
Principal  of  Marshall  "  College  '"  at  Henry,  an  acad- 
emy under  the  auspices  of  the  M.  E.  Church.  By 
this  lime  he  had  commenced  the  study  of  law,  and 
after  earning  some  money  as  a  temporary  Professor 
of  Latin  at  the  Illinois  VVesleyaa  University  at 
Bloomington,  he  entered  the  law  office  of  Weldon, 
Tipton  &  Benjamin,  of  that  city.  Each  member  of 
this  firm  has  since  been  distinguished  as  a  Judge. 
Admitted  to  the  Bar  in  May,  1870,  Mr.  Hamilton 
was  given  an  interest  in  the  same  firm,  Tipton  hav- 
ing been  elected  Judge.  In  October  following  he 
formed  a  partnership  with  J.  H.  Rowell,  at  that  time 
Prosecuting  Attorney.  Their  business  was  then 
small,  but  they  increased  it  to  very  large  proportions, 
practicing  in  all  grades  of  courts,  including  even  the 
U.  S.  Supreme  Court,  and  this  partnership  continued 
atnbroken  until  Feb.  6,  1883,  when  Mr.  Hamilton 
was  sworn  in  as  Executive  of  Illinois.  On  the  4tl) 
•f  March  following  Mr.  Rowell  took  his  seat  in  Con- 
gress. 

In  July,  187  I,  Mr.  Hamilton  married  Miss  Helen 
M.  Williams,  the  dau_L;hter  of  Prof.  VVm.  G,  Williams, 
Professor  of  Greek  in  the  Ohio  Weileyan  University. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  H.  have  two  daughters  and  one  son. 

In  1876  Mr.  Hamilton  was  nominated  by  the  Re- 
publicans for  the  State  Senate,  over  other  and  older 
competitors.  He  took  an  active  pait  "  on  the  stump  " 
in  the  campaign,  for  the  success  of  his  party,  and  was 
elected  by  a  majority  of  1,640  over  his  Democratic- 
Greenback  opponent.  In  the  Senate  he  served  on 
the  Committees  on  Judiciary,  Revenue,  State  Insti- 
tutions, Appropriations,  Education,  and  on  Miscel- 
lany ;  and  during  the  contest  for  the  election  of  a 
U.  S.  Senator,  the  Republicans  endeavoring  to  re- 


elect John  A.  Logan,  he  voted  for  the  war  chief  on 
every  ballot,  even  alone  when  all  the  other  Republi- 
cans had  gone  over  to  the  Hon.  E.  B.  Lawrence  and 
the  Democrats  and  Independents  elected  Judg? 
David  Davis.  At  this  session,  also,  was  passed  the 
first  Board  of  Health  and  Medical  Practice  act,  of 
which  Mr.  Hamilton  was  a  champion,  against  cs 
much  opposition  that  the  bill  was  several  times 
"  laid  on  the  table."  Also,  this  session  authorized 
the  location  and  establishment  of  a  southern  peni- 
tentiary, which  was  fixed  at  Chester.  In  the  session 
of  1879  Mr.  Hamilton  was  elected  Vx^'ixAtrA pro  tern. 
of  the  Senate,  and  was  a  zealous  supporter  of  John 
A.  Logan  for  the  U.  S.  Senate,  who  was  this  time 
elected  without  any  trouble. 

In  May,  1880,  Mr.  Hamilton  was  nominated  on 
the  Republican  ticket  for  Lieutenant  Governor,  his 
principal  competitors  before  the  Convention  being 
Hon.  Wm.  A.  James,  ex-Speaker  of  the  House  of 
Representatives,  Judge  Robert  Bell,  of  '■"'abash 
County,  Hon.  T.  T.  Fountain,  of  Perry  County,  and 
Hon.  M.  M.  Saddler,  of  Marion  County.  He  engaged 
actively  in  the  campaign,  and  his  ticket  was  elected 
by  a  majority  of  41,200.  As  Lieutenant  Governor, 
he  presided  almost  continuously  over  the  Senate  in 
the  32d  General  Assembly  and  during  the  early  days 
of  the  33d,  until  he  succeeded  to  the  Governorship. 
When  the  Legislature  of  1883  elected  Gov.  CuUom 
to  the  United  States  Senate,  Lieut.  Gov.  Hamilton 
succeeded  him,  under  the  Constitution,  taking  the 
oath  of  office  Feb.  6,  1883.  He  bravely  met  all  the 
annoyances  and  embarrassments  incidental  upon 
taking  up  another's  administration.  The  principal 
events  with  which  Gov.  Hamilton  was  connected  as 
the  Chief  Executive  of  the  State  were,  the  mine  dis- 
aster at  Braidwood,  the  riots  in  St.  Clair  and  Madison 
Counties  in  May,  1883,  the  appropriations  for  the 
State  militia,  the  adoption  of  the  Harper  high-license 
liquor  law,  the  veto  of  a  dangerous  railroad  bill,  etc. 

The  Governor  was  a  Delegate  at  large  to  the 
National  Republican  Convention  at  Chicago  in  June, 

1884,  where  his  first  choice  for  President  was  John 
A.  Logan,  and  second  choice  Chester  A.  Arthur;  but 
he  afterward  zealously  worked  for  the  election  of  Mr. 
Blaine,  true  to  his  party. 

Mr.  Hamilton's  term  as  Governor  expired  Jan.  30, 

1885,  when  the  great  favorite  "Dick  "  Oglesby  was 
inaugurated. 


GOVERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


183 


•f^v^... 


J^ 


#» 


r;^USEPH  WILSON  FIFER.  This 
distinguished  gentleman  was 
elected  Governor  of  Illinois 
November  6,  1888.  He  was 
[lopulavly  known  during  the 
c-arapaigu  as  "Private  Joe."  He 
had  served  with  great  devotion 
to  his  country  during  the  Re- 
bellion, in  the  Thirty-third 
Illinois  Infantry.  A  native  of 
Virginia,  he  was  born  in  1840. 
His  parents,  John  and  Mary 
(Daniels)  Fifer,  were  American 
born,  though  of  German  de- 
scent. His  father  was  a  brick 
and  stone  mason,  and  an  old 
in  politics.  John  and  Mary 
Fifer  had  nine  children,  of  whom  Joseph  was  the 
sixth,  and  naturally,  with  so  large  a  family,  it  was 
all  the  father  could  do  to  keep  the  wolf  from  the 
door,  to  say  nothing  of  giving  his  children  any- 
thing like  good  educational  advantages. 

Joseph  attended  school  for  a  while  in  Virgina, 
but  it  was  not  a  good  school,  and  when  his  father 
removed  to  the  AVest,  in  1857,  Joseph  had  not  ad- 
vanced much  further  than  the  "First  Reader." 
Our  subject  was  sixteen  then  and  suffered  a  great 
misfortune  in  the  loss  of   his  mother.     After  the 


Henry  Clay  Whig 


death  of  Mrs.  Fifer,  which  occurred  in  Missouri, 
the  family  returned  to  Virgina,  but  remained  only 
a  short  time,  as  during  the  same  year  Mr.  Fifer 
came  to  Illinois.  He  settled  in  McLean  County 
and  started  a  brickyard.  Here  Joseph  and  his 
brothers  were  put  to  work.  The  elder  Mr.  Fifer  soon 
bought  a  farm  near  Bloomington  and  began  life 
as  an  agriculturist.  Here  Joe  worked  and  attended 
the  neighboring  school.  He  alternated  farm-work, 
and  brick-laying,  going  to  the  district  school  for 
the  succeeding  few  years.  It  was  all  work  and  no 
play  for  Joe,  yet  it  by  no  means  made  a  dull  boy 
of  him.  All  the  time  he  was  thinking  of  the  great 
world  outside,  of  which  he  had  caught  a  glimpse 
when  coming  from  Virginia,  yet  he  did  not  know 
just  how  he  was  going  to  get  out  into  it.  He 
could  not  feel  that  the  woods  around  the  new  farm 
and  the  log  cabin,  in  which  the  family  lived,  were 
to  hold  him. 

The  opportunity  to  get  out  into  the  world  was 
soon  offered  to  young  Joe.  He  traveled  a  dozen 
miles  barefoot,  in  company  with  his  brother  George, 
and  enlisted  in  Company  C,  Thirty-third  Illinois 
Infantry,  he  being  then  twenty  years  old.  In  a 
few  days,  the  regiment  was  sent  to  Camp  Butler, 
and  then  over  into  Missouri,  and  saw  some  vigor- 
ous service  there.  After  a  second  time  helping  to 
chase  Price  out  of  Missouri,  the  Thirty-third   Regi- 


184 


JOSEPH  W.  FIFER. 


ment  went  down  to  Milliken  's  Bend,  and  for  several 
weeks  "Private  Joe"  worked  on  Grant's  famous 
ditch.  The  regiment  then  joined  tlie  forces  oper- 
ating against  Port  Gibson  and  Vicksl)urg.  Joe 
was  on  guard  duty  in  the  front  ditclies  when  the 
flag  of  surrender  was  run  up  on  the  4th  of  Jul}-, 
and  stuck  tlie  bayonet  of  his  gun  into  the  embank- 
ment and  went  into  the  city  with  the  vanguard  of 
Union  soldiers. 

The  next  da}',  July  5,  the  Thirty-third  joined 
the  force  after  Johnston,  who  had  been  threatening 
Grant's  rear;  and  finally  an  assault  was  made  on  him 
at  Jackson,  Miss.  In  this  charge  "Private  Joe"  fell, 
terribly  wounded.  "He  was  loading  his  gun,  when 
a  minie-ball  struck  him  and  passed  entirely 
through  his  body.  He  was  regarded  as  mortally 
wounded.  His  brother,  George,  wlio  had  been 
made  a  Lieutenant,  proved  to  be  the  mcaus  of  sav- 
ing his  life.  The  Surgeon  told  him  that  unless  he 
had  ice  his  brother  could  not  live.  It  was  fift}-  miles 
to  the  nearest  point  where  ice  could  be  obtained, 
and  the  roads  were  rough.  A  comrade,  a  McLean 
County  man,  who  had  been  wounded,  offered  to 
make  the  trip.  An  ambxilance  was  secured  and 
the  brother  soldier  started  on  the  journey.  He  re- 
turned with  the  ice,  but  the  trip,  owing  to  the 
roughness  of  the  road,  was  very  hard  on  liim.  Af- 
ter a  few  months'  careful  nursing,  Mr.  Fifer  was  able 
to  come  home.  The  Thirtj'-third  came  home  on  a 
furlough,  and  when  the  boys  were  ready  to  return 
to  the  tented  field,  young  Fifer  was  ready  to  go 
with  them,  for  he  was  determined  to  finish  his 
term  of  three  years.  He  was  mustered  out  in  Oct- 
ober, 1864,  having  been  in  the  service  three  3-ears 
and  two  months. 

"Private  Joe"  came  out  of  the  armj-  a  tall,  tan- 
ned, and  awkward  young  man  of  twenty-four. 
About  all  he  possessed  was  ambition  to  be  some- 
body— and  pluck.  Though  at  an  age  when  most 
men  liave  finished  their  college  course,  the  young 
soldier  saw  that  if  he  was  to  be  anybody  he  must 
have  an  education.  Yet  he  had  no  means  to  ena- 
ble him  to  enter  school  as  most  young  men  do. 
He  was  determined  to  have  an  education,  however, 
and  that  to  him  meant  success.  For  the  following 
four  years  he  struggled  with   his  books.     He   en- 


tered Wesleyan  University  January  1,  1865.  He 
was  not  a  brilliant  student,  being  neitlier  at  the 
head  nor  at  the  foot  of  his  class.  lie  was  in  great 
earnest,  however,  studied  hard  and  came  forth  with 
a  well-stored  and  disciplined  mind. 

Immediately  after  being  graduated,  he  entered 
an  office  at  Bloomington  as  a  law  student.  He 
had  previously  read  law  a  little,  and  as  he  continued 
to  work  hard,  with  the  spur  of  poverty  and  prompt- 
ings of  ambition  ever  with  him,  he  was  ready  to 
hang  out  his  professional  shingie  in  1869.  Being 
trustworthy,  he  soon  gathered  about  him  some  in- 
fluential friends.  In  1871  he  was  elected  Corpora- 
tion Counsel  of  Bloomington.  In  1872  he  was 
elected  State's  Attorney  of  McLean  Count}^  This 
office  he  held  eight  years,  when  he  took  his  seat  in 
the  State  Senate.  He  served  for  four  j-ears.  His 
ability  to  perform  abundance  of  hard  work  made 
him  a  most  valued  member  of  the  Legislature. 

Mr.  Fifer  was  married  in  1870  to  tiertic,  daugh- 
ter of  William  J.  Lewis,  of  Bloomington.  Mr.  Fifer 
is  six  feet  in  height  and  is  spare,  weighing  only  one 
hundred  and  fifty  pouuds.  He  has  a  swarthy  com- 
plexion, keen  black  eyes,  quick  movement,  and  pos- 
sesses a  frank  and  sympathetic  nature,  and  natur- 
lly  makes  friends  wherever  he  goes.  During  the 
late  gubernatorial  campaign  his  visits  throughout 
the  State  proved  a  great  power  in  his  behalf.  His 
faculty  of  winning  tlie  confidence  and  good  wishes 
of  those  with  whom  he  comes  in  personal  contact 
is  a  source  of  great  popularity,  especially  during  a 
political  battle.  As  a  speaker  he  is  fluent,  his  lan- 
guage is  good,  voice  clear  and  agreeable,  and  man- 
ner forcible.  His  manifest  earnestness  in  what  he 
says,  .as  well  as  his  tact  as  a  public  speaker,  and  his 
eloquent  and  forceful  language,  make  him  a  most 
valuable  campaign  orator  and  a  powerful  pleader 
at  the  bar.  At  the  Republican  State  Convention, 
held  in  May,  1888,  Mr.  Fifer  was  chosen  as  its 
candidate  for  Governor.  He  proved  a  popular 
nominee,  and  the  name  of  "Private  Joe"  became 
familiar  to  everyone  throughout  the  Stale.  He 
waged  a  vigorous  campaign,  was  elected  by  a  good 
majority,  and  in  due  time  assumed  the  duties  of 
the  Chief  Executive  of  Illinois. 


/?. 


GOVERNORS  OF  ILLINOIS. 


187 


^^r^.^Srt?^ 


,^ 


j-ClIX  P.  ALTGELD,  the  present 
v.;  Governor  of  Illinois, is  a  native 
f'^**"  of  Prussia,  born  in  1848.  Shortly 
after  his  birth  his  parents  emi- 
grated to  America,  locating  on 
a  farm  near  Mansfield,  Ohio. 
When  but  a  mere  lad,  joung 
Altgeld  had  to  walk  from  the 
farm  to  Mansfield  with  butter, 
eggs  and  garden  produce,  which 
he  peddled  from  house  to  house. 
About  1856,  his  parents  moved 
to  the  city  of  Mansfield,  and  for 
a  time  our  subject  was  engaged 
morning  and  evening  in  driv- 
ing cattle  to  and  from  the  pas- 
ture, a  distance  of  eight  miles.  When  fourteen 
years  of  age  he  hired  out  as  a  farm  hand,  and  con- 
tinued in  that  avocation  the  greater  part  of  his 
time  until  he  was  sixteen  years  of  age,  when  he 
enlisted  in  Company  C,  One  Hundred  and  Sixty- 
lourth  Ohio  Infantry,  and  served  until  the  close  of 
the  war.  On  being  mustered  in,  the  regiment  was 
sent  to  Washington  and  was  actively  engaged  in 
the  various  canij)aigns  in  and  around  that  city 
until  the  surrender  of  Lee.  In  the  fall  of  1864, 
young  Altgeld  was  taken  sick,  while  with  his  regi- 
ment in  the  front,  and  the  surgeon  desired  to  send 
him  to  a  hospital  in  Washington;  but  he  asked  to 


be  allowed  to  remain  with  the  regiment,  and  soon 
recovering  from  his  sickness  was  actively  engaged 
until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  was  mustered  out 
at  Columbus,  Ohio,  in  the  spring  of  1865.  The 
succeeding  summer  he  worked  with  his  father  on 
a  farm,  during  which  time  he  became  connected 
with  the  Sunday-school  and  was  given  cliarge  'yl 
the  Bible  class.  Before  entering  tlie  army  he  had 
but  very  limited  educational  advantages,  having 
attended  school  but  a  part  of  two  summers  and 
one  winter.  He  had  at  home,  however,  studied 
the  German  language  and  had  become  familiar 
with  some  German  authors.  Determining  to  fit 
himself  for  a  useful  life,  he  resolved  to  attend  a 
select  school  at  Lexington,  Ohio,  and  in  a  little 
eight-b}'-ten  room,  meagrely  furnished,  he  kept 
"bachelor's  hall,"  and  in  time  was  so  far  advanced 
that  he  secured  a  cei-tificate  as  teacher,  and  for 
two  years  was  engaged  in  that  profession.  At  the 
end  of  that  time  he  left  home  and  traveled  exten- 
sively over  the  country',  working  at  odd  jobs,  un- 
til he  finally  reached  Savannah,  Mo.,  where  he  en- 
tered a  law  office,  and  in  1870  was  admitted  to  the 
Bar.  In  the  fall  of  1872,  he  ran  as  •  rosecuting 
Attorney  for  Andrews  County,  Mo.,  and  was  de- 
feated by  four  votes.  He  ran  again  in  1874  and 
was  elected.  But  life  in  the  small  town  of  Savan- 
nah was  a  little  too  monotonous  for  him,  and  he 
deterxnined  to  locate   in   Chicago.    In   October, 


188 


JOHN  P.  ALTGELD. 


1875,  be  resigned  the  office  of  Prosecuting  Attor- 
ney, moved  to  Cliicago,  and  at  once  commenced 
the  practice  of  law.  For  some  j-ears  after  he  had 
but  little  to  do  with  politics,  confining  himself  to 
his  piactice  and  dealing  in  real  estate.  One  year 
after  his  arrival  in  Chicago  he  found  himself  with- 
out a  dollar,  and  in  debt  some  $400.  By  a  streak  of 
good  luck,  as  it  might  be  termed,  he  won  a  case  in 
court,  from  which  he  received  a  fee  of  $900,  and 
after  pa3'ing  his  debt  he  had  1500  left,  which  he 
invested  in  real  estate.  This  venture  proved  a 
successful  one,  and  from  that  time  on  the  profits 
of  one  transaction  were  invested  in  others,  and 
to-day  he  is  numbered  among  the  millionaire  resi- 
dents of  the  great  metropolis  of  the  West. 

In  1884,  Mr.  Altgeld  was  nominated  for  Con- 
gress, but  was  defeated  by  three  thousand  votes. 
In  1886,  be  was  nominated  and  elected  Judge  of 
the  Superior  Court  of  Cook  County.  His  services 
as  Judge  were  such  as  to  commend  him  to  the  peo- 
ple.    Early  in  the  year  1892,  by  the  solicitation  of 


many  friends,  he  announced  himself  as  a  candi- 
date for  Governor.  At  the  convention  held 
April  27,  he  received  the  nomination  and  at  once 
entered  upon  an  active  canvass.  Alone,  he  traveled 
all  over  the  entire  State,  and  visited  and  consulted 
with  the  leading  politicians  of  eveiy  section.  He 
made  few  public  speeches,  however,  until  near  the 
close  of  the  campaign,  but  it  was  ver}' evident  that 
lie  was  master  of  the  situation  at  all  times.  When 
tlie  votes  were  counted  at  tiie  close  of  election 
day,  it  was  found  that  he  had  a  majority  of  the 
votes,  and  so  became  the  first  Democratic  Governor 
of  Illinois  since  1856. 

Born  in  poverty,  alone,  single-handed  and  un- 
aided, he  faced  the  world,  and  with  a  determina- 
tion to  succeed,  he  pressed  forward,  until  to-day  he 
has  a  National  reputation,- and  is  the  envied  of 
many.  The  lesson  of  his  life  is  worthy  of  careful 
study  by  the  young,  and  shows  what  can  be  done 
by  one  who  has  the  desire  in  his  heart  to  attain  a 
front  rank  among  the  noted  men  of  the  country. 


'©)^^^^^??S^5t( 


Randolph,  Jackson,  Perry 

and  Monroe  Counties, 
Illinois. 


(gr^^^-^..^^^ 


LJj  ^i>j  !i__y 


cMs 


-mm  INTRODUCTORY. 


Y«r>£^%yHE  time  has  arrived  when  it 
''[y/f  becomes  the  duty  of  the 
■^'"  people  of  this  county  to  per- 
petuate the  names  of  their 
pioneers,  to  furnish  a  record 
of  their  early  settlement, 
and  relate  the  story  of  their 
progress.  The  civilization  of  our 
day,  the  enlightenment  of  the  age 
and  the  duty  that  men  of  the  pres- 
ent time  owe  to  their  ancestors,  to 
themselves  and  to  their  posterity, 
demand  that  a  record  of  their  lives 
and  deeds  should  be  made.  In  bio- 
graphical history  is  found  a  power 
to  instruct  man  by  precedent,  to 
enliven  the  mental  faculties,  and 
to  waft  down  the  river  of  time  a 
^afe  vessel  in  which  the  names  and  actions  of  the 
people  who  contributed  to  raise  this  country  from  its 
l)rimitive  state  may  be  preserved.  Surely  and  rapidly 
the  great  and  aged  men,  who  in  their  ])rime  entered 
the  wilderness  and  claimed  the  virgin  soil  as  their 
heritage,  are  passing  to  their  graves.  The  number  re- 
maining who  can  relate  the  incidents  of  the  first  days 
jf  setilement  is  becoming  small  indeed,  so  that  an 
nctual  necessity  e.xists  for  tlie  collection  and  preser- 
vation of  events  without  delay,  before  all  the  early 
settlers  are  cut  down  by  the  scythe  of  Time. 

To  be  forgotten  has  been  the  great  dread  of  mankind 
from  remotest  ages.  All  will  be  forgotten  soon  enough, 
in  spite  of  their  best  works  and  the  most  earnest 
efforts  of  their  friends  to  perserve  the  memory  of 
their  lives.  The  means  employed  to  prevent  oblivion 
and  to  perpetuate  their  memory  has  been  in  propor- 
tion 'o  the  amount  of  intelligence  they  possessed. 
Th-;  (lyramiils  of  Kgvpt  were  liuilt  to  perijctuate  the 
names  and  deeds  of  their  great  rulers.  The  exhu- 
mations made  by  the  ar^-heologists  of  Egypt  from 
buried  Men-.phis  indicate  a  desire  of  those  people 


to   perpetuate   the  memory  of  their  achievements. 

The  erection  of  the  great  obelisks  were  for  the  same 
purpose.  Coming  down  to  a  later  period,  we  find  the 
Greeks  and  Romans  erecting  mausoleums  and  monu- 
ments, and  carving  out  statues  to  chronicle  their 
great  achievements  and  carry  them  down  the  ages. 
It  is  also  evident  that  the  Mound-builders,  in  piling 
up  their  great  mounds  of  earth,  had  but  this  idea — 
to  leave  something  to  show  that  they  had  lived.  All 
these  works,  though  many  of  them  costly  in  the  ex- 
treme, give  but  a  faint  idea  of  the  lives  and  charac- 
ters of  those  whose  memory  they  were  intended  to 
perpetuate,  and  scarcely  anything  of  the  masses  of 
the  people  that  then  lived.  The  great  pyramids  and 
some  of  the  obelisks  remain  objects  only  of  curiosity; 
the  mausoleums,  monuments  and  statues  are  crum- 
bling into  dust. 

It  was  left  to  modern  ages  to  establish  an  intelli- 
gent, undecaying,  immutable  method  of  perpetuating 
a  full  history — immutable  in  that  it  is  almost  un- 
limited in  extent  and  perpetual  in  its  action;  and 
this  is  through  the  art  of  printing. 

To  the  present  generation,  however,  we  are  in- 
debted for  the  introduction  of  the  admirable  system 
of  local  biography.  By  this  system  every  man,  though 
he  has  not  achieved  what  the  world  calls  greatness, 
has  the  means  to  perpetuate  his  life,  his  history, 
through  the  coming  ages. 

The  scythe  of  Time  cuts  down  all ;  nothing  of  the 
physical  man  is  left.  The  monument  which  his  chil- 
dren or  friends  may  erect  to  his  memory  in  the  cemt^ 
tery  will  crumble  into  dust  and  pass  away;  but  his 
life,  his  achievements,  the  work  he  has  accomplished, 
which  otherwise  would  be  forgotten,  is  perpetuated 
by  a  record  of  this  kind. 

To  preserve  the  lineaments  of  our  companions  we 
engrave  theiu  portraits,  for  the  same  reason  we  col- 
lect the  attainable  facts  of  their  history.  Nor  do  we 
think  it  necessary,  as  we  speak  only  truth  of  them,  to 
wait  until  they  are  dead,  or  until  those  who  know 
them  are  gone: -to  do  this  we  are  ashamed  only  to 
publish  to  the  world  the  history  of  those  whose  lives 
are  unworthy  of  public  record. 


GEN.  JOHN  A.  LOGAN. 


g:-f#' 


^^EN.  JOHN  A.  LOGAN  was  born  in  Frank- 
'|[  (5—  lin  County,  111.,  in  1824.  He  entered  mili- 
'^^5  tarj' service  as  Captain  in  the  Mexican  War 
and  served  for  two  3'ears.  At  the  beginning  of 
the  Civil  War  he  espoused  the  cause  of  the  Union 
and  entered  the  volunteer  service  in  1861,  when 
he  raised  and  commanded  the  Thirty-first  Illinois 
Infantry.  At  the  battle  of  Belmont,  Mo.,  he  led 
his  men  into  the  fight  with  great  gallantry. 
Though  they  were  raw  troops  and  had  never  stood 
fire,  yet  thej-  fought  on  this  occasion,  under  the 
lead  of  Colonel  Logan,  with  a  bravery  seldom  sur- 
passed bv  veteran  soldiei-s. 

At  the  battle  of  Ft.  Donelson,  Colonel  Logan's 
command  held  the  right  of  the  line  and  was 
pressed  b\'  overwhelming  odds.  Stubbornly  resist- 
ing the  massed  columns  of  the  enemy,  he  succeeded 
in  holding  his  position  until  reinforcements  were 
brought  and  the  Confederates  finally  driven  from 
the  field.  On  that  occasion  he  was  severely 
wounded  the  first  day  of  the  battle,  but  refused  to 
go  to  the  rear.  For  his  meritorious  conduct  in 
that  engagement  he  was  made  a  Brigadier-General 
and  assigned  to  the  army  under  command  of  Gen- 
eral Grant.  At  the  battle  of  Shiloh  he  displa\ed 
his  usual  courage  and  solid  fighting  qualities.  For 
daring  and  distinguished  conduct  al  this  terrible 
trial  of  strength  between  the  great  contending 
armies,  he  was  promoted  to  Major-General  Novem- 
ber 29,  1862. 

Taking  command  of  a  division.  General  Logan 
accompanied  Grant  through  the  Vicksburg  cam- 
paign, and  after  the  fall  of  that  city,  the  Father  of 
Wat«rs  became,  as  in  days  past,  the  common  prop- 
erty of  the  American  people.  Before  the  war  be- 
gan. General  Logan,  in  a  speech  to  the  people  of 
Illinois,  declared  that  "  If  the  rebel  states,  or  anj' 
other  foreign  Government,  ever  attempted  to  con- 


trol the  mouth  of  the  JHssissippi  River  the  men  of 
the  northwest  would  hew  their  way  to  the  Gulf  of 
Mexico,  sword  in  hand."  That  prophecy  was 
fully  realized.  The  people  of  the  northwest  nobly 
vindicated  the  truth  of  what  General  Logan  had 
said  years  before,  and  forever  settled  the  question 
that  the  men  of  the  great  northwest  are  unaltera- 
bl}'  resolved  that  the  Mississippi  River  is  the  com- 
mon birthright  of  the  children  of  its  far-spreading 
valleys,  which  they  will  neither  voluntarily  relin- 
quish nor  peacefully  surrender.  It  was  indeed  a 
proud  day  for  General  Logan  when  he  could  stand 
on  the  ruins  of  the  last  hostile  fortification  along 
this  noble  river  and  fully  realize  the  thought  that 
the  j-eomanrj'  of  the  northwest  had  literally 
carved  their  way  through  the  entire  Confederacy 
to  vindicate  their  claim  to  this,  the  greatest  of  all 
American  rivers.  The  Stars  and  Stripes  could  now 
be  raised  on  a  steamboat  at  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  and 
borne,  proudl3-  waving,  to  the  mouth  of  the  na- 
tional thoroughfare  and  out  on  the  gulf  below. 
This  work  having  been  finished  by  the  western 
arm^',  the  command  sought  other  fields  of  con- 
quest. 

From  Vicksburg  (ieneral  Logan  started  with 
Sherman,  through  Mississippi  and  Alabama,  to  the 
relief  of  Chattanooga,  in  Tennessee.  November 
24,  1863,  the  battle  of  Mission  Ridge  was  fought 
and  won.  In  that  great  conflict  Logan  bore  a  con- 
spicuous part  and  again  acquitted  himself  with 
distinguished  honor.  At  the  beginning  of  the  At- 
lanta campaign  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the 
F'ifteenth  Atlanta  Cavalry.  In  command  of  this 
corps  he  made  the  celebrated  march  through  the 
entire  Confederacy,  from  Chattanooga  to  Atlanta, 
thence  to  Savannah,  through  the  Carolinas  and 
Virginia  to  Richmond,  and  on  to  Washington.  On 
reaching  the  latter  city  General   Howard  was  ap- 


204 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


pointed  Superintendent  of  the  Freedraen's  Bureau, 
and  General  Logan  succeeded  to  the  command  of 
the  Arm}-  of  the  Tennessee,  consisting  of  tlie  Fif- 
teenth and  Seventeenth  Atlanta  Cavalry.  Thus 
from  the  position  of  an  humble  station  he  had 
fought  his  way  to  tiie  supreme  command  of  a 
magnificent  army  of  a  hundred  thousand  men. 

In  every  department  of  life  the  native  talents 
and  energy  of  the  General  brought  him  success. 
As  a  lawyer  his  was  a  brilliant  career.  As  a  poli- 
tician, he  had,  before  the  Rebellion,  attained  a 
wide  and  growing  popularity  in  Illinois,  having 
been  elected  to  Congress,  and  having  held  other 
posts  of  honor.  Illinois  may  be  proud  of  her  Logan, 
whose  noble  valor  has  vindicated  her  honor  in 
many  a  fiercely  fought  battle,  and  whose  eminent 
achievements  in  peaceful  pursuits  are  surpassed 
only  by  his  daring  deeds  in  the  bloody  theatre  of 
war.  He  was  a  lover  of  militar}-  science  and  born 
to  be  a  commander.  Among  tlie  soldiers  he  was 
the  idol  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee.  He  Mas 
loved  by  his  men  not  only  because  he  was  their 
commander,  but  literally  their  leader  on  all  occa- 
sions where  danger  was  to  be  encountered. 

At  the  close  of  the  Civil  War,  General  Logan 
resigned  his  position  and  retired  to  civic  life, 
though  from  that  time  until  his  death,  December 
26, 1886,  he  was  closely  associated  with  the  history 
of  Illinois  and  the  United  States  as  well.  In  per- 
son he  was  a  remarkable  man,  resembling  no  other 
general.  His  complexion  was  dark,  his  eyes  and 
hair  very  black,  and  in  stature  he  was  low  and 
heav}-.  He  wore  his  hair  and  mustache  long, 
which  increased  his  resemblance  to  the  Indian 
chiefs  of  the  western  wilds. 


^^^  APT.  A.  BEECHER,  who  now  follows  farra- 
[if^  ing  on  section  20,  Makanda  Township, 
^^^'  Jackson  County,  is  one  of  the  honored  vet- 
erans of  the  late  war,  who  valiantly  followed  the 
Old  Flag  through  the  thickest  of  the  fight  and 
stood  by  the  Union  until  its  preservation  was  an 
assured  fact.  He  was  born  in  Canada,  April  30, 
1836,  and  is  a  son  of  Alex  and  Harriet  Beecher, 
who  are  still  living   in   that  country.     His   father 


was  born  in  Massachusetts,  but  his  mother  was 
born  in  Canada,  and  was  of  French  descent.  The 
Captain  was  reared  on  a  farm  and  was  educated 
in  the  common  schools.  He  followed  brick-mak- 
ing for  a  few  years,  and  in  1858  came  to  the 
United  States.  After  a  year  spent  in  St.  Louis, 
he  took  up  his  residence  in  Makanda  Township, 
where  he  has  since  made  his  home. 

On  the  Uth  of  August,  1862,  Mr.  Beecher  be- 
came a  member  of  Company  D,  Eighty -ninth  Illi- 
nois Infantry.  He  joined  the  regiment  at  Chicago, 
and  was  sent  to  Louisville,  where  the  troops  were 
attached  to  General  Buell's  command,  and  entered 
the  Murfreesboro  campaign,  participating  in  the 
battles  of  Perryville,  Murfreesboro,  Liberty  Gap, 
Hoover's  Gap,  Chickamauga,  Chattanooga,  Knox- 
ville,  Daudndge  and  Lookout  Mountain.  He  also 
helped  to  build  the  railroad  bridge  across  the  Hal- 
sten  River,  and  then  burned  it.  The  Atlanta  cam- 
paign came  on,  and  Captain  Beecher  took  part  in 
the  battles  of  Buzzard's  Roost,  Resaca,  Dalton, 
Peach  Tree  Creek,  Marietta,  Atlanta,  Lovejo}'  Sta- 
tion, .Jonesboro,  Pulaski,  Pleasant  Hill,  Franklin 
and  Nashville.  He  served  under  Generals  Buell, 
Rosecrans  and  Thomas.  On  the  16th  of  November, 
1863,  he  was  made  Second  Lieutenant,  and  in 
October,  1864,  became  Fii-st  Lieutenant.  He  com- 
manded the  company  from  September  21,  1863, 
until  mustered  out,  June  27,  1865.  He  was  never 
off  duty  and  was  never  absent  from  a  battle.  A 
brave  and  faithful  soldier,  he  was  always  found  at 
his  post,  faithful  to  the  Old  Flag,  which  now  floats 
triumphantly  over  the  united  Nation. 

Captain  Beecher  was  married  August  21,  1865, 
to  Miss  Belle  Hilliard,  who  was  born  in  Greene 
County,  Ohio,  January  7, 1844.  They  became  the 
parents  of  ten  children,  of  whom  eight  are  j'et  liv- 
ing: Jlattie  S.,  wife  of  Henry  M.  Ingram,  of 
Pinckneyville,  by  whom  she  has  two  children; 
Alex  M.,  of  California;  Blanche  B.,  wife  of  Allen 
Penrod,  by  whom  she  has  one  child;  Fred  Merrill; 
Alida  A..  Josephine  Myra,  Katie  Maud  and  Henry 
Ward.  The  family  are  all  members  of  the  Meth- 
odist Episcopal  Church,  and  take  an  active  part  in 
church  and  Sunday-school  work.  Miss  Alida  is 
successfully  engaged  in  teaching,  and  is  a  promi- 
nent worker  in  the  Epworth  League.     The  Captain 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


205 


is  the  oldest  Mason  in  Makanda  Township,  and 
has  frequently  held  offices  in  his  lodge.  He  also 
belongs  to  the  Knights  of  Honor  and  to  Makanda 
Post,  G.  A.  R.  In  politics  he  is  a  stalwart  Re- 
publican, and  in  the  year  1890  served  as  Census 
Enumerator  of  his  district.  Since  the  year  1859 
he  has  resided  upon  his  present  farm,  and  has 
been  very  successful  in  his  agricultural  pursuits. 
His  life  has  been  well  and  worthily  spent,  and 
Captain  Beecher  is  one  of  the  highly  esteemed 
citizens  of  the  community. 


/p^EORGE  W.  LEAYITT.  Wiiat  presents  a 
ill  g—  pleasanter  picture  than  old  age  grace- 
^^J  fully  reached  after  a  well  spent  and  pros- 
perous life!  There  is  something  very  pleasant  in 
looking  back  upon  the  years  that  intervene  be- 
tween childhood  and  old  age,  and  living  in  mem- 
ory all  the  triumphs  and  joys  of  years  spent  in  an 
effort  to  benefit  self  and  neighbors  at  the  same 
time.  And  sucli  is  the  case  witli  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Leavitt,  who  are  botii  about  eight3'  years  of  age. 
They  are  strong  and  active,  and  are  comfortably- 
fixed  in  a  financial  way.  True,  they  have  expe- 
rienced the  usual  amount  of  "ups  and  downs" 
that  come  almost  invariably  in  a  busy  career,  Ijut 
on  the  whole  they  have  have  known  much  of  suc- 
cess and  happiness.  This  is  in  a  great  measure 
due  to  the  fact  that  they  have  passed  their  da3-s 
in  peace,  free  from  the  dissipations  and  vexations 
of  the  gay  world. 

Mr.  Leavitt  h.as  made  his  home  in  this  count}' 
for  more  than  fift}'  jears,  devoting  his  attention 
entirely  to  agricultural  pursuits.  His  birth  oc- 
curred near  Kaskaskia,  III.,  December  11,  1813,  be- 
ing a  son  of  Abijah  and  Elizabeth  Leavitt,  natives 
of  Maine.  The  father  came  to  Illinois  in  1803  with 
Generals  Stoddard  and  Pike,  and  located  on  a 
farm  near  Kaskaskia.  Our  subject  enjoj'ed  only 
limited  opportunities  for  an  education,  attending 
the  primitive  schools  of  his  neighborhood.  When 
thirteen  years  old  he  began  to  carry  the  mail  from 
Kaskaskia  to  St.  Louis  on  horseback,  and  con- 
tinued at  this  for  the  following  thirteen  years. 

In  1840  Mr.  Leavitt  came   to  Randolph  County 


with  his  young  wife  and  purchased  a  small  farm. 
He  was  soon  enabled  to  purchase  another  tract, 
which  he  likewise  improved.  He  was  sufficiently 
shrewd  to  grasp  at  every  opportunity  for  the  bet- 
tering of  his  financial  condition,  but  has  never 
done  so  at  the  expense  of  his  own  self-respect 
or  by  fraudulent  means.  He  is  to-daj'  the  second 
oldest  resident  of  the  county,  and  is  enjoying  good 
health,  and  bj^  his  correct  mode  of  living  has 
gained  a  popularity  which  is  merited  in  every  re- 
spect. Man}-  and  interesting  are  the  incidents  of 
pioneer  life  that  he  can  relate,  and  he  never  fails 
in  gaining  attentive  listeners. 

In  18-40  our  subject  was  married  to  Miss  Sarah 
Nifold,  a  daughter  of  Daniel  Nifold,  a  native  of 
Kentucky,  but  who  was  a  resident  of  Randolph 
Count}-  at  the  time  of  his  death.  To  this  mar- 
riage were  born  six  children,  all  of  whom  are  now 
deceased.  In  1864  Mrs.  Leavilt  was  also  called  to 
the  home  of  rest,  and  our  subject  in  1865  was 
married  to  Sarah  Meyers.  Four  children  came  to 
bless  this  union.  Emily  is  the  wife  of  Will- 
iam Wright  and  lives  in  this  county;  Annie  mar- 
ried Ed  Wilson  and  is  a  resident  of  Sparta;  Jes- 
sie, the  wife  of  Cul  Nixon,  resides  in  this  county; 
Carrie  Happick  married  Charles  Bushe,  and  they 
also  made  their  home  in  this  county.  Mr.  Leavitt 
is  a  member  of  the  Baptist  Church,  while  his  good 
wife  belongs  to  the  Methodist  denomination.  Po- 
litically, our  subject  casts  his  vote  in  favor  of  the 
Democracy,  but  in  local  matters  thinks  best  to 
vote  for  the  man  and  not  the  party. 


I  I     I    1 1  I  |l  ar  Ml 


Sip^/ RE D E R I C K  KESSEL,  who  is  numbered 
ti/sy  among  the  enterprising  and  representative 
Jts  farmers   of    Kinkaid    Township,    Jackson 

County,  makes  his  home  on  section  16.  He  was 
born  in  the  kingdom  of  Prussia,  Germany,  Feb- 
ruary 21,  1832,  and  is  a  son  of  William  Kessel, 
who  was  also  a  native  of  that  country.  By  occu- 
pation the  father  was  a  farmer.  He  served  for 
five  j'ears  in  the  army  of  Frederick  the  Great 
in  the  War  of  1815  against  Napoleon,  was  at 
the  siege  of  Moscow,  and  took  part  in  many 
of  the    battles   of   that   war.     He    then  returned 


206 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


to  bis  home,  and  in  the  j'ear  1857  he  brouglit 
his  family  to  America,  taking  up  his  residence  on 
a  farm  in  Jackson  Count}',  near  AVilkinson  Island, 
where  he  died  on  the  10th  of  August,  1858.  He 
was  married  in  Prussia  to  (Jertrude  Suootenhouse. 
Unto  them  were  born  ten  children:  William,  Jo- 
hanna, August,  Minnie,  Frederick,  Harmon,  John, 
Julius,  Albert  and  Emily.  All  came  to  America 
with  their  father  except  \Villiam,  who  died  in 
Prussia.  The  mother  of  this  family  was  called  to 
her  final  rest  January  20,  1892,  at  the  advanced 
age  of  ninety-one  years. 

In  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads  our  subject 
was  reared,  and  with  the  family  crossed  the  brin}' 
deep.  Upon  his  father's  death,  he  purchased  the 
home  farm  and  began  business  for  himself.  On 
the  8th  of  January,  1858,  he  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Regina  Rickels,  daughter  of  William 
and  Mary  (Suootenhouse)  Rickels.  She  was  one 
of  seven  children,  viz.:  August,  Joanna,  Minnie, 
John,  Godfrey,  Cliarlotle  and  Regina.  The  par- 
ents both  died  in  Prussia,  and  Mrs.  Kessel,  with 
her  two  brothers,  John  and  Godfrey,  came  to 
America.  John  died  in  Texas  in  1864,  and  God- 
frey died  in  Chester,  III.,  October  27,  1891. 

Upon  the  farm  which  he  purchased  of  his  father 
Mr.  Kessel  resided  for  seven  yeai-s,  and  then  re- 
moved to  Kinkaid  Township,  where  he  improved 
a  farm  three  and  a-half  miles  from  his  present 
home.  In  August,  1878,  he  removed  to  the  farm 
on  which  he  now  resides.  He  has  placed  it  under 
a  high  state  of  cultivation  and  made  many  excel- 
lent improvements  upon  it.  It  is  two  hundred 
and  eighty  acres  in  extent,  and  amid  the  well 
tilled  fields  stand  a  fine  residence  and  large  barns. 
He  also  owns  four  hundred  and  flftj'-one  acres 
in  a  bottom  farm  and  another  tract  of  two  hun- 
dred and  eleven  acres,  making  in  all  nine  hundred 
and  forty-two  acres. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Kessel  were  born  five  chil- 
dren. Robert,  born  March  16,  1862,  married  Louisa 
Krugel,  and  they  have  one  child,  Gertrude;  Albert 
F.,  born  January  20,  1865,  died  December  5,  1889; 
Alfred,  born  Januarj-  2,  1867,  Edward  J.,  May  14, 
1872,  and  Leo  August,  November  9,  1877,  are 
still  at  home.  The  parents  are  members  of  the 
Lutheran  Church,  but  aided  in  the  erection  of  the 


Baptist  Church  near  their  home  and  regularly 
attended  its  services.  Mr.  Kessel  has  always  been 
a  supporter  of  the  Democracy,  and  is  now  serving 
as  Ilighwaj'^  Commissioner  and  School  Trustee. 
He  belongs  to  the  Knights  of  Honor.  By  exten- 
sive reading,  experience  and  observation  he  has 
become  one  of  the  well  informed  men  of  this  sec- 
tion, and  is  conversant  with  all  the  subjects  of  the 
day. 

• ^^(^ ' 


I;,-^  ENRY  GROPPE.  Township  6,  range  7, 
r  ]ll  Randolph  County,  is  the  home  of  many 
.AW^  intelligent,  industrious  and  prosperous 
'^^  farmers,  who  from  a  small  beginning  have 
won  a  competence,  securing  a  considerable  amount 
of  land  and  surrounding  themselves  with  all  the 
comforts  and  conveniences  which  heart  can  wish. 
Among  this  number  may  he  mentioned  Henry 
Groppe. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  Hanover,  Germany, 
December  18,  1840,  and  is  a  sou  of  Adolph  and 
Mary  (Knemeyer)  Groppe.  The  father  died  in  his 
native  land,  Germany.  In  1850  the  mother  came 
to  America,  and  was  followed  three  years  later  by 
our  subject.  The  first  three  jears  of  his  residence 
in  the  United  States  were  spent  in  St.  Louis,  after 
which  he  came  to  Randolph  County  and  located 
on  a  farm  near   the  one  on  which  he  now  resides. 

Attending  the  model  schools  of  his  native  land, 
our  subject  gained  a  fair  education.  While  a  resi- 
dent of  St.  Louis  he  was  engaged  in  the  tobacco 
business,  and  on  reaching  Randolph  County  was 
employed  as  a  day  laborer  for  a  few  3-ears.  In 
1863  he  pureliased  a  partially  improved  piece  of 
land  and  at  once  set  about  its  cultivation.  It  now 
includes  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres,  and  this  val- 
uable property  he  has  acquired  through  his  in- 
domitable industry  and  good  management.  As 
a  farmer  he  displays  excellent  judgment  in  the  ro- 
tation of  crops,  fertilization  of  the  soil  and  cultiva- 
tion of  the  land,  and  as  a  result  of  his  efforts  he 
has  gained  prosperity.  The  stock  to  be  found  on 
the  jilace  is  of  the  best,  and  in  it  the  owner  takes 
great  pride. 

The  marriage  of  Jlr.  Groppe  and  Mrs.  Susannah 
(Wissel)  Sinker  occurred  September  28, 1864.  Mrs. 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


207 


Groppe  is  a  daughter  of  Andrew  and  Kate  Stat- 
miller)  AVissel,  both  natives  of  Germany,  but  now 
residents  of  Illinois.  Five  children  have  come 
to  bless  the  hearth  and  fireside  of  our  subject 
and  his  wife:  Hermann,  Lizzie,  Katie,  Lulu  and 
Emma,  all  of  whom  are  living  at  home  with  their 
parents.  Mrs.  Groppe  by  her  first  marriage  be- 
came the  mother  of  tliree  children,  all  of  whom  are 
still  living:  William,  Mary  and  Anna.  Our  sub- 
ject and  his  entu'e  famil}*  are  members  of  the  Cath- 
olic Church.  In  national  and  state  affairs  our  sub- 
ject is  in  favor  of  the  Democrac3',  but  in  local 
matters  is  rather  conservative. 


N#^li-^"i^li^^ 


^|[OHN  TUDOR,  who  is  a  representative 
of  a  fine  old  English  family  in  Randolph 
Count3',  is  a  general  farmer,  and  has  a 
good  estate  located  on  section  4,  township 
8,  range  5,  which  he  has  supplied  with  all  the 
necessary'  buildings  and  farm  implements  suited 
to  the  purpose  of  a  first-class  agriculturist.  Mr. 
Tudor  was  born  iu  France  .lanuary  4,  1827,  where 
his  parents  were  temporarily  residing.  He  was  the 
fifth  in  order  of  birth  in  a  family  of  eight  chil- 
dren comprising  the  household  of  Thomas  and 
Mary  (Corbitt)  Tudor,  natives  of  Shropshire,  En- 
land,  where  the  family  residence  was  located  for 
many  years. 

About  1832  Thomas  Tudor  came  to  America, 
locating  in  Haverstraw,  N.  Y.,  where  he  worked  at 
his  trade,  that  of  a  foundryman,  for  a  number  of 
3'ears  before  sending  for  his  family  to  join  him  in 
the  New  World.  He  was  more  fortunate  in  a 
monetarj'  waj'  than  man}'  emigrants  who  made 
their  home  in  America,  and  it  was  not  for  lack  of 
funds  that  he  delated  sending  for  the  family,  but 
to  make  sure  that  he  would  be  pleased  with  life  as 
he  found  it  in  a  new  land.  In  1836,  the  mother 
with  her  children  took  passage  at  Liverpool,  and 
after  a  comparatively  smooth  passage  of  a  month, 
they  landed  in  New  Yoik.  One  unpleasant  inci- 
dent of  the  voyage,  long  to  be  remembered,  was  the 
fact  of  the  supply  of  food  giving  out.  The  passen- 
gers had  to  be  placed  on  short  rations,  but  as  the 
journe\'  was  nearly*  at  an  end,  tlieir  suffering   was 


not  very  great.  Thomas  Tudor  met  them  in  New 
York  City,  and  they  went  directl}'  to  their  new 
home  in  Haverstraw. 

Our  subject  immediately  took  a  position  with 
his  father  in  the  mill,  where  he  remained  until  his 
twenty-second  birthday.  Having  heard  such  glow- 
ing accounts  of  life  in  this  then  western  country,  he 
decided  to  cast  in  his  lot  with  friends  and  kindred 
who  had  come  to  Illinois,  and  was  accompanied  on 
the  journey-  bj'  his  brother  and  his  family.  The 
part}-  set  out  in  May,  1849,  and  after  a  tedious 
journey,  reached  their  destination  in  Jackson 
Count}'  on  the  1st  of  June.  On  arriving  here, 
our  subject  first  found  emiiloyment  working  for 
his  brother-in-law,  receiving  for  his  services  ^l  1  per 
month.  The  following  season,  having  received 
aid  from  his  father,  he  purchased  a  tract  of  one 
hundred  and  twenty  acres,  paying  for  it  in  gold, 
which  coin  was  so  scarce  that  the  officials  were  not 
inclined  to  take  it,  fearing  that  it  might  not 
be  good.  He  was  very  successful  in  his  calling, 
and  soon  purchased  two  hundred  and  forty  acres, 
which  now  constitute  the  homestead,  and  he  also 
owns  two  hundred  acres  lying  in  other  townships. 

During  his  boyhood  days  our  subject  attended 
school  in  England,  and  while  in  Haverstraw  he 
attended  a  school  which  was  supported  by  the 
fund  raised  from  the  mill  where  he  was  employed. 
December  9,  1851,  John  Tudor  and  Miss  Eliza, 
daughter  of  Samuel  and  Arabella  (Price)  Richards, 
were  united  in  marriage.  Mr.  and  Mre.  Richards 
were  living  at  that  time  in  Haverstraw,  N.  Y., 
although  they  were  natives  of  Shropshire,  En- 
gland, and  lived  near  the  Tudors  in  the  Mother 
Country.  Mrs.  Tudor  departed  this  life  January 
25,  1876,  at  the  age  of  forty-four  years.  She  had 
become  the  mother  of  eleven  children,  eight  of 
whom  survive:  Thomas  Henry,  who  is  the  present 
Postmaster  of  Rockwood;  Arabella,  Mrs.  James 
Stewart,  who  resides  on  a  farm  near  Rockwood; 
Guy  Seymour,  a  blacksmith  in  Shiloh;  George  Ben- 
jamin,a  farmer  living  in  Jackson  County;  Charles 
Sherman,  a  teacher  in  Randolph  County;  Nellie, 
Mrs.  Edward  Morgan;  Lydia  Priscilla  and  Ernest 
Shubel.  at  home.  Those  deceased  are,  William 
Wallace,  Rose  Hannah  and  Florence  Elizabeth. 

John   Tudor  is  a   member  of   the  Presbyterian 


208 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Church,  as  was  also  his  good  wife.  He  has  been 
a  Republican  in  politics  since  the  organization  of 
the  party,  casting  his  first  vote  for  Fremont  in  the 
3'ear  1856.  Besides  having  served  as  School  Di- 
rector many  terms,  Mr.  Tudor  has  officially  repre- 
sented liis  townsiiip  as  Supervisor  on  the  County 
Board. 

.\f  OUNSON  MARSHALL,  of  Kandoli>h  Coun- 
ty, was  born  in  Washington  County,  Pa., 
in  October,  1823,  and  was  the  second  child 
l)orn  to  William  and  Catherine  (Mooney) 
Marshall.  His  father,  a  native  of  Ireland,  came 
to  America  with  his  parents  in  1801,  and  was 
reared  in  Allegheny  City,  Pa.  Throughout  life 
he  followed  fanning,  and  his  death  occurred  in 
Cleveland  in  1833.  The  Mooney  family  came 
from  Scotland  to  America  in  an  early  daj'  and  lo- 
cated in  Maryland,  where  the  mother  of  our  sub- 
ject was  born.  During  her  girlhood  she  accom- 
panied iier  parents  to  Pennsylvania,  and  died  in 
Princeton,  that  state,  in  1873.  Seven  children 
were  born  unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Marshall,  of  whom 
five  sons  are  yet  living,  three  being  residents  of 
St.  Louis.  Mo.,  and  one  of  Cleveland,  Ohio. 

Johnson  Marshall  obtained  a  limited  education 
in  Cleveland,  but  his  father  died  when  he  was 
ten  years  of  .age,  and  he  was  then  thrown  upon 
bis  own  resources  and  had  to  assist  in  support- 
ing the  family.  He  followed  any  employment 
that  came  in  his  way  whereby  he  might  earn  an 
honest  dollar.  Thus  liis  time  was  passed  until 
eighteen  years  of  age,  when  he  began  boating  on 
the  Muskingum  and  Beaver  Rivers,  where  he  con- 
tinued for  a  number  of  years.  In  March;  1854, 
he  began  steaniboating,  sailing  from  St.  Louis, 
Mo.,  and  since  that  time  he  has  been  engaged 
continuously  in  the  same  pursuit  on  the  Missis- 
sippi and  Missouri  Rivers,  there  being  but  few 
ports  along  the  way  in  which  Captain  Marshall  is 
not  known.  In  his  business  he  has  met  with  suc- 
cess, and  by  close  application  and  earnest  effort 
he  has  worked  his  way  steadily  upward. 

In  October,  1855,  the  Captain  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Catherine  Zollmann,  daughter 
of   Abraham    and  Rachel   Zollmann,    formerly   of 


Pennsylvania,  but  afterward  of  Missouri,  where 
their  last  davs  were  spent.  Bj'  the  union  of  our 
subject  and  his  wife  there  were  born  fifteen  chil- 
dren, four  of  whom  died  in  infancy.  Tliose  still 
living  are,  Emma,  wife  of  E.  W.  Mann,  of  Ne- 
braska; Sarah,  wife  of  William  Heard,  of  Kansas; 
Robert,  of  St.  Louis,  who  married  Lizzie  Cooley, 
and  is  engaged  in  steamboating  on  the  Mississippi; 
Melia,  wife  of  William  Rosborough,  who  lives  near 
Sparta,  111.;  Frank,  who  married  Elizabeth  Raglin 
and  lives  in  Oregon;  Ida,  wife  of  Robert  Ruppert, 
of  Chester;  Caroline,  wife  of  George  Montroy; 
Norman,  Mabel,  Laura  and  Fred,  all  of  whom  are 
still  with  their  parents. 

In  his  social  relations  Mr.  Marshall  is  a  Mason, 
belonging  to  Chester  Lodge  No.  72,  A.  F.  &  A.M., 
of  Chester.  He  also  holds  membership  with  Ches- 
ter Lodge  No.  57,  I.  O.  O.  F.,  and  his  estimable 
wife  is  a  member  of  the  Presbyterian  Church.  In 
politics  he  is  a  Democrat,  but  has  never  aspired  to 
public  office.  A  pleasant,  genial  gentleman,  he 
wins  friends  wherever  he  goes,  and  his  circle  of 
agreeable  acquaintances  is  very  large.  His  life 
has  been  well  and  worthily  spent,  and  he  may  truly 
be  called  a  self-made  man. 


f|j^x  ICHOLAS  W.  KELLY.  On  section  8,town- 
II  jjj  ship  8,  range  5,  Randolph  County,  lies  a 
jiyj^  pleasant,  well  improved  farm,  which  is 
the  propert3'  of  our  subject.  He  is  a  native  of 
this  count}',  and  was  born  on  the  8th  of  February, 
1845,  to  Thomas  and  Eliz.abetli  (Anderson)  Kell}-, 
natives  of  County  Down,  Ireland,  and  of  Scotch 
origin.  The  parents  emigrated  to  the  United 
States  about  the  year  1842,  and  after  residing 
about  seven  j-ears  in  Haverstraw,  N.  Y.  (where 
the  father  worked  as  a  brick  molder,  and  later  as 
engineer  in  a  chemical  factory),  came  to  Illinois. 
With  the  exception  of  four  3'eais  spent  in  Jack- 
son Country  and  one  year  in  Washington  Count}', 
Kan.,  they  have  been  residents  of  this  county  since 
coining  west. 

Nicholas  W.  Kelly  served  eight  months  during 
the  late  war  as  a  member  of  Company  F,  One  Hun- 
dred   and    Fifty-fourth    Illinois    Infantry,  under 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


209 


General  Thomas.  He  was  discharged  at  Nashville, 
Tenn.,  September  21,  1865,  and  was  mustered  out 
at  Springfield,  111.,  nine  days  later.  He  was  mar- 
ried April  24,  1866,  to  Miss  Alsa  C,  daughter  of 
Charles  R.  and  Rhoda  (Adams)  Ilaskin,  the  former 
a  native  of  New  York,  and  the  latter  born  in  Ken- 
tucky. Mrs.  Kelly  was  the  eldest  of  seven  chil- 
dren in  her  parents'  family, and  was  born  October 
22,  1847,  in  Jackson  County,  111.-  She  became  the 
mother  of  ten  children,  and  departed  this  life  No- 
vember 15,  1889.  Only  five  of  tlie  family  are  liv- 
ing at  the  present  time:  Luella,  Clara,  Thomas  A., 
Benjamin  C.  and  Maida  J.  Mrs.  Kell3'  during  her 
lifetime  was  an  active  member  of  the  Kbenezer 
Presbyterian  Ciiurch,  in  which  bod3'  our  subject 
is  an  Elder.  In  his  political  relations  Mr.  Kelly 
is  a  Republican,  and  socially  is  connected  with 
Rockwood  Post  No.  734,  G.  A.  R. 


-^=m>^^<i 


-J— 


f|^^ICHOLAS  VVELSCH,  a  well  known  farmer 
11  jl)  of  Monroe  County,  who  now  devotes  his 
'^c^!)  time  and  energies  to  agricultural  pursuits 
on  section  31,  township  3,  range  10  west,  was  born 
on  the  18th  of  September,  1834,  and  comes  of  one 
of  the  re()resentative  families  of  this  comiuuiiity. 
His  parents,  John  and  Anna  M.  (Weirschem) 
Welsch,  were  both  natives  of  Germany,  and  were 
there  reared  and  educated.  The  father  was  a  farmer 
by  occupation  and  followed  that  pursuit  in  his  na- 
tive land  until  1839,  when  with  his  family  he 
crossed  the  water  to  America.  He  took  up  his  resi- 
dence in  St.  Clair  County,  111.,  and  two  years  later 
came  to  Monroe  County,  locating  on  a  farm  near 
Madonnaville.  He  purcliased  one  hundred  and 
sixty  acres  of  land,  but  afterward  sold  this  and  pur- 
chased a  large  farm,  the  same  upon  which  our  sub- 
ject now  resides.  At  one  time  he  owned  over 
eight  hundred  acres  of  valuable  land  and  was  num- 
bered among  the  wealthiest  citizens  of  the  county. 
In  1870,  he  removed  to  Monroe,  purchased  a  pleas- 
ant home,  and  there  resided  until  his  death,  which 
occurred  at  the  age  of  sixty -seven.  His  wife,  a 
most  estimable  lady,  passed  awa^'  at  the  age  of 
seventy-two.  They  were  both  members  of  the 
Catholic    Church,   and  Jlr.    Welsch  served    as   its 


Trustee  for  some  time.  In  politics  he  was  a  stal- 
wart Democrat,  and  was  honored  with  several  local 
offices.  He  engaged  extensively  in  raising  grajjes 
for  the  manufacture  of  wine,  wliich  he  sold  to  the 
St.  I.ouis  markets.  In  one  year  he  made  over  four 
thousand  gallons  of  wine.  Mr.  "Welsch,  who  was  a 
very  popular  man,  won  many  friends  and  was 
highl3-  respected  bj'  all  who  knew  him. 

In  the  Welsch  family  were  twelve  children,  but 
seven  of  the  number  are  now  deceased.  Those 
still  living  are  Maria,  Joseph,  Catherine,  Peter  and 
Nicholas.  Tiie  last-named,  who  is  the  subject  of  this 
sketch,  was  reared  and  educated  in  Monroe  County, 
spending  the  days  of  his  boj^iood  and  youth  in  the 
usual  manner  of  farmer  lads.  He  began  life  for 
himself  at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  and  as  a  com- 
panion and  helpmate  on  life's  journey  chose  Miss 
Mar3'  E.  Arns,  a  native  of  Germany.  B}'  their 
union  were  born  eleven  children,  of  whom  two  are 
now  deceased.  The  others  are,  Anna  S.,  Lizzie  J., 
Mary  L.,  Katie  C,  Louisa  T.,  Josephine  M.,  Emil 
J.,  George  N.  and  Joseph  J.  They  have  also 
reared  two  orphan  children,  Henrietta  Bucher  and 
John  Fageu.  The  mother  of  this  family  came  to 
America  when  a  maiden  of  twelve  summers,  and 
lived  with  her  parents  in  New  Orleans  for  two 
3'ears  before  coming  to  Illinois.  She  is  a  member 
of  the  Catholic  Church,  and  is  a  most  highl3'  re- 
spected lad3',  whose  excellencies  of  character  have 
gained  her  many  friends. 

After  the  death  of  his  father,  Mr.  Welsch  pur- 
chased the  old  homestead  farm,  comprising  more 
than  five  hundred  acres  of  land.  He  has  led  a 
useful  life,  and  as  the  result  of  his  untiring  labors 
he  is  now  the  owner  of  a  very  valuable  property. 
His  land  is  all  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation, 
and  is  improved  with  good  buildings  and  all  the 
accessories  and  conveniences  of  a  model  farm.  In 
his  political  views,  Mr.  Welsch  is  a  supporter  of 
the  Democracy;  he  has  held  the  offices  of  Trustee 
and  School  Director,  but  has  never  been  an  active 
politician,  preferring  to  devote  his  entire  time  and 
attention  to  his  business  interests,  in  which  he 
has  met  with  signal  success.  He  and  his  chil- 
dren are  all  members  of  the  Catholic  Church,  and 
he  is  a  prominent  and  influential  citizen  of  the 
eommunit3',  and  is  held  in  high  regard  throughout 


210 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


the  count}'  in  which  he  has  so  long  made  his 
home.  He  is  numbered  among  the  pioneer  settlers, 
for  since  a  very  early  da}'  he  has  witnessed  the 
growth  and  upbuilding  of  this  region,  and  in  the 
work  of  public  advancement  and  improvement  he 
has  ever  borne  his  part. 


i|t_.  ENRY  SCHULZE.  Examples  of  unremitting 
\¥}i>  zeal,  strict  integrity  and  financial  success 
/■^^  may  be  met  witli  in  every  agricultural  dis- 
v^^  trict  in  our  country.  Especially  is  this  the 
case  in  Randolph  Count}-,  where  the  farmers  are 
almost  invariably  well-to-do,  intelligent  and  en- 
terprising. As  a  representative  of  this  class  we 
mention  tiie  name  of  Mr.  Schulze,  the  owner  and 
occupant  of  a  farm  located  on  section  2,  township 
7,  range  6.  He  is  engaged  in  general  farming, and 
is  especially  successful  in  stock-raising. 

A  native  of  Germany,  our  subject,  who  was  the 
son  of  Ciiarles  and  Dorothea  (Welge)  Schulze,  was 
born  November  17,  1838.  His  fatiier  came  to 
America  with  his  family  in  the  year  1849,  and  hav- 
ing heard  such  glowing  accounts  of  the  Prairie 
State,  made  his  way  directly  to  Randolph  County, 
where  he  became  a  farmer.  While  residing  in  Ger- 
many, however,  he  worked  at  his  trade  of  a  shoe- 
maker, but  followed  that  occupation  only  a  few 
years  after  coming  1o  the  New  World.  His  death 
occurred  in  1879,  while  his  good  wife  preceded  him 
to  the  better  land  by  many  years. 

Henry  Schulze  was  a  lad  of  eleven  years  when 
he  crossed  the  Atlantic,  and  while  residing  in 
his  native  land  attended  school.  After  locating 
in  this  county,  and  desiring  to  become  thor- 
oughly conversant  with  the  English  language, 
young  Schulze  attended  school,  and  later  went  to 
Chester,  where  he  learned  the  trade  of  a  shoemaker. 
Not  liking  that  occupation,  however,  he  returned 
to  the  farm  and  has  ever  since  given  his  attention 
to  agtieultural  pursuits,  and  now  has  one  of  the 
finest  estates  in  southern  Illinois.  He  has  been 
successful  as  a  farmer,  and  his  understanding  of 
agriculture  in  its  various  departments  is  broad 
and  deep. 

In  1861,  Mr.  Schulze  and  Miss  Caroline  Opper- 


man  were  united  in  marriage.  The  lady  was  born 
in  Germany,  and  by  her  union  with  our  subject 
she  became  the  mother  of  six  children,  only  two 
of  whom,  Mena  and  Sophia,  are  living.  The 
elder  daughter  is  the  wife  of  Fritz  Dreggemuller, 
and  makes  her  home  in  Kansas,  while  Sophia  re- 
sides with  her  father  on  the  home  farm.  Mrs.  Caro- 
line Schulze  departed  this  life  in  the  year  1871, 
and  two  years  later  our  subject  was  married  to 
Miss  Mary  Brammer.  Their  union  was  blessed  by 
the  birth  of  a  daughter,  Mary.  Mrs.  Mary  Schulze 
died  in  1876,  and  the  following  year  Miss  Louisa 
Hornbustle,  of  St.  Louis,  became  the  wife  of  our 
subject.  To  them  has  been  born  a  son,  William. 

Our  subject  is  a  stanch  Democrat  in  politics,  and 
in  religious  matters  he  and  his  wife  are  devoted 
members  of  the  Lutheran  Church.  In  this  com- 
munity where  he  has  so  long  made  his  home  he  is 
both  widely  and  favorably  known,  and  in  the  his- 
tory of  his  adopted  county  he  well  deserves  repre- 
sentation. 


l(i).   ^»^_... -@J 


FREDERICK  DREVES.  The  career  of 
this  gentleman  has  been  marked  by  en- 
terprise, industry  and  well  directed  efforts, 
and  he  has  been  rewarded  by  the  accumu- 
lation of  a  large  amount  of  land  and  the  machinery 
and  stock  necessary  for  carrying  on  a  first-class 
farm.  Mr.  Drevts  is  one  of  those  German-Amer- 
ican citizens  of  whom  we  have  reason  to  be  proud 
on  account  of  the  example  they  present  of  indus- 
try, morality  and  good  citizenship.  He  is  at  pres- 
ent residing  in  township  7,  range  6,  Randolph 
County,  where  he  owns  a  good  estate  which  he  has 
placed  under  the  best  methods  of  improvement. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  Prussia  in  March,  1841, 
and  is  the  eldest  of  four  children  born  to  Henry 
and  AVilhelmina  (Hamote)  Dreves.  In  1849  the 
family  emigrated  to  America,  and  on  the  journey 
across  the  Atlantic  Mrs.  Dreves  and  one  daughter 
died.  The  father  landed  in  the  New  World  with 
three  of  his  children,  and  on  going  to  St.  Louis, 
Mo.,  there  found  the  cholera  raging,  and   the  re- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


211 


maining  brother  and  sister  of  our  subject  were 
taken  away  b_y  that  dread  disease. 

The  father  of  our  subject  was  again  married  in 
St.  Louis,  and  in  1850  came  to  Illinois  and  located 
a  tract  of  land  near  Chester,  which  is  the  present 
home  of  Mr.  Dreves  of  this  sketch.  The  latter  at- 
tended school  in  his  native  country  and  also  at- 
tended a  short  time  in  St.  Louis  and  in  Chester,  this 
state.  He  lias  always  made  farming  his  life  pursuit, 
and  has  brought  to  bear  upon  it  a  high  degree  of 
intelligence,  and  is  looked  upon  as  one  of  the  best 
agriculturists  in  this  part  of  the  county.  A  new 
postoffice  has  been  created  near  his  home  which 
bears  his  name. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  established  a  home  of 
his  own  in  1865,  at  which  time  he  was  married  to 
Miss  Catherine  Trede.  Her  parents  were  also  na- 
tives of  Germany  and  died  in  the  Mother  Country. 
To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Dreves  have  been  born  seven 
children.  Henry  married  Annie  Shemory  and  re- 
sides near  the  old  homestead,  and  the  others  are 
Dietlof,  George,  Hermann,  William,  Anna  and 
Mena. 

Mr.  Dreves  believes  in  the  principles  laid  down 
in  the  Republican  platform,  and  therefore  votes 
the  straight  ticket.  His  entire  family  are  mem- 
bers of  the  Lutheran  Church  and  conduct  them- 
selves so  as  to  win  the  respect  of  all  with  whom 
they  come  in  contact.  Although  he  never  seeks 
office,  our  subject  alwaj's  manifests  a  great  interest 
in  the  public  welfare,  and  may  be  counted  upon 
to  bear  his  part  in  every  worthy  enterprise  which 
is  being  promulgated  in  the  neighborhood. 


G: 


^^ 


(^ 


'^^ 


m^ 


^~) 


mn 


^ 


ISAAC  LEHNHERR.  There  is  nothing  of  more 
interest  to  the  general  reader  than  a  sketch  of 
a  gentleman  who  has  won  for  himself  both 
fame  and  fortune  in  the  battle  of  life,  and  accord- 
ing to  this  principle  a  brief  account  of  Mr.  Lehn- 
herr  cannot  fail  to  prove  interesting.  He  ranks 
among  the  most  successful  business  men  of  Ches- 
ter, and  is  closely  identified  with  both  the  com- 
mercial and  social  prosperity  of  the  citj'.  He  is  a 
man  of  sterling  worth  and  superior  intelligence, 


and  at  the  present  time  is  carrying  on  a  splendid 
business,  dealing  in  dry  goods,  groceries  and  gen- 
eral farming  implements. 

Our  subject  is  a  native  of  Switzerland,  and  was 
born  September  9,  1824.  He  is  a  son  of  Christian 
and  Elizabeth  C.  (Klopsten)  Lehnherr,  the  former 
of  whom  was  a  miller  in  his  native  land,  and  a 
well-to-do  citizen  in  Spietz.  Isaac  was  a  lad  of 
nine  years  when  in  1833  he  crossed  the  Atlantic 
in  company  with  his  parents.  On  landing  in  the 
New  World,  they  went  directly  to  New  York  City, 
whence  the  father  soon  went  to  Stark  County, 
Ohio,  and  located  on  a  farm  near  Paris.  After 
living  six  years  in  the  Buckeye  State,  the  elder  Mr. 
Lehnherr  with  his  family  came  to  Randolph  Coun- 
ty, and  located  on  a  farm  in  Ellis  Grove  Township. 
This  he  continued  to  operate  with  fair  success  un- 
til his  decease,  which  occurred  in  1860.  His  good 
wife  preceded  him  to  the  better  land  many  years, 
dying  in  1844. 

Our  subject  was  the  sixth  in  order  of  birth  of 
the  parental  famil3'  of  seven  children.  His  broth- 
ers and  sisters  bear  the  respective  names  of  Susan, 
John,  Christian,  Martha,  Jacob  and  Elizabeth.  Af- 
ter coming  to  the  United  States,  Isaac  attended 
school  in  Ellis  Grove  Township,  and  thus  gained 
a  fair  education  in  the  English  language.  Young 
Lehnherr  remained  on  the  farm  assisting  liis  father 
in  its  cultivation  until  1849,  when  he  began  in 
life  on  his  own  account. 

On  the  24th  of  Ma}',  1849,  our  subject  and  Miss 
Sophia  Heitman  were  united  in  marriage.  The 
lady  was  born  on  the  1st  of  May,  1826,  and  was 
a  daughter  of  Herman  and  Margaret  (Wayland) 
Heitman.  After  their  marriage,  the  young  people 
removed  to  a  farm  near  Steelerille.  In  October, 
1856,  Mr.  Lehnherr  established  himself  in  busi- 
ness in  Randolph  County,  opening  a  general  store 
which  he  carried  on  for  seven  j-ears.  At  the  ex- 
piration of  that  time,  having  good  reasons  to  be- 
lieve he  could  better  his  condition,  he  removed 
his  stock  of  goods  to  Chester,  and  soon  after- 
ward put  in  a  full  line  of  hardware  and  agricult- 
ural implements,  carr3-ing  the  Hocking,  the  Supe- 
rior and  Hoosier  drills,  and  the  Belleville  thresher. 
His  honorable  course  in  business,  bis  frank  and 
1   courteous  bearing,  and    his  warm-hearted  nature 


212 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


have  won  bim  the  confidence  of  the  entire  com- 
munity, and  have  given  liini  a  high  place  in  the 
regard  of  all  with  whom  he  associates  either  in  a 
business  or  social  way. 

The  five  children  born  to  our  subject  and  his 
wife  are,  Rudolph  D.,  who  aids  his  father  in  the 
store;  Louis  F.,  a  druggist;  Adelia,  the  wife  of 
Fred  Kebbe,  of  tiiis  city;  Herman  IL,  a  saddler; 
and  Enim.1,  at  home.  In  his  political  relations,  Mr. 
Lehnherr  is  a  Democrat,  and  has  taken  an  import- 
ant part  in  the  local  government,  serving  for  some 
time  as  Alderman  of  the  Third  Ward.  In  him  the 
Lutheran  Church  finds  one  of  its  most  earnest 
and  valued  members,  and  he  has  held  the  office  of 
Trustee. 

■ 0^P • 


OA.  DEAN,  M.  D.,  who  is  successfully  en- 
gaged in  the  practice  of  medicine  in  Camp- 
bell Hill,  is  a  native  of  Cliester,  111.  He  was 
born  June  22,  1854,  and  is  a  son  of  Robert  W.  and 
Sarah  E.  (Hanna)  Dean.  His  father  was  a  native 
of  Kentuckj',  and  his  mother  belonged  to  one  of 
the  pioneer  families  of  Randolph  Count}'.  For 
man}'  years  they  resided  in  Chester,  but  are  now 
residents  of  Perry  County,  111.  In  their  family 
were  seven  children,  of  whom  six  sons  are  yet 
living. 

The  Doctor  acquired  his  early  education  in  the 
common  schools,  and  it  wa«  supplemented  by  study 
in  the  select  schools  of  Carbondale  and  Du  Quoin. 
He  was  reared  upon  a  farm  and  afterward  engaged 
in  teaching  school  in  Randolph,  Perry,  Monroe  and 
Jackson  Counties.  He  was  quite  successful  in  that 
undertaking,  but  at  length  turned  his  attention  to 
the  drug  business,  and  was  employed  as  a  clerk  in 
a  drug  store  for  five  years.  On  the  expiration  of 
that  period,  in  1884,  he  bought  a  drug  store  in 
Campbell  Hill.  He  formed  a  partnership  with 
James  Hanna,  and  has  since  conducted  the  busi- 
ness with  good  success,  the  firm  now  enjoying  a 
liberal  patronage. 

Dr.  Dean  began  reading  at  the  age  of  twenty- 
four  years  and  pursued  his  studies  quietly  during 
his  leisure  hours  for  some  time.  In  order  to  fit 
himself  for  the  profession,  he  then  entered  the 
medical  college  of  Beaumont,  and  later  became  a 


student  in  the  Missouri  Medical  College  of  St. 
Louis,  from  which  he  was  graduated  in  the  Class  of 
'88.  He  at  once  opened  an  office  in  Campbell 
Hill,  and  from  the  beginning  his  practice  has  con- 
stantly increased,  until  he  now  has  all  of  the  prac- 
tice at  this  place. 

In  1877,  Dr.  Dean  was  united  in  miuiiagc  willi 
Mrs.  Mary  A.  Wayland,  a  native  of  Illinois.  She 
died  on  the  1st  of  A|)ril,  1883,  leaving  three  chil- 
dren, Grace,  Clara  and  ^Mary.  In  1887,  the  Doctor 
was  again  married,  his  second  union  being  with 
Mary  L.  Redfield,  a  native  of  Jackson  County,  born 
March  8,  1856.  They  have  oneciiild,  a  daughter, 
Pearl  lone.  The  mother  is  a  member  of  the  Free 
Will  Baptist  Church   and  is  a  most  estimable  lady. 

The  Doctor  takes  a  very  active  interest  in  tem- 
perance work,  and  is  a  member  of  the  Good  Temp- 
lars" society,  in  wiiich  lie  lias  served  as  Worthy 
Chief.  He  also  belonged  to  the  JMasonic  fraternity. 
He  takes  an  active  interest  in  all  that  pertains  to 
the  welfare  of  the  community,  and  does  all  in  his 
power  to  advance  public  welfare.  He  has  been  a 
member  of  the  County  Medical  Association  and 
the  Southern  Illinois  Medical  Association,  and 
among  his  brethren  of  the  fraternity  he  holds  an 
enviable  position,  while  in  the  community  where 
he  lives  his  skill  and  ability  have  won  for  him  a, 
most  excellent  practice. 


L.  LUCIER  is  engaged  in  the  grocery  busi- 
ness in  Murphysboro,  and  is  enjoying  a 
large  trade.  He  has  a  well  stocked  store, 
J  complete  in  all  its  appointments, and  by  fair 
and  honest  dealing  and  courteous  treatment  he 
has  secured  a  liberal  patronage,  which  is  well  mer- 
ited. He  is  also  a  Director  in  the  Murphysboro 
Savings  Bank.  Enterprise  and  industry  are  num- 
bered among  his  chief  characteristics  and  have 
been  the  essential  factors  in  his  success. 

Mr.  Lucier  was  born  near  Montreal,  Canada, 
September  18,  1848,  and  his  grandfather  and  fa- 
ther, both  of  whom  bore  the  name  of  Michael,  were 
natives  of  that  country.  The  father  was  a  farmer 
and  served  in  the  Canadian  Rebellion.  He  married 
Clara  Danan,  who   was  born  in  that  country,  and 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


213 


who  is  of  French  descent.  His  death  occurred  at 
the  age  of  sixt^'-five,  but  his  widow  is  still  living 
in  her  native  land,  at  the  advanced  age  of  eigiity- 
oue.  Of  their  fifteen  children,  eleven  grew  to 
manhood  and  womanliood,  while  five  sons  and  five 
daugliters  are  yet  living. 

In  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads,  J.  1^.  Lucier 
was  reared.  He  was  educated  in  English  and 
French,  and  in  1864  came  to  Murpli^sboro,  joining 
his  brother,  Medor.  He  here  attended  school  for 
two  years,  after  which  he  spent  some  time  in  trav- 
eling in  northern  Illinois,  and  later  went  to  Canada. 
Subsequently  we  find  him  engaged  in  clerking  in 
Haverstraw,  N.  Y.,  and  afterward  carrying  on  busi- 
ness for  himself.  While  living  there  he  chose  as  a 
companion  and  helpmate  on  life's  journey  Miss 
Winnefred  Fay.  They  were  married  in  1874,  and 
became  the  parents  of  eight  children,  seven  of 
whom  are  still  under  the  parental  roof,  namely: 
K.  M.,  James  L.,  Ludger,  Winnefred,  Clara  B., 
Eugenia  and  Charles.  William  died  at  the  age  of 
seven  years. 

In  the  fall  of  1877,  Mr.  Lucier  again  came  to 
Murphysboro,  and  was  employed  as  salesman  in 
his  brother's  grocery  store  until  the  autumn  of  1885, 
when  he  began  business  for  himself.  He  secured  a 
small  stock  of  groceries  and  afterward  added  a 
stock  of  general  merchandise.  Through  his  ear- 
nest efforts  he  steadily  increased  his  trade,  and  at 
length  bought  a  two-story  brick  block  located  on 
the  square.  There  he  carried  on  business  until  the 
fall  of  1893,  when  he  built  a  large  and  handsome 
store  and  removed  to  his  present  location,  at  the 
corner  of  Main  and  Locust  Streets.  His  store  is 
29x93  feet,  and  two  stories  in  height,  with  a  base- 
ment. He  handles  general  merchandise  and  ships 
produce  quite  extensively  to  St.  Louis.  He  also 
carries  on  a  feed  store.  In  addition  to  his  stores 
he  owns  a  fine  residence  and  other  city   property. 

Mr.  Lucier  is  a  stockholder  and  Director  in  the 
Murphysboro  Savings  Bank,  and  a  stockholder  in 
the  Southern  Illinois  Mill  and  Elevator  Company, 
and  is  a  Director  of  the  branch  of  the  East  St.  Louis 
Safety  Homestead  and  Loan  Association  of  Mur- 
physboro. He  was  one  of  the  organizers  and  is  a 
Director  of  the  Catholic  Knights  of  Illinois.  He 
has  contributed  liberally  to  various  organizations 


that  have  materially  advanced  the  best  interests  of 
the  city,  and  is  recognized  as  one  of  its  valued 
citizens.  He  is  a  member  and  liberal  supporter  of 
St.  Andrew's  Catholic  Church,  and  in  politics  is  a 
Democrat. 


'ifl  OIIN  IJ.  BEARE.  This  name  will  at  once 
be  recognized  by  the  majority  of  our  read- 
ers as  that  of  one  who  at  one  time 
^  was    one  of    the    leading  agriculturists    of 

Randolph  County.  In  addition  to  general  farm- 
ing he  was  extensively  engaged  in  fruit  growing 
and  in  the  manufacture  of  brandy,  wine  and  cider. 
The  estate  consists  of  two  hundred  and  fifteen 
acres,  which  are  tilled  in  the  most  thorough  man- 
ner and  are  adorned  with  a  fine  set  of  build- 
ings, second  to  none  in  the  township.  They  are 
complete  in  all  their  appointments,  and  the  dwell- 
ing is  surrounded  with  all  that  goes  to  make  a 
home  pleasant  and  attractive. 

Our  subject  was  a  representative  of  a  prominent 
and  highly  esteemed  family,  whose  identification 
with  the  early  development  of  this  county  proved 
it  a  valuable  factor  in  the  county's  civilization. 
Mr.  Beare  was  born  in  the  canton  of  Berne,  Switz- 
erland, March  24,  1823,  and  when  a  child  of  three 
years  was  brought  by  his  parents  to  America,  they 
settling  in  Toledo,  Ohio.  In  1837  they  came  to 
Illinois  and  located  in  Randolph  County,  where 
our  subject  continued  to  live  until  the  time  of  his 
death,  which  occurred  May  27,  1892.  He  assisted 
his  father  in  the  operation  of  his  farm  until  en- 
abled to  own  one  of  his  own.  He  engaged  in 
farming  all  his  life  with  the  exception  of  a  few 
3'eais,  when  he  was  with  his  brothers,  Joseph  and 
John,  in  a  grocery  store  at  Chester.  Possessing 
the  progressive  ideas  of  the  age,  and  making  of 
his  agricultural  pursuit  both  an  art  and  a  science, 
he  proved  successful  in  Lis  chosen  calling,  gain- 
ing from  the  fertile  soil  abundant  crops  of  excel- 
lent quality.  His  fruit  farm  was  one  of  the  finest 
in  the  count}'  and  the  source  of  a  good  income. 

The  marriage  of  our  subject  was  solemnized 
April  18,  1849,  his  wife  being  Mrs.  Mary  (Nifong) 


214 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Leavitt.  Mrs.  Beare  bore  her  husband  three  chil- 
dren, Margaret,  who  is  deceased;  William  Nicholas, 
a  resident  of  Ellis  Grove;  and  Joseph  A.,  who 
lived  iu  San  Francisco,  Cal.  Tiie  good  wife  and 
mother  died  September  23, 1872, and  May  14, 1873, 
Rlr.  Beare  was  married  to  Mrs.  Maria  Sophia  Eliza- 
beth Kemfor,  who  still  survives.  She  was  the  widow 
of  John  Kemfor,  was  born  in  Germany  and  came 
to  America  when  twenty-five  years  of  age.  She 
received  excellent  home  training  and  good  educa- 
tional advantages,  and  is  therefore  well  qualified 
to  fill  lier  place.  She  is  a  consistent  member  of 
the  German  Methodist  Church,  as  was  her  good 
husband.  In  his  political  faith  Mr.  Beare  was  a 
stanch  Democrat. 


(^ 


(^ 


-^■^ 


=^ 


<A  I^ILLIAM  K.  BORDERS,  one  of  the  wealthy 
\/\J//  and  most  enterprising  citizens  of  Ran- 
^^  dolpli  County,  is  at  the  head  of  the  Bank 
of  Sparta;  indeed  he  is  sole  proprietor  of  that  insti- 
tution, and  is  ranked  among  the  leading  business 
men  of  the  city.  His  father,  James  J.  Borders,- 
was  born  in  Randolph  County-  July  2,  1818,  only 
a  short  time  before  the  state  was  admitted  to  the 
Union.  At  the  age  of  twenty-five,  he  purchased 
land  and  began  farming  for  himself.  He  contin- 
ued to  reside  on  the  homestead  which  he  there  de- 
veloped until  1878,  when  he  came  to  Sparta.  He 
engaged  extensively  in  raising  horses  and  mules, 
and  also  had  on  hand  large  land  speculations.  He 
owned  at  one  time  as  much  as  ten  thousand  acres, 
and  at  his  death  was  the  largest  land-owner  in  the 
Gounty. 

In  the  year  1873,  in  connection  with  Mr. 
Boyle,  James  J.  Borders  purchased  the  Bank  of 
Sparta,  then  operated  by  S.  P.  Smith,  and  re- 
tained his  connection  with  it  up  to  the  date  of  his 
death.  He  was  a  charitable  and  benevolent  man, 
and  his  help  was  given  in  a  practical  way,  which 
enabled  the  receiver  to  help  himself  and  thus  re- 
tain his  self-respect.  In  politics  he  was  a  Demo- 
crat. In  1873  he  was  elected  County  Commis- 
sioner. He  had  previously  served  as  Justice  of 
the  Peace,  but  few  cases  came  before  him  for  trial, 


as  he  almost  invariably  induced  the  litigants  to 
compromise.  Socially  he  was  a  Master  Mason. 
He  was  as  honest  as  the  day  is  long,  outspoken 
and  fearless,  and  had  the  confidence  of  all.  His 
death  occurred  in  Sparta,  July  22,  1891. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  bore  the  maiden 
name  of  Mary  A.  Ritchey.  She  was  born  in  this 
county,  and  is  a  daughter  of  William  and  Sarah 
(_Hyndman)  Ritchey,  who  were  natives  of  Penn- 
sylvania, and  who  came  thence  to  Illinois.  The  fa- 
ther was  a  coal  dealer  and  a  very  successful  business 
man.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Borders  were  married  about 
1854,  and  became  the  parents  of  eight  children, 
namely:  Andrew,  .James  B.  and  Maggie,  deceased; 
William  R.,  of  this  sketch;  Andrew,  Mattie  E., 
Michael  W.  and  Mary  I.  James  B.  married  Ada 
McCormick,  and  lived  at  Nashville,  III.  They 
have  six  children.  Andrew  was  Postmaster  at 
Sparta  during  President  Cleveland's  first  term,  and 
is  at  present  Postmaster  at  Tulare,  Cal.  He  mar- 
ried Mamie  Weir,  and  they  have  two  children, 
Francis  and  Irene.  Mattie  E.  is  the  wife  of  Dr. 
C.  F.  Taggart,  a  practicing  physician  of  San  Fran- 
cisco, Cal.,  who  was  graduated  in  St.  Louis,  and  is 
now  taking  a  post-graduate  course  in  Berlin,  Ger- 
many; they  have  one  child,  Norma  H.  Michael 
W.,  a  practicing  attorney  of  Belleville,  III.,  was 
graduated  from  the  Columbia  Law  School,  of  New 
York,  and  is  now  holding  the  office  of  City  Attor- 
ney of  Belleville,  although  he  is  only  twenty-five 
years  of  age.  He  married  Alice  Abby,  and  they 
have  one  child.  The  Borders  family  is  one  of 
prominence  in  Randolph  County,  its  members 
having  been  inseparably  connected  with  the  ma- 
terial progress  and  development  of  this  com- 
munit}%  Maj.  Andrew  Borders,  father  of  James  J., 
was  one  of  the  earl^-  pioneers  and  prominent  char- 
acters of  Illinois. 

Our  subject  has  also  borne  his  share  in  the  work  of 
public  advancement  and  improvement.  He  was 
reared  in  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads,  and  be- 
came familiar  with  all  the  duties  of  farm  life.  He 
entered  upon  his  business  career  as  silent  partner  in 
the  Bank  of  Sparta  in  1873,. and  is  now  sole  proprie- 
tor. This  is  now  one  of  the  leading  financial  insti- 
tutions of  the  county,  conducted  on  a  safe  and  con 
servative  basis,  and  is  a  credit  to  the  community  as 


PORTRAIT   AND   JilOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


217 


well  as  to  the  owner.  Mr.  Borders  is  a  mau  of  excel- 
lent business  and  executive  abilit}'.  and  his  success 
is  well  deserved.  He  is  extensively  interested  in 
the  natural  gas  wells  at  Sparta.  In  fact,  he  was  a 
ruling  spirit  in  the  company  which  discovered 
natural  gas  in  Sparta,  and  is  now  sole  proprietor 
of  three  flowing  wells,  with  about  three  miles  of 
gas  mains.  He  is  also  a  prominent  breeder  of  trot- 
ting and  pacing  horses  and  is  a  member  of  the  Board 
of  Directors  of  the  National  Standard  Pacing 
Horse  Breeders'  Company.  In  politics  he  is  a  zeal- 
ous Democrat,  but  never  held,  and  could  net  be 
induced  to  hold,  an  office.  For  eight  years  he 
served  as  Treasurer  of  Hope  Lodge  No.  162,  A.  F. 
&  A.  M.,  and  he  is  also  a  member  of  Tancred  Com- 
mandery  No.  50,  at  Belleville,  111.  He  is  the  larg- 
est owner  of  city  property  in  Sparta,  and  one  of 
the  largest  holders  of  real  estate  in  Randolph 
County. 

\I^-^  ON.  WILLIAM  RALLS  MORRISON,  for 
If  j)  sixteen  years  a  Member  of  Congress  from 
'^y^  the  Eighteenth  Congressional  District  of 
(^/  Illinois,  was  born  in  Monroe  County,  111., 
September  14,1825.  He  secured  his  preliminary 
education  in  the  common  schools,  and  afterward 
attended  McKendree  College.  He  enlisted  in  the 
Mexican  War  and  served  as  a  private  in  Colonel 
Bissel's  regiment  under  General  Taylor,  after 
which  he  studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the  Bar 
in  Monroe  County. 

In  1852  Mr.  Morrison  was  elected  Clerk  of  Mon- 
roe County,  and  served  in  that  capacity  until  1854, 
when  he  resigned.  He  was  then  chosen  to  repre- 
sent his  district  in  the  Legislature  and  became 
Speaker  of  the  House  in  1859.  At  the  beginning 
of  the  Rebellion  he  organized  the  Forty-ninth  Illi- 
nois Infantry  and  took  an  active  and  prominent 
part  in  the  early  portion  of  the  war.  At  the  bat- 
tle of  Ft.  Donelson  he  was  severely  wounded.  In 
1862,  while  in  command  of  his  regiment,  he  was 
elected  bj'  the  Democratic  party  to  the  Thirty- 
eighth  Congress,  but  was  defeated  for  the  Thirty- 
ninth  and  Fortieth  Congresses. 

In    1872   Colonel   Morrison   again  received  the 
nomination    by    the   Democratic    party,  and    was 
2 


elected,  taking  his  seat  the  following  3'ear  and 
serving  until  1887.  From  1875  until  1877,  and 
again  from  1883  to  1887,  he  was  Chairman  of  the 
Ways  and  Means  Committee,  and  in  that  responsi- 
ble position  rendered  efficient  service,  as  he  did  in 
every  other  duty  entrusted  to  kim.  In  1886  he 
was  defeated  for  re-election.  He  was  a  delegate 
to  the  National  Union  Convention  in  1866,  and  to 
the  Democratic  Conventions  of  1856,1868,1884 
and  1888.  At  the  time  of  the  last  election  of  Gen- 
eral Logan  to  the  United  States  Senate,  Colonel 
Morrison  was  his  opponent,  and  there  was  a  differ- 
ence of  but  two  votes  between  their  respective 
parties.  Though  the  matter  was  long  and  hotlj'  con- 
tested, the  relations  between  the  two  were  of  the 
most  friendly  character,  as  they  had  been  friends 
from  an  early  day  and  comrades  during  the  war. 
At  the  expiration  of  his  Congressional  service, 
in  March,  1887,  Colonel  Morrison  was  appointed 
by  President  Cleveland  a  member  of  the  Inter- 
State  Commerce  Commission  for  a  term  of  five 
years,  and  was  re-appointed  by  President  Harrison 
for  six  years.  For  a  long  time  he  has  been  a  promi- 
nent factor  in  the  Democratic  part}',  which  he  more 
truly  represents  then  any  one  else  in  this  section. 
On  two  occasions  he  has  had  a  strong  following 
for  the  Presidential  nomination.  He  is  still  active 
and  influential  in  the  councils  of  his  party,  and  is 
held  in  high  regard,  nor  only  by  those  of  similar 
political  belief,  but  by  his  fellow-men,  irrespective 
of  part\'  affiliations. 


ILLIAM  W.  COLLIER.  This  county  is 
/'  the  home  of  quite  a  number  of  men  who 
'^/m  were  thrown  upon  their  own  resources  at 
an  early  age,  and  whose  natural  aptness  and  en- 
ergy were  developed  and  strengthened  by  contact 
with  the  world,  resulting  in  making  their  lives 
more  than  ordinarily  successful  in  worldly  prosper- 
ity and  in  winning  respect.  Among  this  number  is 
William  W.  Collier,  of  Chester,  where  he  is  carry- 
ing on  a  splendid  trade  in  the  saddler}-  and  har- 
ness business. 

A  native   of  Wayne  County,  Mo.,  our  suliject 
was    born   near    Frederickstown,   September    12, 


218 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


1847,  and  is  the  son  of  Miles  H.  and  Mary  S. 
(Sliort)  Collier,  natives  ies])eetively  of  Alabama 
and  Tennessee.  The  father,  who  in  early  life  was 
a  merchant,  later  followed  farming,  and  on  the 
outbreak  of  the  Civil  War  owned  a  fine  estate, 
which  with  the  slaves  upon  it  was  valued  at  840,- 
000.  Desiring  to  Leave  the  state,  he  sold  his  prop- 
erty for  $400,  and  moving  north,  made  his  home 
in  Carlj'Ie,  Clinton  County,  this  state.  He  em- 
barked in  the  saddlery  business  there,  and  con- 
tinued to  make  it  his  home  for  many  years.  He 
was  a  very  capable  man,  and  died  while  on  a  visit 
to  his  son  in  this  cit}-.  In  his  deatu,  which  oc- 
curred in  1882,  not  onl3'  the  family,  but  the  com- 
munity- at  large  sustained  a  heav}'  loss.  The 
mother  of  our  subject  departed  this  life  in  1886, 
in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  while  at  the  home  of  her  daugh- 
ter, Mrs.  J.  II.  Donewald. 

William  W.  Collier  was  the  third  in  order  of 
birth  of  his  parents'  family  of  nine  children,  six 
of  whom  grew  to  mature  years.  He  passed  his 
boyhood  and  youth  in  this  state,  and  at  Carlyle 
received  a  good  education  in  the  public  school. 
When  old  enough  to  choose  a  life  occupation  he 
learned  the  trade  ot  a  saddler  from  his  father,  and 
remained  in  the  above  place  working  at  his  trade 
until  1870,  the  _year  of  his  removal  to  Chester. 

May  7,  1870,  Mr.  Collier  launched  out  in  busi- 
ness in  this  citj-,  opening  a  store  along  the  river 
front,  and  has  continued  in  the  harness  business 
up  to  the  present  time.  He  has  been  more  than 
ordinarilj'  successful  in  his  chosen  trade,  although 
he  met  with  severe  losses  on  two  occasions.  .Jan- 
uary 9,  1879,  his  dwelling  w.as  burned,  and  Decem- 
ber 24,  1887,  his  store  was  destroyed,  he  thereby 
losing  14,700. 

The  lady  to  whom  Mr.  Collier  was  married 
March  31,  1874,  was  known  prior  to  her  marriage 
as  Miss  Angelique  E.  Smith.  She  was  the  daugh- 
ter of  David  and  Frances  Smith,  and  was  born  and 
reared  in  this  cit}'.  By  her  union  with  our  sub- 
ject she  has  become  the  mother  of  the  following 
six  children:  Minnie  C,  Lelia  S.;  Byron  S.  and 
Mamie,  deceased;  .Jolin  W.  and  Elbert. 

Mr.  Collier  believes  the  principles  laid  down  in 
the  Democratic  platform  are  best  adapted  to  the 
needs  of  the  nation,  and  therefore  votes  a  straight 


ticket.  He  can  alwaj's  be  counted  upon  to  bear  a 
I)art  in  every  worthj'  enterprise  which  is  promul- 
gated in  the  neighborhood,  and  is  particularity  in- 
terested in  the  advancement  of  the  cause  of  educa- 
tion. This  is  recognized  bj'  his  fellow-citizens, 
who  have  bestowed  upon  him  the  office  of  School 
Trustee,  which  he  held  for  two  terms.  Socially  he 
is  a  Mason  and  belongs  to  Chester  JjOdge  No.  72. 
Mr.  Collier  has  a  neat  residence,  which  is  located 
on  the  bluflf  and  commands  a  fine  view  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi River. 


•r^m-r 


OBERT  BROWN,  who  was  one  of  the  well- 
f  to-do  agriculturists  of  Randolph  County, 
i4^\y  was  residing  on  an  eighty-acre  tract,  lo- 
)^  cated  on  section  8,  township  8,  range  5,  at 
the  time  of  his  death.  He  was  the  son  of  William 
and  Pjliza  (Carruthers)  Brown,  and  was  born  in 
County  Down,  Ireland.  August  22,  1838.  He 
came  to  America  in  1855,  and  meeting  a  brother 
who  was  living  in  Pennsylvania,  remained  there  a 
few  weeks,  when  he  came  with  him  to  Randolph 
County,  their  destination  being  Rockwood,  which 
at  that  time  was  known  as  Liberty. 

On  reaching  this  county,  the  young  Irish  lad 
engaged  to  work  on  neighboring  farms  for  several 
years,  and  then  purchasing  a  tract  of  lorty  acres 
in  township  7,  range  5,  there  made  his  home  for 
six  j-ears.  Previous  to  buying  tliis  tract,  however, 
he  was  married,  February  28,  1858,  to  Miss  Mar- 
garet L.,  daughter  of  Thomas  and  Elizabeth  (An- 
derson) Kelly,  also  natives  of  Count}'  Down,  Ire- 
land, whence  they  emigrated  to  the  United  States 
some  sixty  years  ago.  The}-  located  in  Rockland 
County,  N.  Y.,  where  Margaret  was  born  March  8, 
1841.  In  the  summer  of  1842,  Thomas  Kell\-.  with 
his  family,  came  to  this  count}-,  and  made  his  home 
near  Rockwood  until  his  death  May  29,  1891.  His 
good  wife  died  July  5,  1872. 

After  residing  six  years  on  his  first  purchase, 
our  subject  bought  a  quarter-section  elsewhere  in 
this  locality,  and  resided  on  it  for  seven  years, 
when  he  made  permanent  location  on  section  8. 
By  this  union  with  Miss  Brown  there  were  born 
ten  children,  of  whom  four  survive.     They  are, 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


219 


Eliza  Ellen,  Maggie,  Elijah  and  Harvey  Robert. 
Those  deceased  are,  William,  Henry,  Mary  Ann, 
John  Walker,  John  C.  and  Minnie.  Mr.  Brown 
during  his  lifetime  was  a  member  of  the  Presby- 
terian Church,  with  which  body  his  widow  and 
children  arc  connected. 

3<'  ?^C 


/RANCIS  GOLLON,  one  of  the  noted  busi- 
ness men  of  the  cit3'  of  Chester,  is  a  native 
of  Prussia  Poland,  and  was  born  January 
26,  1839.  His  parents,  Jacob  and  Barbara  (Singer) 
Gollon,  were  also  born  in  Prussia,  and  lived  and 
died  in  that  country.  Our  subject  attended  the 
schools  of  his  native  laud,  and  when  old  enough 
commenced  to  cultivate  a  farm  for  bis  parents,  at 
which  he  continued  until  reaching  his  eighteenth 
year,  when  he  determined  to  emigrate  to  America. 
After  landing  in  New  York  Cit}-,  he  made  his  way 
to  Peoria,  this  state,  and  began  to  learn  the  trade 
of  a  baker,  at  which  he  worked  for  the  following 
two  years.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time  he 
came  to  Chester  to  visit  a  brother  who  was  resid- 
ing here.  It  had  been  his  intention  to  go  farther 
south,  but  instead  he  engaged  to  work  in  the 
bakery  of  William  Bruns,  who  was  just  starting  a 
shop.  After  a  time  our  subject  was  enabled  to 
embark  in  business  for  himself,  and  continued  in 
this  until  the  latter  part  of  I860.  The  following 
year  we  find  him  working  at  his  trade  in  New 
Orleans.  Having  an  opportunity  to  engage  as  pas- 
try cook  on  the  steamer  "Paj'tona,"  plying  from 
Louisville  to  New  Orleans,  he  accepted  the  posi- 
tion, but  a  few  months  later,  however,  he  resigned 
and  commenced  working  in  the  last  named  city. 
After  three  months  in  that  city  he  went  to  Cairo, 
and  worked  in  the  Government  baker}'  there  until 
just  after  the  battle  of  Pittsburg  Landing,  in  1862. 
Mr.  Gollon  then  joined  the  army  stationed  at 
the  above  city  and  baked  for  them.  He  subse- 
quently visited  many  places,  among  which  were 
Helena,  Ark.,  and  Vicksburg,  and  went  with  the 
regiment  on  Bank's  expedition  on  Red  River.  In 
the  spring  of  1864  our  subject  returned  to  New 
Orleans,  and  in  June  of  that  year  made  his  way  to 
Chester.     He  soon   entered   into   partnership  with 


Valentine  Ritter,  who  was  engaged  in  the  retail 
liquor  business.  After  a  year  thus  spent  he  bought 
out  his  partner,  and  has  .since  conducted  the 
business  alone.  In  addition  to  this  he  has  been 
engaged  in  the  hotel  and  restaurant  business  a 
great  deal  of  the  time,  besides  dealing  extensively- 
in  ice  and  in  wholesaling  beer.  Because  of  his 
straightforward  manner  and  sagacity  he  is  consid- 
ered one  of  Chester's  solid  business  men  and  has 
gained  the  entire  confidence  and  respect  of  the 
community.  Politically  Mr.  Gollon  is  a  stalwart 
Republican  in  principle,  but  in  local  affairs  is 
rather  conservative,  voting  for  the  best  man,  irre- 
spective of  party. 

January  11,  1866,  Miss  Rosa  Dushinks}',  a 
daughter  of  Joseph  and  Julia  (Gollon)  Dusbinks}-, 
became  the  wife  of  our  subject.  The  parents  of 
Mrs.  Gollon  emigrated  from  Prussia  in  an  early 
day,  and  spent  the  remainder  of  their  lives  in  Ches- 
ter. Fourteen  children  came  to  bless  the  union  of 
our  subject  and  his  estimable  wife,  four  of  whom 
are  deceased.  The  living  are:  Frank,  who  is  mar- 
ried and  makes  his  home  in  Chicago;  Edward,  who 
is  engaged  as  a  railway  postal  clerk;  Louis,  who  is 
a  jeweler;  and  Clem,  John,  Bertha,  Rosa,  Georgiana, 
Leon  and  James  Blaine,  all  of  whom  are  attending 
school.  The  last-named  was  born  November  4, 
1884,  on  the  night  of  the  defeat  of  James  G. 
Blaine  for  President.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gollon,  with 
their  entire  family,  are  devout  members  of  the  Ro- 
man Catholic  Church. 

JULIUS  H.  JAENKE,  a  harness  dealer  of 
Burksville,  is  numbered  among  the  promi- 
nent and  representative  business  men  of 
that  place.  He  well  merits  the  prominent 
position  which  he  fills  and  the  high  regard  in 
which  he  is  held.  He  was  born  in  Germany,  De- 
cember 21,  1851,  and  is  a  son  of  Ehrenfried  G. 
and  Christiana  (Grallert)  Jaenke,  both  of  whom 
were  natives  of  Prussia.  Their  family  numbered 
six  children,  of  whom  four  are  3-et  living:  Will- 
iam, Fred,  Julius  H.  and  George  J.  The  parents 
were  both  reared  and  educated  in  their  native 
land.     The   father  was  a  millwright  by  trade.     In 


220 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


1852  he  brought  his  wife  and  children  to  the 
United  Slates,  and  on  reaching  the  shores  of  this 
country,  came  directly  to  Waterloo,  111.,  where  he 
followed  coopering  for  a  time.  He  afterward  pur- 
chased an  eight3--acrc  farm  in  Monroe  Countj',  and 
successfull}'  carried  on  agricultural  pursuits  until 
his  death.  Both  he  and  his  wife  were  members 
of  St.  Paul's  Church,  and  in  politics  he  was  a  Re- 
publican. His  death  occurred  at  the  age  of  sixty- 
seven,  and  his  wife  passed  away  at  the  age  of 
sixty-two  j'ears. 

It  was  during  the  infancy  of  our  subject  that 
he  was  brought  to  America.  He  attended  school 
until  thirteen  3'ears  of  age,  and  then  began  earn- 
ing his  own  livelihood  by  learning  the  harness- 
maker's  trade,  serving  a  three  years'  apprentice- 
ship. He  then  again  attended  school,  and  after 
pursuing  his  studies  for  a  time  in  the  high  school 
at  AVaterloo  he  began  teaching.  Subsequently  he 
was  for  three  terms  a  student  in  the  state  normal 
school  at  Carbondale,  111.  He  then  resumed  teach- 
ing, which  profession  he  followed  for  twelve  3'ears, 
being  recognized  as  one  of  the  most  able  instruc- 
tors in  the  countj'. 

On  leaving  the  normal  school,  Mr.  Jaenke  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Maiy  Keck,  a  native 
of  Monroe  County,  who  was  reared  and  educated 
near  Waterloo,  and  who  is  a  highly  cultured  and 
refined  lady.  Two  children  were  born  to  them,  of 
whom  one  is  j'et  living,  Julius  H.  The  mother 
was  a  faithful  member  of  St.  Paul's  Church  of 
Waterloo,  and  was  a  most  estimable  lady.  Her 
death  occurred  at  the  early  age  of  twenty-six 
years.  For  his  second  wife,  Mr.  Jaenke  chose 
Catherine  Trost,  also  a  native  of  Monroe  County, 
where  her  maidenhood  days  were  passed.  Three 
children  graced  this  union,  of  whom  two  are  yet 
living,  Lydia  and  Flora.  The  mother  is  a  highly 
educated  lady,  and  belongs  to  the  Lutheran  Church. 

Mr.  Jaenke  continued  to  engage  in  teaching  for 
some  years.  He  then  abandoned  that  profession, 
and  gave  his  entire  attention  to  farming  and  har- 
ness-making, which  pursuits  he  still  follows.  He 
is  the  owner  of  one  hundred  and  eighty  acres  of 
rich  land,  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation  and 
well  improved,  and  also  owns  some  town  property. 
As  a  harness  dealer  he   is   doing  a  good  business, 


and  enjoys  a  constantly  increasing  trade,  which  he 
well  merits,  for  he  is  honorable  and  upright  in  all 
transactions  and  earnestly'  desires  to  please  his 
customers.  He  cairies  a  policy'  in  the  Northwest- 
ern Insurance  Company  of  Chicago  for  ^1,000. 
He  is  a  member  of  the  Harigari  Lodge  of  Water- 
loo, and  has  held  the  offices  of  Township  Assessor 
and  Justice  of  the  Peace,  discharging  his  duties 
with  credit  to  himself  and  satisfaction  to  his  con- 
stituents. He  votes  indeiiendently,  preferring  to 
support  the  man  whom  he  thinks  best  qualified  for 
the  office.  Mr.  Jaenke  is  a  member  of  the  Lutheran 
Church,  and  is  now  serving  as  its  President. 


^^< 


J^!  NDREW  GARNER,  lately  deceased,  was  an 
WlU\\  intelligent  and  enterprising  farmer  who 
resided  in  township  6,  range  7,  Randolph 
County.  He  was  a  native  of  the  Father- 
land, and  was  born  September  12,  1832.  He  was 
the  second  child  in  order  of  birth  in  a  family  of 
three  children  born  to  George  and  Magdalena 
(Helmana)  Garner.  The  parents  emigrated  to  the 
United  States  in  1851,  locating  in  this  county, 
where  they  died. 

Our  subject  attended  the  model  schools  of  his 
native  country,  and  after  coming  to  America  com- 
menced farming  on  his  own  account.  He  was  then 
twenty-one  years  of  age,  and  he  became  one  of  the 
leading  farmers  of  the  county.  The  neat  and  at- 
tractive estate  com]n'ises  two  hundred  fertile  acres, 
on  which  he  carried  on  general  farming  and  stock- 
raising.  On  the  place  are  to  be  found  all  the  re- 
quisites necessary  for  conducting  successful  farm- 
ing, and  the  many  outbuildings  are  adequate  for 
the  care  of  the  grain  and  stock.  In  1860  he 
erected  a  cooper  shop  on  his  farm  and  employed  a 
number  of  men  to  make  flour  barrels,  which  enter- 
prise was  very  successful. 

In  the  j'ear  1854  Mr.  Garner  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Catherine  Denninger,  who  was  a 
native  of  Germanj^  and  who  came  to  Illinois 
in  an  earlj'  day  with  her  parents.  She  bore  her 
husband  four  children,  all  of  whom  yet  survive: 
Emma,  who  is  the  wife  of  Baty  Schultz  and  lives 
in  St.  Louis;  Jane,  who  is  the  wife  of  John  McDon- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


221 


aid,  and  resides  on  a  farm  near  Ellis  Grove;  Chris- 
tian who  married  Ella  Humphry,  and  is  a  farmer 
near  Ellis  Grove;  and  Anna,  the  wife  of  William 
Schoeppel,  residents  of  Ellis  Grove.  On  Septem- 
ber 1,  1892,  the  wife  and  mother  passed  to  the 
land  of  rest,  and  Mr.  Garner  moved  from  his  farm 
to  Ellis  Grove,  where  he  lived  with  his  youngest 
daughter  until  death  called  him  to  rest,  Jan- 
uary 10,  1894.  Neither  Mr.  Garner  nor  his  wife 
were  members  of  a  church.  He  was  a  member  of 
Kaskaskia  Lodge  No.  86,  F.  &  A.  M.,  and  politi- 
cally cast  his  vote  for  the  candidates  of  the  Deni- 
ovatic  party. 


^^EORGE  B.  ALLISON,  of  Chester,  is  a  na- 
III  (— ,  tive  of  Maries  Count}-,  Mo.,  and  was  born 
^^ijl  March  10,  1862.  He  is  a  son  of  Ebenezer 
and  Margaret  (Gow)  Allison,  natives  of  Scotland, 
the  former  having  been  born  in  Fifeshire,  and  the 
latter  in  Perthshire.  The  paternal  grandparents, 
John  and  Jane  (Beveredge)  Allison,  were  also  na- 
tives of  the  Lowlands  of  Scotland.  The  maternal 
grandparents  were  William  and  Elizabeth  Gow, 
the  latter  of  whom  is  still  living  in  the  High- 
lands, and  has  attained  the  advanced  age  of  one 
hundred  and  one  years  (1894). 

In  the  spring  of  1856  Ebenezer  Allison  and 
Miss  Margaret  Gow  were  united  in  marriage,  and 
a  few  months  later  they  bade  farewell  to  their 
childhood's  home  and  set-sail  for  America.  Land- 
ing in  New  York,  they  proceeded  thence  to  Roches- 
ter, where  they  remained  on  a  farm  about  three 
years.  Traveling  still  further  westward  and  set- 
tling in  Missouri,  they  entered  land  some  fourteen 
miles  south  of  RoUa,  where  they  engaged  in  farm- 
ing for  seven  years.  The  war  coming  on,  they 
were  unable  to  get  away  from  the  county,  although 
the  surroundings  were  not  pleasant,  owing  to  tlie 
fact  that  they  were  faithful  to  the  Union,  while 
their  neighbors  were  mostly  southern  sympathizers. 
RoUa  was  at  that  time  a  military  post,  and  Eben- 
ezer Allison  joined  the  militia  service,  which 
drew  upon  him  the  animosity  of  his  fellow-citi- 
zens. His  life  was  constantly  in  danger,  and 
often,  after  retiring,  he   could   hear  the   sound  of 


approaching  footsteps,  the  neighing  of  horses  and 
the  lowing  of  cattle,  and  knew  that  his  best 
stock  was  being  stolen,  but  he  did  not  dare  to 
protest.  Had  he  done  so,  it  would  have  cost  him 
his  life. 

The  Rebellion  ended,  Mr.  Allison  sold  his  farm 
in  Missouri  in  the  spring  of  1866,  and  came  di- 
rectly to  Chester,  where  a  brother  held  the  position 
of  miller  in  Cole's  mill.  For  the  four  years  suc- 
ceeding his  advent  in  Randolph  County  he  oper- 
ated rented  land  near  Chester,  and  then  pur- 
chased the  farm  where  his  widow  still  resides. 
Twenty  years  after  coming  to  this  state  he  passed 
awaj',  in  March,  1886.  He  and  his  wife  had  a 
famil}'  of  seven  sons  and  one  daughter,  five  of 
whom  are  now  living,  viz.:  William  G.,  a  stock- 
dealer  in  Chester;  George  B.,  Postmaster  at  Ches- 
ter; Ebenezer,  proprietor  of  a  fine  grocery  store 
on  Main  Street,  Chester;  Alex  G.,  who  is  living 
on  the  old  homestead  with  his  mother;  and  David. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  spent  his  early  child- 
liood  d.ays  on  the  farm.  His  primary  education 
was  secured  in  the  district  school  and  was  supple- 
mented with  two  years  in  the  South  Normal  In- 
stitute of  Carbondale.  The  six  months  succeeding 
his  normal  course  he  taught  in  thejdistrict  schools 
of  Randolph  County.  During  the  summer  seasons 
he  read  law  in  the  office  of  H.  Clay  Horner,  of  Ches- 
ter, and  in  August,  1886,  he  was  admitted  to  the  Bar 
of  Randolph  County.  In  the  county  seat  he  began 
the  practice  of  his  profession,  and  continued  thus 
engaged  until  his  appointment  as  Postmaster  at 
Chester,  under  President  Harrison,  his  commission 
bearing  date  of  December  22,  1891.  , 

Since  casting  his  first  vote  in  a  Presidential 
election  for  James  G.  Blaine,  Mr.  Allison  has  con- 
tinued loyal  to  the  principles  of  the  Republican 
party.  He  made  the  race  for  Prosecuting  Attor- 
ney, and,  although  the  county  is  hopelessly  Dem- 
ocratic, he  ran  some  sixty  votes  ahead  of  his 
ticket.  Socially,  he  is  connected  witli  the  order 
of  Knights  of  Pythias,  in  which  he  has  filled  the 
highest  local  offices.  He  is  also  a  prominent  mem- 
ber of  the  Chester  Club. 

The  lady  who,  September  8,  1886,  became  the 
wife  of  Mr.  Allison  was  Flora,  daughter  of  Rob- 
ert and  Kate  (Harmon)  Gant,  natives  of  Randolph 


222 


PORTRAIT  AKD  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


County.  Her  father  was  a  representative  of  an 
old  English  family,  members  of  which  were  earlj' 
settlers  of  Pennsj-lvania,  coming  thence  to  this 
county  man3'  years  ago.  The  Harmon  family  is 
of  Dutch  origin.  Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Allison  have 
been  born  three  children,  Maggie  M.,  Robert  G. 
and  William  E.  Mrs.  Allison  is  a  member  of  the 
Methodist  Church,  and  Mr.  Allison  is  a  regular 
attendant  at  the  services  of  that  denomination, 
though  not  a  member.  In  the  social  circles  of 
Chester  they  are  worthily  held  in  high  esteem. 


Jn  OHN  S.  BALTZELL,  who   for  the  past  two 
I    3-ears  has  been  telegraph  operator  at  Perc}', 
'    has  the  honor  of  being  a  native  of  Illinois, 
'    his  birth  having  occurred  in  Union  County, 

July  11,  1860.  He  is  the  youngest  child  of  John 
and  Rapsy  (Lewis)  Baltzell.  His  father  was  a  na- 
tive of  Maryland,  and  when  quite  young  came  to 
this  state  with  his  parents,  the  family  locating  in 
Jonesboro,  111.  The  grandfather  of  our  subject, 
Henry  Baltzell,  spent  his  remaining  days  in  this 
state,  and  died  near  Grand  Tower.  The  father 
carried  on  a  supply  store  and  wood  yard  on  the 
river  near  Grand  Tower  until  the  great  overflow 
in  1844,  when  he  began  school  teaching,  which 
profession  he  followed  until  his  death,  which  oc- 
curred January  1,  1860,  a  few  months  before  the 
birth  of  our  subject.  Mrs.  Baltzell  is  still  living, 
and  has  reached  the  advanced  age  of  seventy-two. 
She  makes  her  home  in  Belleville,  111. 

Mr.  Baltzell  of  this  sketch  received  his  pri- 
mary education  near  Cobden,  Union  County,  111., 
and  subsequently'  attended  school  in  Alto  Pass, 
111.,  for  two  terms,  alternating  his  studies  with 
farm  work  in  that  community.  At  the  age  of  six- 
teen he  began  learning  telegraphy-  in  Jonesboro, 
and  has  since  devoted  the  greater  part  of  his  time 
and  attention  to  that  work.  After  studying  for 
seven  months  he  started  out  to  seek  a  position, 
and  going  to  the  south  secured  employment  in 
Little  Rock,  Ark.  He  went  from  that  place  to 
Bismarck,  Mo.,  and  thence  returned  to  Alto  Pass, 
111.  Later  he  was  employed  in  the  general  office 
of  the  Mobile  (k  Ohio  Railroad  at  St.  Louis,  Mo., 


and  on  leaving  the  city  he  went  to  Millstadt.  We 
next  find  him  in  Perc}',  where  he  continued  tele- 
graph operating  until  his  removal  to  Cairo,  111. 
On  leaving  that  pl.ace  he  again  went  south,  locat- 
ing in  Union  City,  Tenn.,  whence  he  retunied  to 
Columbia,  111.  He  afterward  was  again  emplo3'ed 
in  the  general  office  in  St.  Louis,  and  later  Jn 
O'Kean  and  Olyphant,  Ark.  A  short  time  was 
then  spent  in  McNeil.  Mo.,  after  which  he  returned 
home  on  a  visit  and  then  located  in  Baldwin,  111. 
After  being  emploj-ed  as  operator  in  Blackwater, 
Mo.,  for  a  period  of  four  years  he  then  again  re- 
turned to  Baldwin,  later  he  was  employed  in  A\^ 
Pass,  and  thence  came  to  Percy,  where  he  has  now 
been  located  for  the  past  two  years. 

In  1888  Mr.  Baltzell  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Alice  Brown,  of  Percy,  a  daughter  of 
David  and  Elizabeth  (Harmon)  Brown.  Their 
union  has  been  blessed  with  two  children,  Homer 
and  Ethel,  who  are  with  their  parents.  Mrs.  Balt- 
zell is  a  member  of  the  Methodist  Church,  and  is  a 
most  estimable  lady,  who  is  held  in  high  regard 
throughout  the  communitj'  in  which  she  makes  her 
home. 

Mr.  Baltzell  holds  membership  with  Blackwater 
Lodge  No.  127, 1.  O.  O.  F.,  of  Blackwater,  Mo.,  has 
filled  all  of  its  offices,  and  is  now  Past  Grand.  He 
exercises  his  right  of  franchise  in  support  of  the 
Democratic  part^-,  but  is  busily  emploved  in  his 
profession  and  has  never  aspired  to  public  office. 
He  thoroughly  understands  his  business  and  is  rec- 
ognized as  an  able  operator.  In  Percy  and  through- 
out the  community  he  h:is  many  warm  friends  who 
esteem  him  highl3-  for  his  sterling  worth. 


S|Hi)ENJAMIN  J.  L.  GROSS  is  one  of  the  enter- 
jll<^  prising  business  men  of  New  Palestine, 
/^)  I  Randolph  County.  His  birth  occurred  in 
'is^^  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  April  1,  1854,  and  he  was 
the  third  child  born  to  Conrad  and  Catherine 
(Dihlmann)  Gross,  both  natives  of  Germanj-.  In 
1866  the  parents  removed  to  this  count3'.  The3- 
lived  here  until  their  deaths,  the  mother,  d3-ing 
June   19,  1881,  and  the  father,  .lune  24,  1888. 

Our   subject  was   twelve    years    old  when    the 
journe3'  was  made  hither.     He  had  attended  the 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


223 


schools  in  his  native  state,  but  after  coming  here,  for 
three  years  was  a  student  in  the  Lutlieran  scliool, 
and  spent  one  year  at  the  public  school.  When 
fifteen  years  old  he  began  learning  his  father's 
trade,  blacksmithing, and  has  been  in  tliat  business 
ever  since.  In  1880  he  embarked  for  himself  in 
New  Palestine,  where  he  is  enjoj'ing  a  large  and 
profitable  trade,  manufacturing  wagons, plows  and 
harrows  in  connection  with  his  general  repair 
work. 

The  marriage  of  Mr.  Gross  and  Miss  Justina, 
daughter  of  Adam  and  Elizabeth  Breacher,  na- 
tives of  Germany,  occurred  December  26,  1881. 
To  this  marriage  nine  children  were  born,  tiie  two 
eldest  of  whom  died  in  infancy.  The  others  are: 
John  and  Conrad,  who  are  attending  school  in 
Chester;  Alfred,  Hulda,  Irene,  Justina  and  Sig- 
mund,  who  are  at  home  with  their  parents.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Gross  are  devoted  members  of  the  Lu- 
theran Church  and  are  held  in  high  esteem  by 
the  entire  community.  Politically,  Mr.  Gross  is 
conservative,  preferring  to  cast  his  ballot  for  the 
man,  irrespective  of  party. 


~'P^\l^^ 


^ 


bAVVRENCE   MERGELE  was  born  in  Ger- 
)  many  on    the   10th   of  August,   1826,  and 
, I  was  reared  and  educated  in   that   country. 

In  1845,  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  he  bade  adieu  to 
friends  and  Fatherland  and  sailed  for  the  New 
World.  He  landed  in  New  York  and  worked  for 
some  time  in  that  city  in  order  to  acquire  the  nec- 
essary funds  to  bring  him  to  the  west.  He  then 
made  his  way  to  Illinois,  locating  near  Glasgow, 
where  he  afterward  married  Miss  Mary  Brown. 

The  young  couple  began  their  domestic  life 
upon  an  unbroken  farm.  The  entire  county  was 
in  its  primitive  condition,  and  the  work  of  prog- 
ress and  civilization  seemed  scarcely  begun.  All 
was  wild  and  unimproved,  and  deer  and  wolves 
were  numerous.  The  famil}'  experienced  all  the 
hardships  and  trials  of  frontier  life,  but  the  efforts 
of  Mr.  Mergele  were  abi}'  seconded  by  his  wife,  who 
proved  to  him  a  faithful  helpmate.  She  was  born 
in   Germany  in    1832,  and  when  onl3'  a  year  old 


was  brought  to  this  country  by  her  parents,  who 
settled  in  St.  Louis,  where  she  acquired  her  educa- 
tion m  the  common  schools.  Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Mergele  were  born  six  children,  but  only  four  are 
now  living.  The  eldest,  Theresa,  died  in  1889, 
and  the  youngest,  Lizzie,  died  at  the  age  of  ten 
years.  Those  still  living  are  Caroline, Kate,  Frank 
and  Bernard.  Kate  was  born  in  1857,  near  Glas- 
gow, and  under  the  parental  roof  grew  to  woman- 
hood. She  attended  a-  convent  in  Waterloo  one 
winter,  but  made  her  home  with  her  parents  until 
twent}'-five  years  of  age,  when  she  became  the  wife 
of  George  Leibach,  and  removed  to  Glasgow,  where 
her  husband  worked  as  a  saddler.  Two  years  later 
they  came  to  Burksville,  where  Mr.  Leibach  fol- 
lowed the  same  business  for  a  time.  Later  they 
went  to  Denver,  Colo.,  where  he  carried  on  a  gro- 
cery store  until  going  to  New  Mexico.  His  death 
there  occurred  on  the  30th  of  November,  1892. 
Mrs.  Leibach  still  survives  her  husband  and  is  living 
upon  the  home  farm  in  this  county.  She  iiad  three 
children,  one  of  whom,  Frank  is  deceased.  Celia 
and  George  are  still  with  their  mother.  .  Bernard 
Mergele,  the  youngest  member  of  the  family,  was 
born  December  15,  1872,  in  this  county,  and  now 
operates  the  old  homestead.  He  is  a  wide-awake 
and  enterprising  agriculturist,  and  the  neat  ap- 
pearance of  the  farm  indicates  his  enterprise.  He 
holds  membership  with  the  Catholic  Church. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Mergele  traveled  life's  journey 
together  for  fifty-five  years,  sharing  witli  each 
other  its  joys  and  sorrows,  its  adversity  and  pros- 
perity. They  were  separated  by  death  in  1887, 
when  the  wife  and  mother  was  called  to  the  home 
beyond.  Her  remains  were  interred  in  Tipton. 
With  the  Catholic  Church  she  held  membership, 
and  she  was  a  most  highly  respectecl  woman. 
After  the  death  of  his  first  wife,  Mr.  Mergele  re- 
moved to  Burksville,  and  thence  to  a  farm  close 
by.  He  was  afterward  again  married,  his  second 
union  being  with  Mrs.  La  Forge,  who  is  still  living. 
While  residing  in  Burksville,  Mr.  Mergele  car- 
ried on  milling  for  some  time.  In  earl}'  life  he 
served  in  the  Mexican  War,  and  as  a  result  of 
his  service  his  health  was  always  somewhat  im- 
paired. By  the  Government  lie  was  given  a  pen- 
sion, which  proved  of  benefit  to  him  in  his  declin- 


224 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


ing  years.  After  about  a  year's  illness  his  death 
occurred,  May  17,  1890,  and  his  remains  were  in- 
terred in  Tipton  Cemetery.  He,  too,  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Catholic  Church.  By  his  industry  and 
economy  he  had  accumulated  several  hundred 
acres  of  land,  and  thus  left  his  family  in  comforta- 
ble circumstances.  His  life  was  well  and  worthily 
passed,  and  by  an  lionorable,  upright  career,  he 
won  the  high  regard  of  all. 


P.  WALKER,  one  of  tlie  well  known 
farmers  of  Jackson  County,  resides  on  sec- 
tion 31,  Elkville  Township.  He  claims 
Michigan  as  the  state  of  his  nativity,  his 
birth  having  occurred  in  Grass  Lake,  in  1838.  He 
traces  his  ancestry  back  to  1620,  and  the  family 
numbers  among  its  members  some  of  the  most 
noted  people  of  Ohio  and  Illinois.  In  his  native 
state  he  grew  to  manhood,  and  there  received  a  lib- 
eral education,  which  was  completed  by  a  course  of 
study  in  the  Kalamazoo  Baptist  College.  For  five 
years  he  tauglit  school,  and  proved  an  able  in- 
structor. With  the  capital  which  he  had  thereby 
acquired  he  then  embarked  in  the  drug  business  at 
Grass  Lake,  where  for  eight  years  he  enjoyed  a 
good  trade  and  the  prosperity  it  brought  to  him. 
In  1862,  in  his  native  town,  Mr.  Walker  was 
joined  in  wedlock  with  Miss  Malissa  Babbitt,  a 
daughter  of  Levi  Babbitt,  but  tlie  lady  died  of 
consumption  shortly  after  her  marriage.  In  1866, 
he  married  Miss  Katie  Smith,  of  Schoolcraft,  Mich. 
She  was  a  most  estimable  lady  and  possessed  su- 
perior talent  in  vocal  music.  Her  death,  which 
occurred  in  1872,  was  widely  and  deeply  mourned. 
On  the  3d  of  June,  1879,  Mr.  Walker  was  united 
in  marriage  with  Mrs.  L.  E.  Kuglcr,  a  relative  of 
J.  H.  Kugler,  who  is  widely  known  as  a  steamboat 
pilot.  Her  father,  Mahlon  Van  Pelt,  was  a  noted 
stock-raiser  of  Highland,  Ohio,  and  married  P^liza- 
beth  Arthur, a  relative  of  tlie  late  President  Arthur. 
Mrs.  Walker  is  possessed  of  unusual  force  of  char- 
acter and  intelligence,  and  as  a  newspaper  cor- 
respondent has  won  an  enviable  reputation  by  her 
sharp, clear  sarcasm  and  her  humor.  The  children 
of   Mrs.  Walker  by  her   former  marriage  are  two 


ill  number,  Fannie,  who  married  Robert  Ruther- 
ford, an  artist  residing  in  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa; 
and  Dudley,  who  resides  on  the  old  homestead. 

About  1878,  Mr.  Walker  removed  from  his  old 
home  in  Grass  Lake,  Mich.,  and  came  to  Jackson 
County,  111.  He  settled  on  section  31,  Elkville 
Township,  where  he  jjurcliased  one  hundred  and 
sixty-five  acres  of  valuable  land,  which  constitutes 
one  of  the  finest  farms  in  the  community.  It  is 
neat  and  thrifty  in  appearance,  and  the  many  im- 
provements upon  the  place  stand  as  monuments  to 
his  thrift  and  enterprise.  The  greater  part  of  his 
time  and  attention  are  now  devoted  to  its  further 
cultivation.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Walker  are  people  of 
intelligence  and  worth,  and  are  well  informed  on 
the  questions  of  the  da}-.  They  take  a  deep  interest 
in  old-time  mementos  and  relics,  and  as  the  years 
have  passed,  have  collected  a  number  of  very  in- 
teresting and  valuable  souvenirs.  The}'  have  in 
their  possession  a  copy  of  the  Boston  Gazette  which 
was  published  in  1770,  and  a  Vicksburg  paper 
which  was  published  during  the  war  and  printed 
on  wall  paper. 


J.  BURGE.  This  name  will  be  at  once 
recognized  as  that  of  a  leading  business  man 
of  Tamaroa,  who  is  carrying  on  a  prosper- 
(^/'  ous  trade  as  a  dealer  in  farm  implements. 
His  establishment  is  supplied  with  a  complete  line 
of  machinery  suited  to  the  needs  of  the  farmer. 
Both  in  prices  and  quality  the  stock  is  exceptional, 
and  through  reliable  dealings  with  all,  the  proprie- 
tor has  gained  the  confidence  of  the  people  of  this 
section. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  born  in  Wayne 
County,  111.,  in  1848.  At  the  time  his  parents  re- 
moved to  this  place,  in  1859,  he  accompanied 
them,  and  has  since  made  this  place  his  home, 
with  the  exception  of  a  short  time  spent  in  the 
west.  He  was  one  in  a  family  of  nine  children 
born  to  William  and  Nanc}'  (Adams)  Burge,  na- 
tives respectively  of  Tennessee  and  Kentucky. 
The  eldest  brother  of  our  subject,  John  R.,  entered 
the  Union  army  in  1862,  becoming  a  member  of 
Company  F,  Thirteenth  Illinois  Cavalry,  and  served 


■<^SN 


f  a'^^^k 


<::yC^^t^y 


v<^ 


PORTRAIT  A^T)  BTOGRAfmCAL  RECOftD. 


227 


his  country  faithfullj'  and  well  until  the  close  of 
liostilities.  His  death,  which  occurred  in  Tamaroa, 
was  caused  b_y  consumijtion. 

J.  J.  Burge  was  also  of  a  ver^'  patriotic  nature, 
and  was  only  detained  from  entering  the  army  on 
account  of  liis  age.  In  1880  he  engaged  in  selling 
farm  implements,  and  eleven  years  later  formed  a 
partnership  with  H.  W.  Adams,  the  firm  now  con- 
ducting business  under  the  stj-le  of  Adams  & 
Burge.  Our  subject  deals  fairly  with  ever^'  one, 
lives  a  life  of  the  strictest  integrity,  and  has  gained 
not  only  the  respect,  but  the  high  esteem  of  a  very 
wide  circle  of  acquaintances. 

The  lady  witii  whom  Mr.  Burge  was  united  in 
marriage  in  1881  was  Miss  Cassie  Freeman,  a  resi- 
dent of  this  city.  Their  union  has  been  blessed 
b3'  the  birth  of  three  children.  Harlon  C,  Ebert  (de- 
ceased) and  A!«bie  R.  In  his  political  relations 
Jlr.  Burge  is  a  stanch  Republican,  and  although  an 
active  supporter  of  its  principles,  is  not  one  to  seek 
political  preferences.  He  is  a  member  of  the  In- 
dependent Order  of  Odd  Fellows,  with  which  bodj- 
he  has  been  connected  since  early  manhood.  Mrs. 
Burge  is  a  member  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church. 


I^OX.  WILLIAM  J.  ALLEN,  LL.  B.,  of  the 
l|)V  LTnited  States  District  Court  for  southern 
/^^^  Illinois.  In  presenting  to  the  readers  of 
(^)  this  volume  the  biographj'  of  Judge  Allen, 
we  are  perpetuating  the  life  work  of  one  of  the 
most  honored  residents  of  the  state.  Throughout 
a  long,  honorable  and  influential  career,  he  has 
maintained  that  energy  and  integrity  which  char- 
acterized his  earlier  \'ears.  Nor  has  his  success 
been  merely  in  accumulating  wealth,  but  in  the 
better  sense  of  the  word,  he  has  been  successful  in 
serving  others,  in  doing  good  and  in  winning  the 
respect  and  esteem  of  a  very  large  circle  of  ac- 
quaintances. Laborious  and  patient,  exhibiting 
by  his  life  his  self-reliant  spirit  and  strong  individ- 
uality, the  influence  he  unconsciously  exerts  has  a 
future  as  well  as  a  present  bearing  upon  the  prog- 
ress of  this  section  of  the  state. 

The  record  of  the  life  of  Willis  Allen,  father  of 
the  Judge,  is  one  of   which   his  descendants   may 


justly  be  proud.  Possessed  of  that  indefatigable 
industry  and  legal  ability  which  was  later  so  abun- 
dautl3'  evinced  by  the  son  of  whom  we  write,  he 
became  eminent  in  the  political  circles  of  southern 
Illinois.  He  was  born  in  Tennessee  in  December, 
1806,  and  there  married  Miss  Elizabeth  Joiner. 
In  1830  he  came  to  Illinois  and  commenced  farm- 
ing in  what  was  then  Franklin  County'.  He  served 
as  Sheriff,  Representative  and  State  Senator,  and 
in  1841  was  elected  State's  Attorney  for  the  Cir- 
cuit. He  was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional  Con- 
vention of  1847,  and  of  Congress  from  1851  until 
1855.  As  a  lawyer  he  was  successful,  and  at  the 
time  of  his  death  was  Judge  of  the  Circuit  Court. 
He  died  in  April,  1859,  while  his  wife,  who  was 
born  in  1807,  survived  him  three  ^-ears,  passing 
away  in  1862.  They  left  three  sons  and  two 
daughters. 

Born  in  Wilson  County,  Tenn.,  June  9,  1829, 
our  subject  was  brought  by  his  parents  to  Illinois 
when  an  infant.  He  received  his  literary  education 
at  a  boarding  school,  and  was  graduated  in  1849 
from  the  Law  School  of  Louisville,  Ky.  Open- 
ing an  office  at  Metropolis,  111.,  he  removed  from 
there  to  Williamson  County  in  1853,  and  practiced 
in  Marion  until  1854,  when  he  was  elected  to  the 
Lower  House  of  the  State  Legislature.  In  the 
spring  of  1855  he  was  appointed  United  States  Dis- 
trict Attorney,  and  four  years  later  resigned  that 
position  to  resume  the  practice  of  law  at  Marion. 
He  was  elected  Circuit  Judge  to  succeed  his  father 
in  1859.  holding  the  office  until  December,  1861, 
when  he  became  a  member  of  the  Constitutional 
Convention.  In  the  spring  of  1862  he  was  elected 
to  Congress,  and  there  served  on  the  Committee 
on  Claims,  also  the  Committees  on  Territories  and 
Commerce. 

Next  we  find  Judge  Allen  located  at  Cairo,  111., 
where  he  remained  until  1874.  and  whence  he  re- 
moved to  Carbondale.  During  his  residence  in 
these  cities  he  devoted  his  attention  to  the  prac- 
tice of  his  chosen  profession,  being  employed  by 
Governor  Beveridge  to  prosecute  the  AYilliamson 
County  vendetta.  This  delicate  and  dangerous 
service  he  performed  with  fearlessness  and  distin- 
guished ability,  convicting  all  the  leaders  and  re- 
storing peace  to  the  community.     In    1886   he  re- 


228 


PORTRAIT  AND  BlOGRAJfHiCAL  RECORD. 


moved  from  Carbondale  to  Springfield,  and  in 
,Iune  of  that  year  formed  a  partnership  with  C.  C. 
Brown  it  Son,  tlie.firm  name  being  Allen,  Brown  A- 
Brown.  This  partnership  was  continued  until  our 
subject  was  appointed  in  1887  to  his  present 
■ludgeship.  Throughout  his  entire  life  he  has 
been  a  stanch  supporter  of  Deraocravic  principles. 
The  marriage  of  Judge  Allen  and  Miss  Annie 
McKeen,  of  Maryland,  was  celebrated  in  Decem- 
ber, 1858.  Mrs.  Allen  was  born  in  1840,  and  is  a 
daughter  of  Hugh  Blair  and  Ursula  McKeen,  na- 
tives of  Maryland,  and  now  deceased.  Of  the 
union  of  Judge  and  Mrs.  Allen,  six  children  were 
born,  five  of  whom  are  now  living,  namely:  Willis, 
Miriam,  Robert  M.,  Louise  and  John  B. 


T^^^^ms-^^^m^^sm-^^ 


i;ILLlAM  FRICK,  Sr.,  a  well  known  farmer 
^jll  residing  on  section  17,  township  3,  range 
'^^  8  west,  ]\Ionroe  County,  was  born  in  the 
Hessian  province  of  German}^  on  the  Sd  of  Octo- 
ber, 1819,  and  is  a  son  of  Henry  and  Catherine 
Frick.  His  father  was  a  farmer  and  butcher.  In 
1833,  accompanied  by  his  family,  he  crossed  the 
Atlantic,  landing  in  New  Orleans  in  M.a^'  of  that 
year.  The^-  went  thence  to  Little  Rock,  on  to  St. 
Louis,  and  later  to  Belleville,  St.  Clair  County,  in 
the  vicinity  of  whicii  place  the  family  lived  for 
some  time,  the  members  working  for  farmers  in 
the  neighborhood  until  1834,  when  the  father 
rented  a  farm.  In  the  fall  of  1835  the  family 
came  to  Monroe  County,  where  again  a  farm  was 
rented.  For  a  short  time  the  sons  worked  for 
others,  and  then  worked  upon  the  home  farm,  a 
claim  of  school  land  having  been  secured.  Mr. 
Frick.  Sr.,  continued  to  live  in  this  locality  until 
called  to  the  home  beyond,  on  the  4th  of  .Septem- 
ber, 1860.  In  the  familj'  were  eight  children,  five 
of  whom  are  still  living,  John,  William,  Charles, 
Ernst  and  Jacob. 

William  Frick, of  this  sketch,  continued  to  work 
as  a  farm  hand  until  twenty-two  yeai-s  of  age.  In 
1840  he  bought  land  in  Randolph  County-,  a  tract 
of  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres,  comprising  forty 
acres  of  timber  land  and  one  liundred  and  twenty 
acres  of  prairie.     On  the  17th  of  September.  1850, 


he  married  Mary  Magdelena,  daughter  of  Christo- 
pher He}-!,  a  native  of  Germany,  who  came  to  Illi- 
nois from  Pennsylvania  about  1835  and  settled  in 
Jlonroe  Countj'.  Mrs.  Frick  was  born  in  Pennsyl- 
vania September  1,  1833.  The  j'oung  couple  be- 
gan their  domestic  life  upon  his  farm  in  Randolph 
Count}',  but  after  two  years  our  subject  sold  out 
and  removed  to  the  farm  which  is  now  his  home. 
He  and  his  brother  John  are  the  oldest  settlers 
living  in  the  township.  AVhen  they  came  here,  deer, 
wild  turkeys  and  other  game  were  very  plentiful. 
The  land  was  wild,  and  tlie  work  of  civilization 
seemed  hardly  begun. 

In  1890,  Mr.  Frick  was  called  upon  to  mourn  the 
loss  of  his  wife,  who  died  on  the  23d  of  Septem- 
ber. In  their  family  were  eleven  children,  eight 
of  whom  are  still  living:  William  Henry,  a  farmer; 
Mary  Magdalena,  wife  of  Charles  "Menmann,  who 
operates  a  farm  belonging  to  her  father;  Louisa, 
wife  of  Amend  Streichcr,  of  Red  Bud;  Carolina 
Henrietta;  Johanna,  wife  of  John  Whiteside,  an 
agriculturist  of  this  community;  Mary  Ann,  at 
home;  Emil  D.,  a  merchant  of  St.  Louis;  Edward 
Christopher;  and  Ernest  Henry,  who  are  still  upon 
the  home  farm.  One  child  died  in  inSancy;  Eliza- 
beth died  at  the  age  of  six  and  a-half.  and  JIary 
when  eight  and  a-half  years  of  age. 

Mr.  Frick  at  one  time  owned  over  four  hundred 
acres  of  land,  but  now  has  three  hundred  and 
eighty-three  acres,  forty-three  on  section  18,  forty 
on  section  7,  one  hundred  and  twenty  on  section 
5,  eigiity  on  section  17,  eighty  on  section  21.  and 
twenty  on  section  16.  The  land  is  all  highly  culti- 
vated and  improved,  and  Mr.  Frick  successfully 
carries  on  general  farming  and  stock-raising.  He 
started  in  life  for  himself  without  a  dollar,  and  in  h  is 
early  years  had  to  work  very  hard  to  provide  for  his 
own  maintenance,  but  he  was  industrious  and 
frugal,  saved  his  money,  and  by  judicious  invest- 
ments and  well  directed  efforts  he  has  become  one 
of  the  substantial  farmers  of  the  community.  In 
politics  he  is  a  stanch  supporter  of  the  Democracy, 
and  for  three  years  was  Supervisor  of  his  town- 
ship. He  was  one  of  the  organizere  of  the  Evan- 
gelical Church,  is  now  serving  as  Trustee,  and  has 
ever  been  one  of  its  active  and  faithful  workers. 
Mr.  Frick  in  an  early  day  drove  a  peddler's  wagon 


PORTRAIT  ANt)  BlOGRAPiOCAT.  RECORD. 


229 


from  Hecker  to  8t.  Louis.  He  supplied  tlie  mer- 
chants with  goods,  and  took  their  produce  to 
market  in  St.  Louis,  making  tliree  trips  every  two 
weeks.  This  was  during  the  cholera  epidemic  in 
1849. 


•jf^^RITZ  .JENKEL  is  classed  among  the  intel- 
K^Gji  ligeut,  keen  and  successful  German  farm- 
/li  ers  of   Perry   County  and   is  contributing 

much  to  its  material  prosperity.  His  property, 
which  consists  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  acres, 
is  located  on  section  36,  township  4,  range  3  west, 
and  is  kept  up  to  the  highest  point  in  every  re- 
spect, being  supplied  with  neat  and  well  ordered 
buildings  and  the  most  im[)roved  modern  ma- 
chinery. 

Fritz  and  Mar}'  (Ahrens)  Jenkel,  the  parents  of 
our  subject,  were  born  in  Germany.  The  grand- 
father was  a  tailor  by  trade,  and  for  many  years 
held  a  Government  position  as  forestman.  When 
too  old  to  follow  this  business  any  longer  he  was 
retired  with  a  good  pension.  In  early  manhood 
he  was  ordered  to  enter  the  German  arm}-,  and 
not  wishing  to  do  so,  was  about  to  be  forced  into 
the  service  when  his  young  wife  locked  him  in 
a  clothes  press  and  thus  he  evaded  his  would-be 
captors. 

The  father  of  our  subject  learned  the  carpen- 
ter's trade  in  early  life,  but  did  not  follow  that 
occupation,  as  he  succeeded  his  father  as  forest- 
man  and  held  that  position  until  coming  to  the 
United  States.  The  lady  whom  he  married  in  his 
native  country  was  the  daughter  of  Henr>'  Ahrens, 
a  well-to-do  farmer  and  a  devoted  Baptist  in  re- 
ligion, who  was  so  persecuted  by  his  enemies  that 
he  was  compelled  to  spend  the  greater  part  of  his 
•life  either  in  the  woods  or  in  prison. 

Fritz  .Jenkel,  Sr.,  emigrated  to  the  United  States 
with  his  familj'  in  1854,  and  when  locating  in  St. 
Louis  was  without  means  of  any  kind.  He  worked 
for  other  people  for  the  succeeding  two  3'ears, 
after  which  he  came  to  Illinois  and  made  his  home 
for  some  time  in  St.  Clair  County.  In  1858  he 
came  to  Perry  Count}',  where  he  purchased  eighty 
acres  of  land  and  resided  until  liis  decease.     The 


parental  family  included  ten  children,  of  whom 
six  were  born  in  Germany.  They  were  William, 
Fritz,  Elizabeth,  Mary;  Henry  and  Dora  (twins); 
Mina,  Ida,  Catherine,  and  one  who  died  in  infancy. 
Of  this  family,  our  subject,  Ida  and  Catherine  are 
the  only  members  living. 

Our  subject  w.as  born  December  13,  1835,  and 
I'eceived  a  fair  education  in  his  native  land.  Be- 
ing one  of  the  eldest  children,  he  was  compelled 
to  aid  his  father  in  the  support  of  the  family. 
When  nine  years  of  age  he  began  to  workout,  and 
after  coming  to  the  United  States  was  employed 
by  other  people  for  a  number  of  years.  The  lady 
whom  he  married  in  his  twenty-fifth  year  was  Mrs. 
Julia  A.  Holstetter,  daughter  of  Jacob  Hoot.  Mrs. 
Jenkel  was  also  a  native  of  Germany,  and  by  her 
union  with  our  subject  has  become  the  mother  of 
five  children,  viz.:  Henry,  William,  John,  George 
and  Mary.  In  1862  our  subject  located  in  this 
county,  and  after  renting  property  for  a  twelve- 
month purchased  his  present  farm,  the  greater 
portion  of  which  he  has  cleared  himself.  With  his 
wife  he  is  a  member  in  good  standing  of  the  Bap- 
tist Church  at  Oak  Grove,  in  which  body  he  has 
served  as  Deacon  for  the  past  sixteen  years.  He 
is  not  connected  with  any  political  party,  but  al- 
ways votes  for  the  best  man. 


JR.  W.  J.  HARRAL  is  a  well    known    and 
)   rising  young   physician   now  engaged  in 
the  practice  of  medicine  in   Elkville.     He 
"  claims  Tennessee  as  the  state  of  his  nativ- 

ity, and  in  its  schools  he  received  a  liberal  educa- 
tion. Determining  to  take  up  the  practice  of 
medicine  and  make  it  his  life  work,  he  entered  the 
college  at  Jlemphis,  Tenn.,  and  was  graduated 
with  honor  from  that  institution  with  the  degree 
of  M.  D. 

Mr.  Harial  is  a  doctor  of  the  old  school.  He 
began  practice  in  1883  and  has  continued  it  unin- 
terruptedly up  to  the  present  time,  in  the  early 
part  of  1894.  His  ability  to  properly  diagnose 
difficult  cases  soon  brought  him  conspicuously  be- 
fore the  public  and  made  him  well  known  to  a 
wide  territory.     His  practice  from  the  beginning 


230 


PORTRAIT  ANt)  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


steadily  increased  and  in  a  few  years  extended 
tluoughout  the  more  densely  populated  districts 
of  the  western  part  of  Middle  Tennessee. 

Shortly  after  beginning  practice,  as  he  was  now 
starling  out  for  himself,  Dr.  Harral  chose  as  a 
companion  and  helpmate  on  life's  journey  Miss 
Kugcnia  Thompson,  a  daughter  of  J.N.Thomp- 
son, a  native  of  North  Carolina.  The  parents  of 
our  subject.  Baker  and  Rebecca  (White)  llarral, 
were  also  natives  of  North  Carolina,  and  from 
that  state  some  sixty  years  ago  emigrated  to  Ten- 
nessee, where  the  father  carried  on  agricultural 
pui-suits.  Unto  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Harral  have  been 
born  two  children,  a  son  and  daugliter,  Carl  Riv- 
ers and  Lonera. 

For  about  ten  years  our  subject  continued  to 
practice  in  his  native  state  and  then  came  to 
Illinois,  locating  in  Elkville  in  1893.  He  has 
for  about  a  year  been  engaged  in  practice  in  this 
place  and  is  already  doing  a  successful  business. 
He  is  a  close  student  of  his  profession,  and  his 
skill  and  ability  have  won  for  him  a  high  reputa- 
tion, not  only  among  his  patrons,  but  also  among 
his  brother  physicians.  He  is  a  wide-awake  and 
enterprising  young  man,  and  this  community  finds 
in  him  a  valued  citizen  who  manifests  a  commend- 
able interest  in  everything  pertaining  to  its  wel- 
fare and  its  advancement.  He  possesses  raan\' 
excellencies  of  character,  and  he  and  his  estimable 
wife  have  gained  many  friends  in  this  community. 


HARLES  R.  MILLER.  Randolph  County 
is  the  home  of  a  goodly  number  of  men 
who  have  put  forth  such  industrious  and 
well  directed  efforts  that  they  have  been  able  to 
retire  from  the  toils  and  cares  of  life,  and  are  now 
spending  their  time  in  ease  and  enjoyment.  Among 
this  number  is  the  gentleman  above  named,  who 
occupies  an  attractive  home  in  Sparta,  into  which 
he  moved  in  1881.  He  still  owns  his  fine  farm, 
which  consists  of  two  hundred  acres  in  township 
5,  range  5,  on  wiiich  he  has  erected  every  building 
necessary  in  carrying  on  the  work  of  the  estate,  all 
being  substantial  and  well  arranged. 

Tiie  father  of  our  subject,  Andrew  Miller,  was  a 


native  of  Scotland,  having  been  born  in  Glasgow, 
about  1776.  He  made  his  home  in  his  native  land 
until  1796,  when  he  crossed  the  Atlantic,  antl  for 
twelve  3'cars  resided  in  Ryegate,  Vt.  While  living 
in  the  Green  Mountain  State  he  was  the  proprie- 
tor of  a  grist  mill,  which  was  burned  down  on  two 
occasions.  From  Vermont  he  went  to  Gallowa}' 
Countj-,  N.  Y.,  where  he  engaged  in  farming  for 
some  time.  In  1827  he  came  to  Randolph  County 
and  made  his  home  on  section  9,  township  5,  range 
5,  where  he  remained  until  his  decease,  which  oc- 
curred in  July,  1846.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
Covenanter  Church,  being  identified  with  the 
Bethel  congregation.  Grandfather  James  Miller 
was  also  a  native  of  Scotland,  and  a  miller  by  trade. 

Mrs.  Margaret  (McLearj-)  Miller,  the  mother  of 
our  subject,  was  a  native  of  Ireland,  and  when 
ready  to  come  to  America  made  the  trip  across  tlie 
Atlantic  in  compan}'  with  Rev.  William  Gibson. 
She  located  in  Vermont,  where  she  was  married  to 
.\ndrew  Miller  in  1802.  Of  their  family  of  four- 
teen children,  three  died  in  infancy.  Those  who 
lived  to  mature  years  were,  James,  Jane,  Robert, 
William,  Margaret,  Andrew,  Mar}'  Ann,  Eliza, 
Rachael,  John,  and  Charles,  of  this  sketch. 

Charles  R.  Miller  was  born  December  13,  1819, 
in  Galloway  County,  N.  Y.,  which  was  his  home 
until  1827,  when  he  accompanied  his  father  to 
Chester.  The  journey'  hither  was  made  by  canal 
from  Amsterdam  to  Buffalo,  where  they  crossed 
the  lake  to  Dunkirk,  and  from  that  place  they 
traveled  eighteen  miles  by  wagon.  Then  they 
built  a  liatboat,  b^'  means  of  which  they  reached 
Louisville,  K}'.,  and  there  embarked  on  a  steam- 
boat which  landed  them  at  Chester.  Charles  R.  con- 
tinued to  make  his  home  with  his  parents  until  1846. 
Three  years  previous  to  this  he  married  Miss 
Elizabeth  Adams,  a  native  of  Washington  County, 
Pa.  Mrs.  Miller  is  the  daughter  of  William  and 
Sarah  (Hughes)  Adams,  the  former  a  native  of 
Pennsylvania,  and  the  latter  Ixjrn  in  Wales.  Mrs. 
Adams  was  brought  to  America  when  nine  years 
of  age,  and  departed  this  life  while  residing  in 
Illinois.     Her  husband's  decease  occurred  m  Ohio. 

Upon  the  farm  concerning  which  mention  was 
above  made,  Mr.  Miller  continued  to  make  his 
home   until   1881,  since  which   time   he   has  been 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


231 


identified  witii  the  interests  of  Sparta.  In  addition 
to  liis  valuable  farm  of  two  hundred  acres  he  owns 
town  property  of  value.  He  is  a  strong  Republi- 
can in  politics.  With  his  wife  he  is  a  member  of 
the  Covenanter  Church,  in  wliicli  he  has  been 
Elder  for  the  past  forty-eight  j^ears.  By  his 
union  witii  Miss  Adams,  ten  children  were  born, 
viz.:  Sarah,  Andrew  Calvin,  Robert, .John,  Charles, 
Delia,  Nellie,  Willie,  Edward  (deceased),  and  one 
who  died  in  infancy. 


PRANK  .J.  IIRABIK,  proprietor  of  a  bakery, 
confectionery  and  grocery  store,  is  one  of 
the  self-made  men  of  the  city.  He  began 
life  empty-handed,  but  has  steadil}'  worked  iiis  way 
upward,  and  as  a  result  of  his  enterprise  and  per- 
severance h.is  acquired  a  comfortable  competence. 
He  was  born  in  Dolan,  Bohemia,  .July  7,  1853,  and 
is  a  son  of  John  and  Annie  (Stankovsky")  Hrabik, 
both  of  whom  were  natives  of  the  same  country. 
The  father  was  a  farmer  by  occupation  and  fol- 
lowed that  pursuit  throughout  his  entire  life. 
The  parents  never  left  tlieir  native  land.  In  the 
family  were  five  children,  but  only  two  are  now 
living. 

Our  subject,  who  is  the  second  in  order  of  birth, 
was  reared  in  his  native  province  and  attended 
the  gymnasium  or  Latin  school  for  three  years, 
thus  acquiring  a  good  education,  which  fitted  him 
for  the  practical  duties  of  life.  In  1871,  at  the 
age  of  seventeen  years,  he  bade  adieu  to  home  and 
friends  and  sailed  for  the  New  World.  He  boarded 
an  ocean  steamer  at  Bremen  and  at  length  arrived 
in  New  York,  whence  he  made  his  way  to  St.  Louis. 
He  there  learned  the  trade  of  manufacturing 
confectionery  and  also  learned  the  baker's  trade, 
in  the  Quentin  Bakery  of  that  city.  In  1877  he 
came  to  Mur[)h}'sboro,  where  he  began  working  as 
a  baker  in  the  employ  of  E.  Loosley,  with  whom  he 
continued  until  1881.  During  that  time,  through 
his  industry  and  econora}',  he  had  acquired  some 
property  and  he  now  began  business  for  himself  at 
the  corner  of  Broad  and  Mulberry  Streets,  build- 
ing an  oven  and  engaging  in  trade  as  a  baker.  He 
afterward  added  a  stock  of  groceries  and  confec- 


tionery and  is  now  doing  a  good  business.  Tiie 
public  soon  found  that  it  would  fair  well  at  his 
hands,  and  his  courteous  treatment  and  straight- 
forward dealing  have  secured  for  him  a  liberal 
trade. 

The  marriage  or  Mr.  Hrabik  was  celebrated  in 
Murphysboro  in  1881,  when  Miss  Henrietta  Schoch 
became  his  wife.  The  lady  was  born  near  Ora- 
ville,  Jackson  County,  and  is  a  daughter  of  Con- 
rad Schoch,  a  native  of  Germany,  who  is  numbered 
among  the  early  settlers  of  this  coramunit}'.  They 
have  become  the  parents  of  four  children,  a  son 
and  three  daughters,  Annie,  John,  Lillie  and  Lena. 

In  politics  Mr.  Hi'abik  is  a  supporter  of  the  Re- 
publican party.  He  has  never  been  an  office 
seeker,  his  time  and  attention  being  entirely  taken 
up  by  his  business  interests,  in  which  he  is  meet- 
ing with  good  success.  His  prosperity  is  certainly 
well  merited,  for  with  nothing  to  depend  upon 
except  his  own  exertions  he  has  become  one  of  the 
substantial  citizens  of  the  community.  Socially, 
he  is  connected  with  the  Independent  Order  of 
Forresters. 


<^  felLLIAM  H.  FOUNTAIN,  a  retired  merchant 
\f\/ll  '^^  Du  Quoin,  was  born  in  North  Carolina 
^1^  February  22,  1811.  His  father,  William 
Fountain,  was  born  in  the  same  state  and  through- 
out life  followed  farming.  His  death  occurred  in 
18 16, when  our  subject  was  only  five  years  of  age. 
The  family  has  long  been  established  in  North 
Carolina  and  was  of  English  lineage.  The  mother 
of  our  subject  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Martha 
Kej'.  She  was  born  in  North  Carolina  and  died 
in  1875,  at  the  advanced  age  of  ninety  3-ears. 
William  H.  was  their  only  son,  but  they  had  three 
daughters,  one  of  whom  died  in  childhood.  Ma- 
hala  married  and  lived  in  North  Carolina  until 
her  death,  which  occurred  in  1891.  Nancy  was 
married  and  removed  to  Missouri,  where  she 
reared  a  large  famil}'.  She  was  called  to  the  home 
beyond  in  1892. 

The   educational  advantages  which   Mr.  Foun- 
tain of  this  sketch  received  were  limited.  In  1835 


232 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD 


he  removed  to  Tennessee,  and  in  1840  went  to 
Wn.'^liington  County,  111.,  where  he  engaged  in 
teaching  school  and  carried  on  a  small  farm.  Later 
he  went  to  Franklin  County,  and  in  1852  em- 
barked in  merchandising  in  Benton,  111.,  and  also 
ran  a  iiotel  until  1862,  when  he  came  to  Perry 
C'()unt3-,  III.  Three  years  later  he  opened  a  mer- 
cantile store  in  Du  Quoin  and  continued  opera- 
tions along  that  line  until  1876,  when  he  retired 
to  private  life,  having  accumulated  a  handsome 
property  which  enabled  him  to  lay  aside  business 
cares. 

In  1831  Mr.  Fountain  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Penelope  Pope,  who  died  in  1851.  To  them 
were  born  ten  children,  but  only  two  are  now  liv- 
ing, although  seven  of  the  number  grew  to  man- 
hood and  womanhood.  Henry,  a  prominent  mer- 
chant of  Du  Quoin,  died  in  1867.  Mary  became 
the  wife  of  Judge  E.  V.  Pierce,  and  both  are  now 
deceased.  Martha  became  the  wife  of  Aaron  Neal 
and  died  in  1869.  Melvina  E.  was  twice  married, 
but  is  now  a  widow  living  in  St.  Louis.  Penelope 
is  the  wife  of  Henry-  W.  Lever,  of  Du  Quoin.  T.  T. 
was  a  soldier  in  the  Civil  War  and  held  the  rank 
of  Second  Lieutenant.  He  was  graduated  from 
the  Michigan  University  of  Ann  Arbor  and  be- 
came a  prominent  attorney  representing  his  district 
in  the  General  Assembly.  His  death  occurred 
October  6,  1892.  D.  W.,  the  next  son,  who  was 
a  soldier  in  the  late  war,  was  a  graduate  of  the 
Michigan  State  Universitj'  and  became  a  leading 
lawyer.  He  served  as  State's  Attorney  and  was 
for  a  time  engaged  in  the  banking  business  in 
South  Dakota.  His  death  occurred  in  Du  Quoin 
in  October,  1891.  For  his  second  wife  Mr.  Foun- 
tain married  the  daughter  of  ex-Governor  Daugh- 
erty,  of  Illinois.     She  died  in  1884. 

Mr.  Fountain  has  been  a  member  of  the  Meth- 
odist Church  since  1836,  and  has  taken  a  very 
prominent  part  in  its  work.  For  many  years  he 
has  been  a  Roj'al  Arch  Mason,  and  was  at  one 
time  Master  of  the  blue  lodge  and  a  member  of 
the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  state.  In  politics  he  has 
been  a  stanch  Republican  since  Ft.  Sumter  was 
fired  upon,  and  has  been  true  and  faithful  to  every 
duty.  He  has  now  reached  the  age  of  eighty-three 
years.     His  step  is  not  as  light  and  his  baud  is  not 


as  steady  as  it  was  in  the  prime  of  manhood,  but 
his  eye  is  bright  and  his  intellect  is  as  clear  as  it 
was  a  half-century  ago.  He  is  now  living  a  quiet, 
retired  life  in  his  pleasant  home,  surrounded  by 
the  comforts  and  luxuries  which  he  has  been  en- 
abled to  secure  through  the  capital  acquired  by 
his  own  exertions.  He  is  indeed  a  self-made  man 
and  his  honorable,  upright  life  is  well  worthy  of 
emulation. 


= ■!•  •5*  "i^J*  "J*  •}•  "J*  •5*  i 


HOMAS  DEVINE  is  one  of  the  active  and 
wide-awake  business  men  of  the  citj-  of 
Chester,  in  which  place  he  made  his  advent 
in  1891,  but  has  been  a  resident  of  this  state  for 
twenty  3'ears.  His  birth  occurred  in  Birmingham, 
England,  December  12,  1858,  and  his  parents  were 
James  and  Catherine  Devine.  The  father  was  born 
in  Ireland,  and  in  early  manhood  emigrated  to 
England,  where  he  and  his  wife  are  still  living, 
spending  their  declining  years  in  ease  and  com- 
fort. 

Our  subject  is  one  of  a  family  of  six  children 
born  to  his  parents.  He  attended  the  public 
schools  in  his  native  shire,  gaining  a  good  educa- 
tion, and  when  old  enough  he  commenced  to  work 
in  the  rolling  mills.  He  continued  in  this  business 
until  1873,  when  he  thought  he  could  better  his 
fortunes  by  coming  to  the  United  States.  He  im- 
mediately came  to  the  Prairie  State,  settling  in 
Grand  Tower,  Jackson  County,  where  he  worked 
for  his  uncle,  John  Devine.  Two  years  later  he 
went  to  Fredericktown,  Mo.,  where  he  sta}'ed  until 
his  removal  to  this  city,  since  which  time  he  has 
been  engaged  with  his  uncle  in  the  ice  and  saloon 
business.  It  has  grovvn  to  be  a  lucrative  enterprise, 
and  part  of  the  time  he  has  carried  it  on  alone. 

June  30, 1885,  Miss  Vena  Bruns  became  the  wife 
of  our  subject.  The  lady  is  a  daughter  of  William 
and  Sophia  Bruns,  who  are  residents  of  Chester, 
and  who  emigrated  from  Germany  in  an  early  day. 
Mrs.  Devine  is  the  second  in  a  family  of  six  chil- 
dren born  to  her  worthy  parents.  She  was  reared 
in  the  faith  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  while  her 
husband  is  a  Catholic. 

Politically,  Mr.  Devine  is  a  Democrat,  but  has 
never   aspired    to   official    duties,  preferring   the 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


233 


quietude  of  home  life  to  political  honors.  Socially 
he  is  a  member  of  Hercules  Lodge  No.  228,  K.  of 
P.,  at  Chester. 


=*5'*5**J**5"{"5**J*'5'= 


=-^i'  NTON  LANGSDORF  is  a  prominent  mer- 
iWiuW  chant  of  Ruiksville,  where  he  has  carried 
on  business  for  a  number  of  years.  He  is 
now  the  proprietor  of  a  general  store,  well 
stocked  with  everything  found  in  that  line.  He 
receives  from  the  public  a  liberal  patronage,  for  he 
is  honorable  and  upright  in  all  his  dealings  and 
courteous  in  his  treatment  of  his  customers.  The 
record  of  his  life  is  as  follows: 

Mr.  Langsdorf  was  born  in  Germany  .June  27, 
1833,  and  is  a  son  of  Martin  and  Elizabeth  (Cappes) 
Langsdorf,  both  of  whom  were  natives  of  the  same 
country.  They  had  a  family  of  eight  children, 
three  of  whom  are  now  deceased.  Those  still  liv- 
ing are,  John,  Anton,  Elizabeth,  William  and 
Jacob.  The  father  of  this  family  served  for  seven 
years  in  the  German  army.  His  occupation  was 
that  of  farming,  and  this  he  followed  tlirougiiout 
life.  Both  he  Jind  his  wife  were  faitiiful  and  con- 
sistent members  of  the  Lutheran  Church, and  were 
highly  educated  people,  who  had  the  respect  of  all 
who  knew  them.  They  never  left  their  native  land. 
Mr.  Langsdorf  died  at  the  age  of  sixty-three  years 
and  his  wife  at  the  age  of  sixty. 

Our  subject  spent  the  dajs  of  his  boyhood  and 
youth  quietly,  attending  the  public  schools  and 
thus  acquirimg  a  good  education.  When  a  young 
man  he  determined  to  seek  a  iiome  .ind  fortune  in 
the  New  World,  for  he  believed  that  better  oppor- 
tunities arfd  advantages  were  afforded  here  than  in 
the  older  countries  of  Europe.  In  1855  he  bade 
adieu  to  friends  and  country  and  crossed  the  At- 
lan^c.  His  first  location  was  made  in  Waterloo,  IlL, 
where  he  remained  for  four  years.  On  the  expira- 
tion of  that  period  he  came  to  Burksville,  where 
he  began  working  at  the  tailor's  trade,  which  he 
followed  for  seven  years.  He  labored  industrious- 
ly and  earnestly  and  acquired  some  capital,  which 
he  invested  in  a  stock  of  general  merchandise, 
and  opened  a  store. 

Mr.  Langsdorf  was  married  in  1857  to  Miss 
Charlotta  Garber,  a  native  of  Germany,  who  came 


to  the  United  States  alone  in  1853,  locating  in 
Waterloo.  She  is  a  lady  possessed  of  many  excel- 
lencies of  character  and  has  made  many  warm 
friends  in  this  communitj'.  By  their  union  were 
born  eight  children,  but  only  four  are  now  liv- 
ing: Anton,  William,  Gustavus  and  Lewis.  The 
sons  "have  been  provided  with  excellent  educa- 
tional privileges  and  are  now  young  men  of  ster- 
ling worth,  who  are  holding  responsible  business 
positions  in  St.  Louis.' 

Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Langsdorf  are  leading  mem- 
bers of  and  active  workers  in  the  Lutheran  Church, 
in  which  he  is  now  serving  as  Elder.  They  take  a 
warm  interest  in  all  church  and  benevolent  work, 
and  tiie  cause  of  education  receives  their  heart3' 
support.  In  his  political  views,  Mr  Langsdorf  is 
a  Republican,  and  he  has  held  the  office  of  School 
Director.  When  he  reached  this  country  he  not 
onlj'  had  no  capital,  but  was  $12  in  debt,  and 
tiierefore  had  to  work  his  way  upward  from  the 
very  lowest  round  of  the  ladder.  He  has  met  with 
difficulties  and  obstacles,  but  he  has  overcome 
these  by  determined  effort  and  has  achieved  a  suc- 
cess of  which  he  may  justly  be  proud,  having  be- 
come one  of  the  substantial  citizens  of  this  com- 
munity. It  was  a  fortunate  day  for  him  when  he 
determined  to  come  to  America,  and  he  need  never 
regret  tliat  he  carried  out  this  resolution. 


♦^^^1 


m^-m 


1 1^  *  *-  - 


OHN  W.  FIRTH  is  one  of  the  representa- 
tive and  enterprising  farmers  of  Randolph 
County.  He  owns  a  farm  of  two  hundred 
and  ten  acres  of  valuable  land,  of  which 
one  hundred  and  twenty  acres  are  under  a  high 
state  of  cultivation  and  3'ield  to  the  owner  a 
golden  tribute  in  return  for  the  care  and  labor 
he  bestows  upon  it.  The  place  is  well  improved 
with  all  the  accessories  and  conveniences  of  a 
model  farm  and  is  stocked  with  fine  grades  of 
horses  and  cattle. 

The  owner  of  this  desirable  place  was  born  in 
Yorkshire,  England,  in  1842,  and  on  both  tlie  pa- 
ternal and  maternal  sides  is  of  English  descent. 
His  grandparents  spent  their  lives  in  that  country. 
His  parents  were  Thomas  and  Charlotte  (Naylor) 


234 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Firth,  natives  of  Yorkshire.  The  father  was  born  in 
1800,  and  in  1820  was  married.  He  and  his  wife  had 
a  family  of  fourteen  children,  of  whom  seven  died 
in  infanc}'.  The  others  are,  Seth,  who  died  in 
1853;  Benjamin,  superintendent  of  tlie  worsted  de- 
partment of  E.  S.  Iliggins  (t  Co.,  of  New  Yorlv; 
Obed,  a  retired  policeman  of  New  York  City*  Will- 
iam, who  died  in  England;  Rile}-,  superintendent 
of  the  carding  and  si)inning  department  of  the 
manufactory  of  E.  S.  Higgins  &  Co.,  of  New  York; 
Tliomas  N.,  who  was  killed  in  England,  and  .Jolin 
W.  The  first  named  son,  Seth,  was  employed  by 
E.  S.  Higgins  &  Co.,  in  1848,  as  foreman  of  the 
carding  and  spinning  department  in  their  factory, 
and  at  his  death,  in  1853,  his  brother  Benjamin 
took  that  position. 

The  mother  of  this  family  was  a  member  of  the 
Wesleyan  Methodist  Church,  and  died  in  England 
in  1846.  In  1847  the  father  came  to  America,  and 
lived  in  New  York  Cit}'  until  1861,  when  he  emi- 
grated to  Randolph  County.  Upon  the  farm  on 
whicii  our  subject  now  makes  his  home  he  resided 
until  his  death,  .June  5,  1881.  In  his  native  land 
he  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  woolen  goods, 
and  during  his  residence  in  New  York  was  with 
the  firm  of  E.S.  Higgins  &  Co.,  carpet  manufact- 
urers, remaining  in  their  emploj'  from  1846  until 
1861.  The  latter  3-ears  of  his  life  were  spent 
in  farming,  and  he  became  the  possessor  of  a  com- 
fortable competence.  He  was  a  Roj'al  Arch  Ma- 
son and  aided  in  organizing  a  number  of  Masonic 
lodges  in  New  York.  In  politics  he  was  first  a 
Whig,  and  afterward  a  Republican.  He  was  much 
interested  iu  churcli  work  and  was  a  local  minis- 
ter of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  for  about 
twenty  years.  During  bis  residence  in  the  east, he 
married  Bettie  Wilde,  who  died  in  1874. 

Our  subject  was  a  lad  of  only  seven  summers 
when  he  came  to  this  country.  He  remained  with 
his  father  until  the  death  of  the  latter.  While  in 
New  York  he  was  also  employed  in  the  carpet 
factor}'  of  Higgins  &  Co.,  in  the  carding  and  spin- 
ning department.  In  1861  he  came  with  liis father 
to  Illinois,  and  together  they  carried  on  farming 
for  a  number  of  years. 

In  Randolph  County,  December  25,  1868,  Mr. 
Firth  married  Elizabeth  Nelson,  who  was  born  in 


this  locality,  and  who  is  a  daughter  of  John  D.  and 
Janet  (Nelson)  Nelson,  who  were  natives  of  Scot- 
land. Eight  children  have  been  born  of  their 
union:  Charlotte  J.,  wife  of  George  H.  Davis,  of 
Indianapolis,  who  is  connected  with  the  Big  Four 
Railway  Company;  William  R.,  an  engineer  of 
Perry  County,  111.;  Thomas  D.,  at  home;  Jennie, 
now  a  student  in  Sparta;  Dianthy  M.,  Luella,  Chris- 
tina and  Obed,  all  at  lioine. 

Mr.  Firth  exercises  his  right  of  francliise  in  sup- 
port of  the  Republican  party.  For  five  3'ears  he 
served  as  Road  Commissioner  and  was  also  Treas- 
urer and  Collector  of  his  township.  We  see  in  our 
subject  a  self-made  man,  who  at  tlie  early  age  of 
fourteen  started  out  iu  life  for  himself  and  has 
since  made  his  own  way  in  tlie  world.  By  de- 
termined effort  he  has  overcome  the  obstacles  and 
difHculties  in  his  patii  and  has  ste;idily  worked  his 
way  upward  to  a  position  of  afflueuce.  His  well 
spent  life  is  worthy  of  emulation. 


+= 


=+ 


'\fj  OSEPH  STEINLE,  proprietor  of  the  Mur- 
ph3'sboro  Steam  Bottling  Works,  and  man- 
^^  ufacturer  of  soda  and  carbonated  waters, 
t^^/  was  born  in  Wurtemberg,  Germany,  No- 
vember 20,  1852,  and  is  a  son  of  Thaddeus  and 
Elizabeth  (Preig)  Steinle,  who  were  farmers  of 
that  count!-}'.  In  the  family  were  seven  children. 
Joseph  is  the  third  in  order  of  birth  and  the  onl\- 
one  in  America.  He  was  reared  upon  the  home 
farm  until  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  was  tlien  ap- 
prenticed to  a  brewer,  working  along  that  line  of 
business  until  1883,  wiien  lie  bade  adieu  to  home 
and  friends,  having  determined  to  try  his  fortune 
in  America.  He  sailed  from  Antwerp,  and  after 
eleven  days  spent  upon  the  briny  deep  reached 
New  York  City.  Going  to  St.  Louis,  he  was  em- 
ployed in  tlie  Stevens'  Brewery,  where  he  contin- 
ued seven  and  a-half  years.  During  the  last  three 
years  of  that  time  he  served  as  second  foreman. 

In  July,  1890,  Mr.  Steinle  came  to  Murphysboro 
and  accepted  the  position  of  Superintendent  of 
the  Murphysboro  Brewing  Company.  Through 
his  instrumentality  the  business  was  placed  on  a 
paying  basis.     On   the  6th  of  February,  1892,  he 


M 


V^cv^' 


^,^^^^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


237 


purchased  of  Ed  Hayes  the  Murphysboro  Steam 
Bottling  "Works,  of  which  he  has  since  been  pro- 
prietor. He  has  greatly  improved  and  enlarged 
the  facilities,  put  in  steam  and  made  a  fine  well, 
and  there  are  all  the  conveniences  and  accessories 
required  in  the  business.  During  tiie  summer  he 
keeps  an  agent  upon  the  road,  and  ships  his  goods 
from  seventy-five  to  one  hundred  miles  from  this 
place.  He  manufactures  California  orange  cider, 
English  Club  soda,  ^rape  soda,  cream  soda,  lemon 
sour,  pale  lager  beer,  birch  beer,  champagne  cider 
and  Scotland  Bay  ginger  ale.  lie  also  carries  in 
stock  the  Seltzer  Spring  waters  and  Silurian  water, 
and  deals  in  whiskey  bottles  and  all  kinds  of  glass- 
ware. 

Mr.  Steinle  was  married  in  Germany  in  1879, 
the  lady  of  his  choice  being  Miss  Louisa  Kull,  a 
native  of  the  Fatlierland.  They  have  one  child, 
Frank.  Our  subject  is  a  member  of  the  Odd  Fel- 
lows' society,  of  the  Treibund  and  of  the  Turners' 
society.  Ho  is  also  connected  with  the  St.  Louis 
Brewing  Company.  During  his  residence  in  Amer- 
ica he  has  met  with  good  success  in  his  business, 
thus  proving  that  his  decision  of  seeking  a  home 
in  the  New  AVorld  was  a  wise  one.  He  has  already 
made  many  friends  in  tliis  community  and  has  a 
wide  acquaintance. 


E.!-*+-S"M~5~fE 


(r_,  ON.  JOSEPH  B.  GILL,  Lieutenant-Gov- 
liTj'  ernor  of  Illinois,  and  President  of  the  State 
laVji^  Senate,  has  won  his  position  of  prominence 
'^P  through  merit  and  ability.  He  was  born 
on  a  farm  near  Marion,  Williamson  County,  111., 
February  17,  1862,  and  is  a  son  of  the  late  John 
M.  Gill,  Jr.,  ex-Mayor  of  Murphysboro,  111.  A  na- 
tive of  Jackson  County,  this  state,  he  was  born 
November  28.  1833,  and  was  the  fifth'of  eight 
children,  whose  parents,  John  and  Nancy  Gill, 
were  old  residents  of  the  county.  The  grand- 
father was  born  in  Virginia,  whence  he  accom- 
panied his  parents  to  Illinois  in  1813,  and  located 
near  De  Soto.  His  death  occurred  in  December, 
1886.  He  was  of  English  and  Irish  descent,  while 
his  wife  was  of  German  extraction. 

During  his  boyhood  years  John  M.  Gill,  Jr.,  as- 
sisted his  father  in  the    work   on  the  home  farm. 
3 


On  the  6th  of  January,  1859,  he  married  Miss 
Nancy  J.,  daughter  of  Washington  Wright,  of 
Williamson  County.  They  had  two  children,  but 
one  is  now  deceased.  In  1855  Mr.  Gill  began 
merchandising  in  De  Soto,  and  in  1859  removed 
to  Williamson  County,  where  he  engaged  in  farm- 
ing .Tnd  dealing  in  tobacco  and  other  produce. 
In  1863  he  returned  to  De  .Soto,  where  he  con- 
tinued to  reside  until  1868,  and  in  that  year  came 
to  IMurphysboro.  Here  he  resumed  mercantile  pur- 
suits, hut  his  store  was  destroyed  by  lire  in  1870, 
and  he  then  turned  his  attention  to  milling. 

In  politics  John  M.  Gill,  Jr.,  was  a  stalwart 
Democrat.  In  1876  he  was  elected  Mayor  of 
Murphysboro,  and  filled  the  office  for  two  terms, 
discharging  its  duties  with  rare  judgment.  He 
was  also  one  of  the  Directors  of  the  public  schools 
of  the  city  for  many  years,  and  was  a  member  of 
the  Masonic  fraternity-  for  about  twenty  years. 
He  founded  the  town  of  Gillsburg,  on  the  narrow 
gauge  railroad  (now  Oraville,  on  the  Mobile  & 
Ohio  Railroad)  about  eight  miles  northwest  of 
Murphysboro.  As  a  business  man  he  was  ener- 
getic, and  combined  many  of  those  qualities — hon- 
esty, integi'ity  and  suavity — which  are  the  sure 
precursors  of  success  in  life.  His  death  occurred 
February  27,  1886. 

In  1863  Joseph  B.  Gill  was  taken  by  his  parents 
to  De  Soto,  and  in  1868  to  Murphysboro,  where 
he  has  since  made  his  home.  He  was  educated  in 
the  public  schools  and  in  the  Christian  Brothers' 
College,  in  ISt.  Louis,  and  the  Southern  Illinois 
Normal  School,  at  Carbondale,  graduating  from 
the  latter  in  June,  1884.  He  then  completed  a 
law  term  of  two  years  at  Ann  Arbor, graduating  in 
July,  1886,  and  was  admitted  to  the  Michigan  Bar, 
passing  an  examination  before  the  Circuit  and  Su- 
preme Courts  of  that  state.  He  has,  however, 
never  practiced  his  profession,  for  immediately 
on  his  return  home  he  embarked  in  the  newspaper 
business,  buying  an  interest  in  the  Murphysboro 
Independent,  which  he  conducted  and  edited  until 
January  1,  1893. 

November  28,  1893,  Mr.  Gill  married  Miss  Pearl 
Hall,  the  daughter  of  James  W.  and  Augusta  Hall, 
formerly  residents  of  southern  Illinois,  and  later 
of  San  Bernardino,  Cal.,  where  Mrs.  Gill  was  liv- 


238 


PORTRAIT  A^'D  BJOURAPHICAL   RECORD. 


infir  at  the  time  of  her  marriage.  She  is  a  lady  of 
refinement  :ind  culture,  and  has  evinced  decided 
talent  in  l)otii  music  and  painting. 

i.ike  liis  fatiier,  the  subject  of  this  sketch  be- 
came a  stanch  advocate  of  the  principles  of  the 
Democratic  party.  In  1888  he  was  elected  to  the 
Lower  House,  and  was  re-elected  in  1890.  In 
both  general  assemblies  lie  was  a  strong  anti-cor- 
poration man,  and  espoused  the  cause  of  the  labor- 
ing people  in  every  measure  of  interest  to  them. 
He  championed  the  [lassage  of  the  Gross- Weight 
Bill,  the  Weekly  Pay  Bill  and  tlie  Anti-Truck 
Store  Bill,  and  did  all  he  could  to  advance  the 
Arbitration  Bill  to  a  successful  issue.  His  efforts 
to  benefit  a  class  of  people  who  had  few  friends  in 
the  Legislature  were  appreciated,  and  soon  after 
that  body  adjourned  in  1891  there  was  a  demand 
for  his  name  to  be  placed  on  the  state  ticket. 

On  the  first  ballot  in  April,  1892,  Mr.  Gill  was 
nominated  for  the  office  of  Lieutenant-Governor 
by  the  Democratic  State  Convention.  An  unusual 
interest  was  taken  in  his  election  on  account  of 
the  close  relations  between  the  candidate  and  the 
class  whose  cause  he  espoused  in  tl»e  Legislature. 
He  was  triumphantly  elected,  receiving  the  highest 
number  of  votes  of  an}-  man  on  the  ticket  except 
the  candidate  for  State  Treasurer.  This  fact  in- 
dicated his  popularity  among  the  working  people, 
and  also  those  in  other  walks  of  life. 

After  the  inauguration  of  Governor  Altgeld, 
owing  to  sickness,  he  did  not  perform  an}'  of  the 
official  duties,  but  started  immediately  for  the 
south.  That  being  the  case,  Mr.  Gill  became  act- 
ing Governor,  and  was  the  first  representative  of 
tiie  Democratic  part}'  to  fill  the  executive  chair 
for  over  thirty-five  years.  Being  mindful  of  the 
interests  of  the  people,  and  believing  that  vast 
sums  of  money  belonging  to  the  state  had  hereto- 
fore been  sequestered,  he  therefore,  by  the  author- 
ity vested  in  liim  as  Governor,  directed  the  Attor- 
ney-General to  institute  suits  against  ex-state 
officials  extending  over  a  long  period  of  3'ears. 
Wliile  his  action  met  with  the  unqualified  approval 
of  the  tax-payers  and  common  people  of  the  state, 
it  created  constern.-ition  in  the  ranks  of  those 
politicians  whose  financial  interests  were  directly 
or   indirectly    affected.     His    course    was    highl}' 


commended  bj'  the  press  of  the  state  and  by  those 
who  favored  good  government  and  the  econom- 
ical administration  of  affairs.  While  thus  engaged. 
Governor  Gill  was  also  executing  the  law  and 
putting  into  effect  the  principles  of  the  platform 
on  which  he  was  elected. 

In  February,  1894,  owing  to  the  absence  of  the 
Governor  from  the  state,  the  Lieutenant-Gover- 
nor .again  assumed  the  gubernatorial  chair,  and  .as 
upon  the  previous  occasion,  discharged  the  duties 
of  the  office  with  skill  and  ability  and  to  the 
entire  satisfaction  of  the  people.  Many  compli- 
ments have  been  extended  hirn  by  the  press  of 
Illinois  and  other  states,  also  b}'  representative 
men  of  this  state  during  his  incumbency  of  the 
office.  He  is  the  youngest  Lieutenant-Governor 
ever  elected  in  this  stale,  yet  his  qualifications 
have  made  him  an  equal  in  the  discharge  of  his 
duties  with  those  whose  years  greatly  outnum- 
bered his.  He  is  an  impartial  presiding  officer, 
and  has  alread}'  won  the  respect  of  the  Senate. 
Though  scarcely  j-et  in  the  prime  of  life,  he  is 
recognized  as  an  important  factor  in  politics,  and 
in  the  future,  should  he  continue  to  devote  his 
energies  to  this  work,  his  career  will  undoubtedly 
be  a  brilliant  one. 


^•}"!"5"i-^ 


ERNARD  DANIEL  has  the  largest  bakery  in 
^  Murphysboro,  and  is  also  engaged  in  gen- 
eral merchandising.  lie  is  enterprising  and 
industrious,  and  tliese  qualifications,  which 
are  essential  to  success,  have  brought  him  a  well 
deserved  prosperit}-.  Numbered  among  the  native 
sons  of  Illinois,  he  was  born  in  Belleville,  July  31, 
1859.  His  father,  Sebastian  Daniel,  was  a  native 
of  Baden,  Germany,  and  in  his  youth  learned 
the  baker's  trade.  When  a  young  man  of  seven- 
teen, he  came  to  the  United  States  and  followed 
that  business  in  Belleville,  III.  During  his  resi- 
dence there  he  married  Clara  Furstenberg,  who  was 
born  in  Freedom,  III. 

Later,  Mr.  Daniel  established  a  bakeiy  in  Red 
Bud,  where  he  continued  business  until  enlisting 
in  an  Illinois  regiment  for  service  in  the  late  war 
He  faithfully  aided   in  the   defense  of  the  Union 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRATHICAL   RECORD. 


239 


until  its  preservation  was  an  assured  fact,  and  then 
returned  to  his  business  in  Red  Bud,  where  he 
continued  until  coming  to  Murphjsboro  in  1869. 
At  tlie  corner  of  Union  and  Chesnut  Streets  he  es- 
tablished a  bakery,  and  in  connection  with  his 
work  in  that  line  also  engaged  in  the  manufact- 
ure and  sale  of  confectionery  until  his  death,  in 
1872.  His  widow  still  survives  hira.audj-et  makes 
her  home  in  Murphysboro.  The  children  of  the 
Daniel  family  are,  William,  who  is  engaged  in  the 
bakery  and  confectionery  business;  Bernard,  of 
this  sketch;  Christine,  wife  of  John  Stoeltzle;  and 
Lizzie,  wife  of  Al  Ozburn. 

Bernard  Daniel  has  lived  in  Murphysboro  since 
the  age  of  ten  years,  and  is  therefore  well  known 
to  its  citizens,  among  whom  he  is  held  in  high  re- 
gard. He  was  educated  in  its  public  and  private 
schools,  and  with  his  father  learned  the  baker's 
trade.  On  the  death  of  the  latter,  he  aided  his 
mother  in  carrying  on  the  business,  and  subse- 
quently worked  as  a  baker  until  February,  1882, 
when  he  began  business  for  himself  in  companj' 
with  tho  Borger  brothers,  under  the  firm  name  of 
Borger  &  Daniel.  He  bought  out  his  partners' 
'interests  in  1884,  and  has  since  conducted  the 
business  alone.  The  store  is  located  at  the  corner 
of  Walnut  and  Union  Streets,  where  he  carries  a 
large  stock  of  dry  goods,  boots  and  shoes,  gro- 
ceries, queenswarc,  provisions,  etc.  He  also  has 
the  largest  bakery  in  Murphysboro,  and  represents 
the  Dozier  Bakery  of  St.  Louis,  handling  large 
quantities  of  the  goods  of  that  firm.  The  oven, 
located  in  the  rear  of  the  store,  is  10x12  feet, 
and  has  a  capacity'  of  one  thousand  loaves  of  bread 
per  day. 

Mr.  Daniel  is  a  member  of  St.  Andrew's  Catho- 
lic Church,  and  is  Financial  Secretary  of  the  Cath- 
olic Knights  of  Hlinois.  He  also  belongs  to  Jack- 
son Camp  No.  113,  S.  V.,  and  is  a  member  of  the 
Camp  Council.  He  exercises  his  right  of  franchise 
in  sup[)ort  of  the  Democratic  nart^',  but  has  neither 
sought  nor  desired  public  office,  preferring  to  de- 
vote his  entire  time  and  attention  to  his  business 
interests,  in  which  he  has  met  with   signal  success. 

In  1891  Mr.  Daniel  built  a  pleasant  residence 
on  Union  Street.  His  wife  was  formerly  Miss 
Lena  Berger.     She  was  born  in  Alabama,  but  her 


maidenhood  da3's  were  passed  in  Murphysboro, 
and  she  is  a  daughter  of  Bartel  Berger,  of  this 
place.  The  marriage  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Daniel  was 
celebiated  January  22,  1883,  and  has  been  blessed 
with  three  children,  Gertie,  William  and  Clara. 


_^,,,  NDREW  B.  CHEW,  who  follows  farming 
1@/-JI|  on  section  21,  Ora  Township,  J.ackson 
County,  was  born  in  Jefferson  County,  III., 
April  20,  1830.  His  father,  James  Chew, 
was  a  native  of  Lebanon,  Ohio,  and  there  resided 
until  he  had  attained  to  man's  estate,  when  he 
removed  to  St.  Clair  Count}',  111.  Soon  afterwards 
he  married  Nancj'  Million,  daughter  of  Bennett 
and  Nancy  Million,  who  came  from  Kentuckj'  to 
to  this  state  in  an  early  day.  Mr.  Chew  was  a 
tailor  by  trade,  but  followed  school  teaching 
through  the  greater  part  of  his  life.  He  removed 
to  St.  Louis  and  thence  went  to  Jefferson  County, 
111.  Later  he  resided  for  a  time  in  Ohio,  after 
which  he  returned  to  St.  Clair  County,  and  finally 
located  in  Washington  County,  III.  While  on  his 
way  to  Ohio,  where  he  intended  visiting,  he  was 
taken  sick,  at  Logansport,  Ind.,  and  died.  He  was 
then  only  thirty-five  \ears  of  age.  He  held  mem- 
bership with  the  Masonic  fraternit}-,  and  belonged 
to  the  Baptist  Church,  frequently  occupying  the 
pulpit.  His  wife  long  survived  him  and  passed 
away  in  Bradley  Townshij),  Jackson  County,  in 
1892,  at  the  age  of  seventy-nine.  In  their  family 
were  three  children,  Andrew  B;  Mary  A.,  wife  of 
David  McCoy;  and  Nancy  J.,  widow  of  John 
Smith,  who  died  in  1893. 

Mr.  Chew  of  this  sketch  aided  in  the  labors  of 
the  home  farm  until  eighteen  years  of  age,  when 
he  went  to  Belleville,  111.,  and  leai-ned  the  carpen- 
ter's trade  with  his  uncle,  John  Million.  He  has 
since  carried  on  business  along  that  line.  He 
was  married  in  Carbondale,  March  23,  1864,  to 
Mahala  J.  Deason.  He.r  father.  Shepherd  Deason, 
emigrated  from  South  Carolina  to  Illinois,  and  in 
this  state  married  Elizabeth  Troop.  He  followed 
farming  near  Carbondale,  and  was  a  well  known 
citizen  of  that  locality.  The  members  of  liis  fam- 
ily were,  McCager,  who  died  in  Missouri;  Edwin, 


240 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RI-XORl). 


who  died  in  Texas;  Delilah,  wife  of  Jesse  Temple; 
Amos,  who  is  living  in  Stoddard  County,  Mo.,  and 
Shepherd  Allen,  who  died  in  cliildhood. 

For  three  years  after  tUeir  marriage,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Chew  made  their  home  in  Murphysboro, 
and  removed  to  their  present  residence  on  the 
oth  of  May,  1869.  The  following  children  were 
born  to  them:  William,  who  was  born  April  22, 
J866,  died  October  1,  1887;  Jesse,  born  October 
13,  1867,  died  in  infancy;  Frank,  born  Septem- 
ber 5,  1869,  is  now  engaged  in  merchandising; 
Julia,  born  July  25,  1872,  died  in  infancy;  Phtcbe, 
twin  sister  of  Julia,  was  married  May  5,  1892,  to 
B.  McBride,  and  with  their  daughter,  Martha  J., 
they  reside  on  a  farm  south  of  Ava;  Delia  was 
born  February  23,  1874;  Oliver  was  born  July  15, 
1877;  Eiizahetli  and  Nancy,  twins,  were  born  July 
24,  1880. 

Mr.  Chew  was  found  among  the  defenders  of 
the  country  during  tiie  late  war.  He  enlisted 
August  26.  1861,  as  a  member  of  Company  H, 
Twenty-seventh  Illinois  Infantry,  under  Capt. 
Mike  H.  Broods  and  Col.  N.  B.  Buford.  He  par- 
ticipated in  the  battles  of  Belmont,  Island  No.  10, 
Corinth,  Farmington,  Iai  verne.  Stone  River,  Chick- 
amauga.  Missionary  Ridge  and  Knoxville.  At 
Blaine's  Cross  Roads  he  re-enlisted  as  a  veteran  of 
Company  G,  Ninth  Illinois  Mounted  Infantry,  un- 
der Captain  Martin  and  Colonel  Hughes,  and 
served  under  General  Sherman  in  the  Atlanta 
campaign,  participating  in  the  battles  of  Franklin 
and  Nashville.  After  the  fall  of  Richmond,  in  the 
spring  of  1865,  he  went  to  Washington, D.  C,  and 
after  participating  in  the  Grand  Review,  was  mus- 
tered out  at  Louisville,  Ky.  He  was  never 
wounded,  but  for  six  weeks  was  confined  to  the 
hospital  with  rheumatism.  He  also  contracted 
granulation  of  the  eyelids,  and  he  still  frequently 
suffers  from  that  disease. 

Since  his  return  from  the  war,  Mr.  Chew  has  con- 
tinuously engaged  in  carpentering  near  his  home. 
He  is  a  prominent  member  of  the  Free  Will  Baptist 
Church,  in  which  he  serves  as  Trustee  and  Deacon, 
and  is  a  member  of  the  Grand  Armj^  post  of  Ava. 
In  politics,  he  is  a  Republican,  and  has  served  as 
Township  Assessor  for  two  terms,  and  for  one  term 
was  Justice  of  the  Peace.     His  official  duties  and 


those  of  private  life  are  discharged  with  the  same 
fidelity  that  characterized  his  career  when  he  went 
to  the  defense  of  his  country  and  followed  the 
Stars  and  Stripes  to  victory. 


O.  Ml'RPllY,  |)roprietor  of  an  extensive 
clothing  house,  and  the  head  of  the  mer- 
cantile firm  of  H.  0.  Murphy  &.  Co.,  is  rec- 
ognized as  one  of  the  leading  business  men 
of  Pinckneyvillc,  for  he  is  connected  with  various 
enterprises  in  this  place.  lie  was  born  here  De- 
cember 6,  1862,  and  is  a  son  of  the  Hon.  William 
K.  Murphy.  The  family  is  of  Irish  origin.  The 
great-grandfather  of  our  subject  was  born  in  the 
North  of  Ireland,  came  to  America  prior  to  the 
Revolution,  and  was  a  soldier  in  the  great  conflict 
which  ended  British  rule  over  the  American  Col- 
onies. When  their  independence  was  achieved, 
he  settled  in  Tennessee,  and  in  1818  came  to  Illi- 
nois, locating  in  Perry  County,  near  what  is 
known  as  Lost  Prairie.  He  was  a  stonemason  by 
trade,  but  his  last  days  were  spent  on  a  farm, 
wliere  his  death  occurred. 

Richard  G.  Murphy,  the  grandfather  of  our  sub- 
ject, was  born  in  Tennessee,  January  4,  1801,  and 
was  the  youngest  of  five  brothers.  He  became  a 
conspicuous  figure  in  the  history  of  southern  Illi- 
nois. He  served  in  the  Black  Hawk  War,  and  in 
1832  was  elected  to  the  State  Legislature,  where 
he  remained  for  ten  consecutive  years.  In  1847 
he  was  appointed  by  President  Polk  as  agent 
for  the  Sioux  Indians,  then  on  their  reservation 
in  Minnesota,  whither  he  went,  there  spending 
three  years.  He  then  returned  to  Illinois,  and  in 
1850  was  again  elected  to  the  Legislature,  and  was 
Chairman  of  the  committee  which  incorporated 
the  Illinois  Central  Railroad.  In  1854  he  again 
went  to  Minnesota,  where  he  lived  until  his  death, 
in  1874.  He  was  thcie  extensively  engaged  in 
farming  and  stock-raising,  and  was  also  a  mem- 
ber of  the  first  State  Senate  of  Minnesota.  The 
name  of  Richard  G.  Murphy  was  familiar  through- 
out Illinois  and  IMinnesota,  where  he  was  numbered 
among  the  most  prominent  citizens.  His  brother, 
William  C,  who  was  also  well  known  in  southern 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RPXORD. 


241 


Illinois,  was  for  many  years  doorkeeper  in  the 
State  Senate  and  House  of  Representatives  when 
tlie  State  Capitol  was  located  in  Vandal ia.  Upon 
tlie  organization  of  Perry,  in  1827,  lie  was  ap- 
pointed Slieriff,  and  he  also  held  other  county 
offices.  Miirpliysboro,  the  county  seat  of  Jackson 
County,  was  named  in  his  honor. 

Hon.  William  K.  Murphy,  the  father  of  our  sub- 
ject, was  born  in  Perr3'  County  in  1835.  He  acquired 
such  education  as  could  be  obtained  in  the  com- 
mon schools  half  a  century  ago,  and  then  took  up 
the  study  of  law,  having  determined  to  make  its 
practice  his  life  work.  In  18.59  he  was  admitted 
to  the  Bar,  and  opened  an  office  in  Pinckney  ville. 
When  the  Civil  War  broke  out,  he  raised  a  com- 
pany', and  was  elected  its  Captain.  It  became 
Company  H  of  the  One  Hundred  and  Tenth  Illi- 
nois Infantry,  and  Mr.  Murphy  continued  in  com- 
mand until  April,  1863,  when  he  resigned  and  re- 
turned home.  In  18(56  he  formed  a  law  partnership 
with  the  Hon.  John  Boyd,  which  connection  was 
continued  until  1882.  This  was  considered  the 
most  able  law  firm  in  southern  Illinois,  and  for 
many  ye.irs  there  was  not  an  important  case  tried 
in  this  part  of  the  state  with  which  they  were  not 
connected  on  one  side  or  the  other. 

In  local  [(olitics,  Mr.  Murphy  has  been  an  import- 
ant factor.  He  was  Master  in  Chancery,  and  in  1864 
and  1866  was  elected  to  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives. In  1872  he  was  elected  to  the  State  Senate, 
and  in  1880  and  1881  was  again  in  the  Lower 
House.  In  1882  he  was  the  Democratic  candidate 
for  Congress  from  the  Twentieth  Congressional 
District,  but  was  defeated  by  two  hundred  and 
eighty  votes  in  the  district  that  two  years  previ- 
ously had  given  a  Republican  majority  of  two 
thousand.  This  was  one  of  the  failures  which  may 
be  regarded  as  a  victory.  In  1893  he  was  appointed 
by  President  Cleveland  Collector  of  the  Port  of 
Cairo,  a  position  he  is  now  filling.  In  addition 
to  his  professional  and  political  life,  he  has  been 
an  active  man  in  business,  and  is  at  the  head  of  the 
banking  house  of  Murphy,  Wall  &  Co.,  of  Pinck- 
neyville.  He  is  President  of  the  First  National 
Bank  of  Murphysboro,  and  is  at  the  head  of  the 
large  mercantile  house  of  Murph3',  Crawford  ik  Co., 
besides  beinur  interested  in  various  other  extensive 


business  concerns.  He  owns  lai'ge  tracts  of  land, 
and  is  accounted  one  of  the  wealthiest  men  of 
southern  Illinois. 

Mrs.  Murphy,  the  mother  of  our  subject,  bore 
the  maiden  name  of  Penina  Ozbuin,  daughter  of 
the  Hon.  Hawkins  S.  Ozburn,  a  native  of  Tennes- 
see, who  served  as  Captain  in  the  Mexican  War, 
and  who  was  at  one  time  a  member  of  the  Illinois 
State  Senate.  In  the  Murph.y  family  were  but 
two  children,  H.  0.,  and  Sadie  V.,  wife  of  Joseph 
Crawford,  of  the  firm  of  Murphy,  Crawford  &  Co. 

Our  subject  acquired  an  excellent  education, 
and  was  a  student  in  Washington  University,  of 
St.  Louis.  He  entered  upon  his  business  career 
in  1881,  when  he  formed  a  partnership  with  C.  H. 
Greser,  as  dealers  in  general  merchandise.  This 
connection  continued  for  seven  j'ears,  when  Mr. 
Murph}-  withdrew  from  the  firm  and  established 
his  present  extensive  clothing  house.  He  has 
other  business  interests,  which  yield  toliim  a  good 
income. 

In  July,  1889,  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  H. 
O.  Murphy  and  Miss  Minnie  B.  Lawson,  of  Dead- 
wood,  S.  Dak.,  a  most  estimable  lady,  who  has 
won  many  friends  in  this  locality-.  He  is  a  Chap- 
ter Mason,  and  was  the  founder  of  the  Knights  of 
Pythias  lodge  in  Pinckneyville.  He  served  as  its 
first  Chancellor  Commander,  and  is  now  represen- 
tative to  the  Grand  Lodge.  He  is  also  a  worthy 
representative  of  the  honored  Murphy  family,  and 
we  have  no  doubt  that  the  name  will  grow  even 
brighter  as  he  advances  in  his  career. 


.    T.  MACLIN,  M.  D.,  one  of  the    leading 
''     physicians  of  Du  Quoin,  who  is   now   en- 


W^  joying  a  large  and  lucrative  practice,  was 
born  in  Williamson  County,  Tenn.,  August  9, 
1844.  His  father,  W.  T.  Maclin,  Sr.,  was  born  in 
Virginia  October  12,  1804,  and  was  a  son  of  Willis 
Maclin,  a  native  of  Kings  County,  Ireland,  who 
came  to  this  country  during  the  Revolution. 
Hiding  on  a  British  ship,  he  crossed  the  Atlantic 
and  joined  the  Continental  army,  in  which  he 
served  until  after  the  surrender  of  Cornwallis  at 
Yorktown.     He  was  within  a  hundred  feet  of  that 


242 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD 


general  when  he  gave  up  his  sword.  Immediately 
after  the  war  he  locuted  near  Nashville,  Tenn.,  and 
from  that  place  entered  the  army  for  the  War  of 
1812.  He  became  an  extensive  planter,  but  was 
always  opposed  to  slaver^'.  He  was  a  man  of  liberal 
education  and  wasa  great  reader.  In  the  militia  he 
served  as  Captain,  Major  and  Colonel.  His  death 
occuned  in  Tennessee  in  1851,  at  the  age  of 
eighty-five.  His  nephew,  William  Maclin,was  tlie 
first  Secretary  of  .State  in  Tennessee. 

The  Doctor's  father  was  also  a  well  educated 
man,  w.as  a  prosperous  farmer  and  a  prominent 
politician.  He  died  in  Tennessee  in  1886.  He 
had  several  brothers,  and  one  of  the  number,  Isaac 
E.,  served  as  a  soldier  in  the  late  war  in  the  Sev- 
enth Tennessee  Cavalry.  During  the  struggle  he 
was  made  a  prisoner  bj'  Forrest.  When  tiie  war 
was  over  he  came  to  Illinois,  and  was  killed  by  a 
train  at  the  depot  in  Du  Quoin. 

Mrs.  Maclin,  mother  of  the  Doctor,  was  in  her 
maidenhood  Anna  M.  Brooks,  and  was  a  native  of 
Philadelphia.  Her  great-grandfather,  Lord  Brooks, 
had  two  sons,  George  and  Samuel.  The  former 
came  to  America  when  a  boy,  but  the  latter  re- 
mained in  his  native  land  until  he  had  attained 
his  majority,  when  he  crossed  the  Atlantic  to  visit 
his  brother,  who  was  a  sea  captain.  While  return- 
ing to  his  native  land  lie  was  drowned.  Capt. 
George  Brooks  was  the  grandfather  of  Mrs.  Mac- 
lin. While  on  a  voyage  he  was  taken  prisoner  by 
the  Spaniards,  held  captive  for  a  period  of  seven 
years,  and  was  finally  condemned  to  death,  but 
on  making  it  known  to  some  of  the  high  officials 
that  he  was  a  Mason,  he  was  promptly  reprieved. 
Later  he  was  liberated  and  his  ship  and  cargo 
restored  to  him.  He  m.ade  a  fortune  on  the  high 
seas  and  died  in  Philadelphia  at  an  advanced  age. 
The  original  of  the  famous  painting  "Four  Sea- 
sons" was  presented  to  him  bj'  a  nobleman  and  is 
now  in  the  possession  of  the  Green  family.  His 
son  George,  father  of  Mrs.  Maclin,  was  a  promi- 
nent merchant  of  Philadelphia,  and  later  went  to 
Nashville,  Tenn.,  where  he  engaged  in  merchandis- 
ing. He  afterwards  owned  a  tanner3-  at  Franklin, 
Tenn.,  where  his  last  days  were  spent.  He  mar- 
ried Magdaline  Green,  daughter  of  Capt.  John 
Green,  who  was  also  a  sea  captain  and  was  of  Irish 


descent.  His  home  was  in  Philadelphia  and  he 
was  said  to  be  quite  wealthy.  In  his  family  were 
five  daughters,  of  whom  four  married  physicians, 
namely:  Dr.  Shelby,  Dr.  .Sims,  Dr.  McNarry  and  Dr. 
Minich.  The  other  daughter,  Mrs.  Brooks,  died  in 
Tennessee  in  the  '40s. 

Our  subject  was  the  second  in  the  family  of 
three  sons  and  three  daughters.  His  sister  Mary 
is  now  living  near  Nashville;  Columbus  C.  is  a 
phj'sician  of  Tennessee;  B.  F.  is  a  farmer  of  Ten- 
nessee; Cordelia  died  in  1890;  and  Julia  is  the 
wife  of  C.  K.  Mitchell,  a  prosperous  farmer  of 
Tennessee.  The  Doctor  was  reared  upon  the  home 
farm,  acquired  his  education  in  the  common 
schools  and  fitted  himself  for  teaching.  He  began 
this  work  at  the  age  of  seventeen  and  continued 
it  through  the  Civil  War,  during  which  time  he 
also  read  medicine.  He  attended  his  first  course 
of  lectures  in  the  Nashville  Medical  College  in 
1865-66,  then  entered  the  Cincinnati  Medical  Col- 
lege and  was  graduated  therefrom  in  1868.  In 
1881  he  took  a  post  graduate  course  in  Memphis 
Hospital.  He  began  practice  in  Cairo,  Tenn., 
where  he  continued  seventeen  years,  wiien,  in  1884, 
he  came  to  Du  Quoin,  where  he  has  met  with  ex- 
cellent success,  securing  a  most  liberal   palionage. 

The  Doctor  married,  September  1,  1868,  Mar}' 
E.  Harrell,  a  native  of  Tennessee,  who  came  of  an 
old  North  Carolina  family'.  She  died  on  her 
forty-first  birthd.iy,  December  16, 1890.  They  had 
a  family  of  seven  children,  of  whom  five  are  }'et 
liying:  Lula  A.,  wife  of  Clarence  E.  Blakeslee,  of 
the  Blakeslee  Manufacturing  Compan}';  Anna  E., 
wife  of  Stephen  Rogers,  a  hotel-keeper  of  Mt.  Ver- 
non, 111.;  W.  B.;  John  A.  and  Grover  C,  at  home. 
On  the  12th  of  October,  1893,  the  Doctor  married 
Mrs.  Catharine  (Freudenberg)  Weger,of  Du  Quoin, 
the  widow  of  Adrian  Wcger.  This  excellent  lady 
was  born  in  Belleville,  III.,  and  is  connected  with 
some  of  the  oldest  and  most  prominent  German 
families  of  that  city.  She  has  four  children, Oscar, 
Ida,  Anna  and  Walter  Weger. 

Dr.  Maclin  is  a  member  of  the  National  Associ- 
ation of  Railway  Surgeons,  of  the  Southern  Illi- 
nois Medical  Association,  and  is  local  surgeon  for 
the  Illinois  Central  Railroad  and  the  St,  Louis, 
Alton  &  Terre  Haute  Railroad  Companj'.     During 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


243 


President  Cleveland's  first  administration  he  held 
tlie  office  of  Pension  Examiner.  He  heeame  an 
Odd  Fellow  iu  1 867,  has  filled  all  the  chairs  of  the 
local  lodge,  and  is  a  member  of  the  Grand  Lodge. 
In  1871  he  was  made  a  Mason,  joined  the  chapter 
in  1874, and  is  a  charter  member  of  the  Knights  of 
Pythias.  He  served  for  eight  years  on  the  Board  of 
Education,  is  a  member  of  the  City  Council,  and  in 
his  political  views  is  a  Democrat.  In  religious  belief 
he  is  identified  with  the  Christian  Church.  He  is 
recognized  as  a  valued  citizen,  one  ever  interested 
in  what  pertains  to  the  upbuilding  of  the  comnui- 
nitv. 


I®),  ^Wa  M 


iW 


if^  APT.  WILLIAM  M.  NEIL,  an  honored  vet- 
l(  eran  of  the  late  war,  who  is  now  living  a 

^^f)  retired  life  in  Pinckne^-ville,  was  born  in 
Perry  Count}',  Ind.,  November  5,  1837.  His  fa- 
ther, David  Gregory  McNeil,  was  a  native  of 
Pennsylvania,  hut  removed  to  Kentucky,  where 
he  married  Harriet  Lay,  who  was  born  near  Lex- 
ington, that  state,  and  belonged  to  one  of  the 
most  prominent  families  there.  The  father  re- 
moved with  his  family  to  Perry  County,  Ind., 
where  the}'  were  among  the  earliest  settlei-s.  Later 
they  went  to  Greenville,  Ohio,  where  the  father 
died  at  the  age  of  seventy-nine  years,  and  the 
mother  when  eighty-four  years  of  age.  In  their 
family  were  six  children,  four  sons  and  two  daugh- 
ters. The  eldest,  J.  B.,  a  Lieutenant  of  the  late 
war,  is  a  carriage  maker  by  trade,  and  resides  in 
Ann  Arbor,  Mich.;  James,  who  was  also  one  of 
the  boys  in  blue,  is  now  express  agent  for  the 
American  Express  Company  at  Greenville,  Ohio; 
Daniel  was  also  a  soldier  for  about  two  j'ears; 
Mary  is  the  wife  of  Joseph  Ritnour,  who  is  en- 
gaged in  fruit-growing  near  Madison,  Ohio;  and 
Elizabeth  became  the  wife  of  I.  N.  Shiveley,  near 
Greenville,  Ohio,  and  died  in  1890. 

In  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads.  Captain  Mc- 
Neil spent  his  early  boyhood  da3'S.  After  attend- 
ing the  common  schools,  we  find  him  a  student  in 
Liber  College,  of  Portland,  Ind.,  and  at  the  age  of 
seventeen  he  engaged  in  teaching.    The  year  1860 


witnessed  his  arrival  in  Illinois.  He  located  in 
Du  Quoin,  and  the  following  year  there  wedded 
Mary  Mead,  of  that  place.  Their  only  child,  Mary 
Alice,  who  was  an  artist  of  fine  ability,  was  educa- 
ted in  the  State  University  at  Champaign.  She 
became  the  wife  of  Prof.  M.  E.  Cliase,  one  of  the 
art  instructors  of  the  university,  but  died  two 
3-ears  after  her  marriage. 

All  of  the  sons  of  the  McNeil  family  were  I'nion 
soldiers.  In  1862  our  subject  enlisted  in  his  coun- 
try's defense,  and  was  assigned  to  Company  A, 
Eighty-first  Illinois  Infantry,  under  command  of 
Col.  John  A.  Logan.  After  a  few  days  he  was 
made  Second  Lieutenant,  six  months  later  became 
First  Lieutenant,  and  afterward  was  promoted  to 
the  rank  of  C'aptain.  During  tiie  last  year  of  his 
service  he  was  a  member  of  the  staff  of  Eugene  A. 
Carr,  under  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith,  General  Logan  and 
General  McPherson.  He  participated  in  the  bat- 
tles of  Raymond,  Jackson,  Champion  Hills  and 
Black  River,  and  in  the  charge  on  Yicksburg  was 
wounded,  as  were  twent3'-flve  of  the  thirt3--eight 
men  under  him.  His  Second  Lieutenant  was  killed 
iu  that  battle.  He  took  charge  in  the  Red  River 
expedition,  the  battle  of  Nashville  and  in  the  cap- 
ture of  Ft.  Blakelyand  Spanish  Fort, serving  until 
August,  1865. 

AVhen  the  war  was  over  and  the  preservation  of 
the  Union  was  an  assured  fact.  Captain  McNeil 
came  to  Pinckney ville,  and  for  four  3ears  was  Prin- 
cipal of  the  cit}-  schools.  During  the  succeeding 
six  years,  he  was  engaged  in  the  grain  and  lumber 
business,  and  for  six  3-ears  thereafter  was  proprie- 
tor of  a  drug  store.  In  his  business  dealings  he 
was  ver}-  successful,  and  b3'  his  well  directed  and 
determined  efforts  he  won  a  handsome  competcnc3', 
which  now  enables  him  to  live  retired,  resting  in 
the  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  his  former  toil. 

Although  the  C'aptain  has  never  aspired  to 
office,  he  has  ever  taken  an  active  part  in  political 
matters,  and  has  made  thrilling  political  speeches 
in  southern  Illinois,  the  efl'ect  of  which  has  been 
seen  at  the  polls  by  an  increased  Republican  vote. 
He  believes  his  part3-  to  be  on  the  side  of  the  peo- 
ple and  the  one  best  able  to  advance  their  interests, 
therefore  is  an  earnest  advocate  of  its  principles. 
He  is  a  prominent  member  of  James  P.   Co  wen 


244 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


Post  No.  219,  G.  A.  R.,  has  served  as  its  Com- 
mander  and  is  now  Quartermaster.  He  lias  also 
been  Master  of  the  Jlasonlc  lodge,  and  lias  served 
as  its  Treasurer  for  the  past  eight  years. 


(^^  T.  AUGUSTINE'S  ROMAN  CATHOLIC 
^^^  CHURCIL  of  Prairie  du  Long,  dates  back 
^&J_M  ("O  t'lc  first  part  of  this  century.  Twelve 
families  from  Lancashire,  England,  came 
to  Monroe  County  in  1812,  and  bought  land  of 
the  Government  near  Prairie  du  Long  Creek,  in 
what  is  now  known  as  the  Prairie  du  Long  District. 
The  settlers,  who  were  Catholics,  soon  erected  a 
log  church  and  were  visited  by  Father  Van  Clos- 
tere,  of  Prairie  du  Rochcr.  This  church  was  situ- 
ated at  English  Settlement,  then  in  Randolph 
County,  but  now  in  Monroe. 

In  1834  sixty  acres  of  land  were  donated  by 
Edward  Newsham  and  John  Winstanley  to  the 
Rt.-Rev.  Joseph  Rosati,  Bishop  of  St.  Louis, 
on  condition  that  a  church  be  built  and  the  land 
used  for  its  benefit.  A  stone  church  was  soon 
erected,  and  on  November  1 1 ,  1838,  was  consecrated 
to  divine  service  by  Bishop  Rosati,  with  Rev.  J. 
Kenney  as  its  first  pastor  and  resident  priest.  The 
edifice  was  about  40x60  feet,  and  was  one  of  the 
finest  churches  in  southern  Illinois.  "Among  the 
oldest  settlers  and  members  of  the  congregation 
were  Edward  Newsham,  John  AVinstanley,  John 
Newsham,  Thomas  Winstanley  and  John  and 
Thomas  Bamber,  all  of  whom  are  now  deceased. 

After  the  church  was  built  the  old  building  was 
used  as  a  district  school.  The  new  church  was 
erected  about  one  hundred  and  fift}^  yards  north- 
west and  was  over  the  line  in  St.  Clair  County. 
In  1854,  it  having  become  dilapidated,  the  con- 
gregation, on  the  12th  of  February,  decided  to  tear 
it  down  and  rebuild.  This  was  done  and  a  paro- 
chial frame  residence  was  erected.  In  1867-68,  a 
two-story  brick  parsonage  was  built  by  Rev.  J. 
Beriage,  who  a  short  time  previous  had  been  ap- 
pointed rector.  A  tower  was  built  on  the  church, 
in  1874,  and  the  following  year  the  old  log  church 
which  had  been  used  as  a  district  school,  was  re- 
placed by  a  new  building,  which  was  erected  fur- 


ther west  on  the  bank  of  Prairie  du  Long  Creek. 
A  room  which  had  been  added  to  the  old  paro- 
chial residence,  however,  was  used  for  a  parochial 
school. 

In  1886  a  new  schoolhouse  of  brick,  20x30  feet, 
was  erected  by  Rev.  L.  Riesen,and  in  1889  the  old 
cracked  bell  was  replaced  by  two  new  bells,  pur- 
chased by  the  present  rector.  Rev.  J.  B.  Schlotmann. 
In  taking  down  the  old  bell  it  was  found  that  the 
steeple  would  be  too  weak  for  the  bells,  and  sugges- 
tions were  made  by  the  members  of  the  congrega- 
tion to  enlarge  and  remodel  the  old  and  also  build 
a  sanctuary  to  the  church.  At  the  examination  of 
the  church,  however,  by  an  architect  (Vul.  Reis,  of 
Belleville,  now  deceased)  it  was  found  very  unsafe 
and  not  wortli  further  expenditure  of  money.  It 
was  tlien  decided  by  the  Trustees  of  the  congrega- 
tion to  build  a  new  church  and  not  at  the  old 
place,  but  at  Freedom,  a  village  about  two  miles 
east.  The  church  at  that  time  had  a  membership 
of  over  a  hundred  families.  Freedom  is  a  little 
town  on  the  Belleville  and  Kaskaskia  road  and  is 
the  center  of  the  congregation,  and  therefore  more 
convenient  and  more  readily  accessible  for  its 
members.  In  spite  of  some  opposition  to  the 
movementa  piece  of  land  of  about  three  and  a-half 
acres  was  purchased  from  Hy.  Diefenbech,  Octo- 
ber 17,  1892,  a  noble  gentleman  of  Freedom,  who 
keeps  a  hotel. 

When  it  became  known  that  a  Catholic  Church 
was  to  be  erected  at  Freedom,  all  endeavored, 
whether  Catholics  or  Protestants,  to  help  the  same 
either  by  funds  or  labor.  The  plans,  details  and 
specifications  for  the  new  church  were  prepared  by 
N.  H.  Melcher,  an  architect  of  St.  Louis.  These 
having  been  accepted  by  the  rector  and  approved 
by  the  Rt.-Rev.  J.  Janssen,  the  bishop  of  the 
diocese,  the  corner-stone  was  laid  by  the  latter 
April  11,  1893,  in  the  presence  of  a  great  number 
of  priests  and  laymen.  The  work  was  then  begun 
under  the  superintendency  of  the  architect  and 
the  rector. 

The  size  of  the  church  is  44x90  feet,  with  a  spire 
one  hundred  and  ten  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
ground.  The  basement  is  nine  feet  high  and  built 
of  native  blue  limestone,  don!v>.ed  by  Benjamin 
Harbaugh,  a  member  of  the   congregation.     The 


X 


/OjlJl^^y^<^ 


'i-yj/.i 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


247 


superstructure  walls  are  built  of  native  sandstone, 
donated  by  F.  Dejfenliardt,  also  a  member,  and 
are  twenty-one  feet  above  the  water-tables,  or 
twenty-four  feet  above  the  level  of  the  ground. 
Tlie  masonry  work  was  done  by  Frank  Tarantiuo, 
of  St.  Louis;  the  lumber  was  furnished  by  Charles 
Boedeker,  who  keeps  a  large  lumber  yard  in  Red 
Bud;  mill-work  by  the  Menke  it  Grimm  Planing 
Mill  Company,  of  (^uincy,  111.;  carpenter  work  by 
J.  H.  fScheiper,  of  St.  Libor}',  III.;  the  caps,  window 
sills  and  other  cut  stone  are  of  Bedford  limestone, 
and  were  furnished  In-  Ralph  Dixon,  of  Alton,  111. 
The  church  is  covered  with  old  Bangor  slate  from 
Bethlehem,  Pa.,  furnished  by  T.  H.  White,  of  St. 
Louis.  All  the  contracts  have  been  carried  out  to 
the  satisfaction  of  the  architect  and  rector.  The 
churcli  has  ornamental  glass  of  mosaic  style,  very 
pleasing,  and  was  furnislied  b3'  the  E.  F.  Kerwin 
Ornamental  Glass  Company,  of  St.  Louis.  The 
church  will  cost  when  completed  about  ^11,000. 
A  now  two-story  parsonage  will  also  be  built  this 
spring  (1894).  The  basement  will  be  of  native 
blue  limestone,  and  the  superstructure  of  native 
sandstone.  The  house  will  be  situated  on  the 
south  side  of  the  church,  with  which  it  will  be 
connected  b}-  a  porch. 


3=^E 


WILLIAM  R.  Mackenzie,  M.  D.,  a  native 
of  Nova  Scotia,  is  of  Scottish  parentage. 
His  grandfather,  Alexander  MacKenzie, 
Sr.,  was  born  in  Inverness,  in  the  Highlands  of 
Scotland,  and  received  a  liberal  education.  He 
was  a  member  of  the  Masonic  order,  and  a  stanch 
supporter  of  the  Presbyterian  Church.  Alexander 
MacKenzie,  Jr.,  the  father  of  our  subject,  was  born 
in  Nova  Scotia,  JNIarch  6,  1797,  and  is  pow  in 
comparatively  good  health,  bidding  fair  to  become 
a  centenarian.  He  still  resides  on  part  of  the  old 
homestead,  where  his  father  settled  just  after  the 
Revolutionary  War. 

Alexander  MacKenzie,  Sr.,  and  William  McMil- 
lan, grandfathers  of  our  subject,  were  pressed  into 
the  British  service  during  the  Revolutionary  War 
and  therein-  became  British  pensioners.  Many  of 
the    former's    descendants,    including   John    and 


Daniel,  two  brothers  of  Dr.  MacKenzie,  partici- 
pated in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion  on  the  Union 
side.  John  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Ft.  Donel- 
son,  February  15,  1862. 

The  birth  of  William  Robert  MacKenzie  occurred 
February  15,  1844,  in  Churchville,  Pictou  County, 
Nova  .Scotia.  He  was  the  eighth  child  in  order  of 
birth.  He  had  five  brothers  and  four  sisters,  of 
whom  there  now  survive  one  brother,  Alexander 
G.,  residing  at  Chester,  III.,  and  four  sisters,  living 
within  a  radius  of  four  miles  from  the  old  home- 
stead. His  earlj'  education  was  secured  in  the 
village  schools  of  his  native  place,  where  he  after- 
ward became  a  teacher.  He  spent  his  boyhood 
days  on  the  old  home  farm  in  Nova  Scotia,  which 
was  the  stopping  place  of  all  the  preachers  of  the 
United  Presbyterian  Church,  and  he  was  reared 
under  the  influences  of  the  sturd}-  old  Cove- 
nanters. 

In  1865  our  subject  came  to  the  United  States, 
landing  at  Boston.  Soon  after  his  arrival  he  con- 
tracted measles.  After  over  a  month's  severe  ill- 
ness, during  which,  through  improper  treatment,  he 
suffered  a  serious  relapse,  he  recovered  onl}-  to  find 
the  stock  of  gold  which  he  had  brought  from  home 
very  much  depleted.  Something  had  to  be  done 
to  mend  his  crippled  finances,  so  the  advertising 
columns  of  the  daily  papers  were  scanned.  A  col- 
Icctorship  for  a  gas  fitting  company  caught  his  eye, 
and  upon  making  application  for  the  position  he 
was  accepted.  Being  a  Nova  Scotian  was,  in  Bos- 
ton, a  sufficient  recommendation  for  his  honesty, 
and  no  bond  was  required. 

After  a  few  months  in  this  position,  a  better 
opening  was  offered  in  the  employment  of  William 
Tidd  &  Co.,  leather  merchants,  on  Pearl  Street,  who 
also  carried  on  business  in  Stoneham,  IMass.,  where 
our  subject  was  assigned  a  position.  While  there 
he  fell  in  with  a  fellow  countryman  named  Mc- 
Leod,  who  induced  him  to  embark  on  a  fishing 
expedition  to  the  Grand  Banks.  Fitting  out  at 
Cape  Cod,  the  vessel  proceeded  to  the  Grand 
Banks  and  began  operations.  The  schooner,  an 
old  one,  sprang  aleak,  and  as  it  became  unman- 
ageable, it  was  necessary  to  abandon  it.  After 
being  looted  of  everything  valuable  on  board  by 
the  rest  of  the   fleet,  she  was  fired  and  cast  adrift. 


U8 


PORTRAIT  AND  BTOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Each  man  Imd  his  own  dory,  and  our  subject  and 
his  partner  were  taken  on  board  a  schooner  from 
Cape  Breton  Island,  of  which  Captain  Doolan 
was  in  command. 

After  five  months  on  the  Atlantic  without  the 
sight  of  land,  the  vessel  weighed  anchor  and 
started  for  iiome;  and  none  too  soon,  for  that 
same  daj'  a  storm  struck  the  Banks,  and  many  of 
the  vessels  with  their  crews  went  down.  Captain 
Doolan 's  craft  was  more  fortunate  than  many  of 
them;  and  after  scudding  for  two  da3'S  under  bare 
poles  the  storm  abated,  and  the  journey  homeward 
was  begun  in  earnest.  So  suddenl}'  did  the  storm 
burst  upon  the  fleet,  that  instead  of  winding  the 
sails  in  the  usual  manner,  the  ordet*  was  given  to 
cut  the  halj'ard  and  let  the  sails  fall.  After  a 
V03'age  of  about  two  weeks,  the  vessel,  with  crew 
and  cargo,  hove  anchor  safely  in  the  harbor  of 
Provincetown.  Expecting  nothing  but  his  rescue 
and  keeping  for  his  labor  after  boarding  the  vessel 
of  Captain-  Doolan,  our  j'oung  Nova  .Scotian  was 
surprised  when  the  Captain,  taking  him  to  a  bank, 
poured  into  his  hands  #80  in  gold. 

Interesting  incidents  occurred  while  Dr.  MacKen- 
zie  was  on  board  Captain  Doolan 's  vessel  at  the 
Grand  Banks.  One  day,  about  noon,  all  the  dories 
were  out  plying  their  lines.  Suddenly  the  sky 
darkened,  the  waters  seethed,  and  all  but  three  of 
the  boats  started  for  and  safel3'  reached  the  fleet. 
Captain  Doolan 's  two  brothers  and  one  other 
man,  each  in  a  separate  dor^',  were  so  baffled  by 
the  dense  fog  that  they  lost  sight  of  the  fleet. 
Not  being  able  to  hear  the  fog-bell,  and  finding 
themselves  rapidly  drifting,  tlie^-  made  prepara- 
tions to  anchor  in  the  deeper  waters.  Accordingly, 
they  fastened  the  three  dories  together  and  occu- 
pied but  one  of  them.  The}'  then  converted  the 
three  anchors  and  the  six  leads,  used  in  fishing, 
and  weighing  four  pounds  each,  into  one  anchor, 
whose  cable  was  formed  by  the  union  of  the  three 
cables  and  the  six  fishing  lines.  Notwithstanding 
all  their  precautions,  however,  the  current  was  so 
strong  that  they  drifted  until  they  were  unable  to 
touch  bottom.  Their  dories  were  tossed  about 
until  four  o'clock  the  next  evening,  when  the  fog 
cleared,  and  just  the  tip  of  the  tallest  mast  in  the 
fleet  was  visiiile.  Making  for  this  thej-  finally  reached 


their  vessel  in  an  exhausted  condition  and  suffering 
from  want  of  food  and  water.  Here  they  were  re- 
ceived with  joy,  for  all  on  board  had  believed  them 
lost,  as  had  been  the  fate  of  many  who  engaged  in 
expeditions  of  this  kind.  McLeod,the  companion 
previously  referred  to,  became  quarrelsome,  and 
shifting  from  one  vessel  to  another,  finally  boarded 
an  English  ship,  was  tal<en  to  Liverpool,  England, 
and  was  returned  to  Boston  bj-  the  American 
Consul. 

During  young  MacKenzie's  absence,  his  brother, 
Alexander  G.,  who  was  then  a  prosperous  miner  in 
Nevada,  sent  him  a  draft  for  ^lOO  in  gold,  to  assist 
him  in  pursuing  his  medical  studies.  During  his 
long  absence  the  letter  was  returned  to  the  writer, 
who  did  not  know  but  that  his  brother  was  dead. 
Communication  being  re-established,  the  check  was 
again  forwarded.  William  R.,  bronzed  by  his  life 
at  sea,  of  which  he  had  had  enough,  secured  an- 
other position,  this  time  with  M.  M.  Peyser  &  Co., 
on  Winter  Street,  Boston.  There  he  remained  until 
February,  1867,  when  he  went  to  Sparta,  111.,  and 
studied  medicine,  and  also  recited  in  Greek  anil 
Latin  to  Rev.  Mr.  Stuart.  Shortly  afterward  he  en- 
tered the  medical  department  of  the  L'niversity  of 
Michigan,  from  which  he  was  graduated  March  30, 
1870.  After  a  few  months  at  Grass  Lake,  assisting 
E.  B.  Chapin,  M.  D.,  his  preceptor,  he  returned  to 
Illinois  for  the  practice  of  his  profession,  locating 
at  Kaskaskia.  After  remaining  there  for  five 
years  he  removed  to  Chester,  where  he  has  been  in 
continuous  practice  ever  since. 

A  leader  in  his  profession,  the  Doctor  holds  a 
prominent  place  in  man}'  of  the  principal  societies 
thereof.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Southern  Illinois 
Medical  Association,  Illinois  State  Medical  Society, 
St.  Louis  Medical  Societ}-,  and  theTri-State  Medical 
Society-  (Indiana,  Illinois  and  Kentucky),  now  the 
Mississippi  Vallc}'  Medical  Association.  He  was 
also  a  delegate  to  the  International  Medical  Con- 
gress, which  met  in  Washington,  I).  C,  in  1887. 
During  the  course  of  this  meeting  he  was  a  guest 
of  the  American  Medical  Editore  at  a  banquet 
given  the  foreign  medical  editors.  Ho  was  a  rep- 
resentative of  the  Illinois  State  Board  of  Health 
at  a  meeting  of  the  Sanitary  Council  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi Valley,  which  w.as  held  in  the  cit}-  of  New 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


249 


Orleans  in  March,  1885.  At  the  meetings  of  the 
Southern  Illinois  Medical  Association,  he  usually 
has  one  or  more  papers  ou  topics  of  interest.  At 
the  meeting  of  this  organization  in  January,  1880, 
he  read  a  paper  wiiich  was  afterwards  published 
in  tlie  "St.  Louis  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal," 
from  which  it  wascopied,  translated,  and  published 
in  the  "Paiis  Medical  Journal,"  Paris,  France. 

June  15,  1883,  Dr.  MacKenzie  was  appointed  a 
member  of  the  Illinois  State  Board  of  Health  by 
Gov.  John  M.  Hamilton,  to  succeed  Dr.  J.  M. 
Gregory,  who  had  resigned.  He  was  continued 
in  office  by  appointment  of  Gov.  Joseph  W.  Fifer, 
May  28,  1889.  He  served  as  Secretary  of  said 
Board  from  July  3  until  December  31,  1891. 
Near  the  close  of  Fifer's  term  the  Doctor  sent  in 
his  resignation,  which  was  not  accepted  until  the 
lOlh  of  May,  1893,  several  months  after  the  ac- 
cession of  Governor  Allgeld  to  the  executive 
chair,  thus  giving  the  Doctor  ten  years  in  this  im- 
portant position.  At  the  meetings  for  examina- 
tion of  candidates  for  license  to  practice  medicine, 
his  questions  have  been  higlil3-  commended  for 
their  thorougliness,  comprehensiveness  and  ele 
mentary  character. 

July  15,  1885,  during  Cleveland's  first  adminis- 
tration. Dr.  MacKenzie  was  appointed  by  Commis- 
sioner J.  C.  Black  to  the  Board  of  United  States 
Examining  Surgeons,  at  Chester,  111.,  and  was  re- 
appointed by  Commissioner  Tanner  under  Harri- 
son's administration.  At  the  organization  of  said 
Board  (in  1885),  he  was  elected  Secretary,  in 
which  capacity  he  served  until  his  resignation,  De- 
cember 7,  1893,  a  term  of  over  eiglit  years.  F'or 
fifteen  years  past  he  lias  been  surgeon  for  the 
Wabash,  Chester  &  Western  Railway  Company, 
and  has,  by  his  thorough  knowledge  of  surgery, 
rendered  the  company  invaluable  services.  He  has 
held  this  position  under  three  successive  manage- 
ments of  the  road. 

May  17,  1875,  Dr.  MacKenzie  married  Miss  Nellie 
M.,  daughter  of  Dr.  William  A.  and  Adeline  S. 
Gordon,  of  Chester,  whose  biograpical  sketch  ap- 
pears elsewhere  in  this  work.  To  tliem  were  born 
five  children,  three  of  whom  are  living,  William 
A.,  Robert  G.  and  Adeline  E.,  aged  respectively  six- 
teen, twelve  and  seven  years.    Socially  Dr.  MacKen- 


zie is  a  member  of  the  blue  lodge  chapter  and  coun- 
cil of  the  Masonic  fraternity  of  Chester,  the  com- 
mandery  of  Knights  Templar  of  Centralia,  III., 
and  the  Chester  lodge  and  encampment  of  In- 
dependent Order  of  Odd  Fellows.  He  is  a  Pres- 
byterian, as  are  most  of  his  race,  while  Mrs.  Mac- 
Kenzie is  a  member  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church. 

A  no  more  appiopriate  closing  of  this  sketch 
could  be  made  than  to  quote  what  has  before  been 
written  of  him  by  one  who  has  known  him  for 
years.  It  is  as  follows:  "Dr.  MacKenzie  is  a  care- 
ful and  indefatigable  student  of  his  profession, 
and  has  attained  a  high  reputation  for  learning 
among  his  fellow-practitioners  in  Illinois  and  Mis- 
souri. He  has  an  extensive  and  lucrative  practice 
and  is  one  of  the  most  highly'  esteemed  citizens  of 
Chester.  The  same  ability  that  has  placed  him  in 
the  front  rank  of  his  profession  is  always  at  the 
service  of  the  community  in  which  he  lives  for 
the  promotion  of  meritorious  enterprises.  He  was 
for  nine  years  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Educa- 
tion of  Chester,  and  President  of  that  body  for 
two  terms.  In  his  social  relations  Dr.  MacKenzie 
is  as  popular  as  he  is  successful  in  his  profession." 


J!  H.  WARD,  one  of  the  leading  business  men 
I  of  Du  Quoin,  is  a  member  of  the  well  known 
,  firm  of  Ward  ct  Brother,  and  is  a  stock- 
holder and  director  in  the  First  National 
Bank.  His  active  business  life  has  won  him  a 
position  of  prominence,  and  it  is  with  pleasure  that 
we  present  to  our  readers  this  record  of  his  career. 
A  native  of  Connecticut,  he  was  born  in  New 
Haven,  August  4,  1847,  and  is  a  son  of  Henry 
Ward,  who  was  born  in  New  Haven  in  1819.  The 
father  was  a  carpenter  and  builder,  and  aided  in 
the  erection  of  the  first  building  in  which  Seth 
Thomas  made  his  famous  clocks.  At  length  he 
came  to  the  west,  locating  in  Williamson  C'ounty, 
111.,  whence  he  removed  to  Carbondale,  Jackson 
County.     He  is  now  a  resident  of  Du  Quoin. 

J.  tl.  Ward  had  fair  educational  advantages  in 
his  youth,  and  was  thus  fitted  for  the  practical 
duties  of  life.     Soon  after  the  close  of  the  war  he 


250 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL    RECORD. 


went  on  the  road  as  a  salesman,  traveling  for  two 
years  in  Iowa,  anrt  one  3'ear  in  Texas  and  Indian 
Territorj'.  He  tlien  engaged  in  the  butchering 
and  grocery  business  in  Carbondale,  and  subse- 
quently- was  a  dealer  in  men's  clothing  at  that 
place.  About  1873  he  came  to  Du  Quoin,  where 
in  connection  with  his  brother,  "W.  D.,  he  engaged 
in  the  livery  and  stock  business,  to  which  he  has 
since  devoted  his  energies.  They  have  become 
the  largest  stock  shippers  in  this  section  of  the 
state,  and  have  accumulated  a  handsome  fortune 
along  this  line.  They  have  also  done  an  exten- 
sive livery  business,  and  are  the  owners  of  the  large 
brick  building  in  which  they  carry  on  this  enter- 
prise, together  with  other  business  property- — a 
thousand  acres  of  farming  land,  several  residences 
which  they  rent,  and  some  valuable  real  estate  in 
Carbondale.  On  their  farm  they  have  a  large  num- 
ber of  blooded  cattle  and  horses.  Our  subject  is 
also  one  of  the  incorporators  of  the  First  National 
Bank,  and  is  one  of  its  stockholders  and  directors. 

In  May,  1875,  Mr.  Ward  wedded  Miss  Cephise 
Slawson,  who  was  born  in  New  Orleans,  and  was  a 
daughter  of  Hiram  Slawson, a  native  of  New  York. 
The  latter  was  the  nephew  of  .Joseph  Slawson,  the 
street  car  inventor,  who  died  in  New  York  City 
worth  half  a  million.  He  served  as  foreman  of 
his  uncle's  works  in  New  Orleans.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Ward  have  but  one  child,  Hiram  H.,  sixteen  years 
of  age. 

Sociallv,  Mr.  Ward  is  a  Royal  Arch  Mason,  and 
in  politics  has  been  a  life-long  Democrat.  He  was 
elected  a  member  of  the  County  Board  of  Com- 
missioners in  1887,  and  served  for  three  years. 
He  has  also  been  twice  elected  to  the  Board  of 
Aldermen  of  Du  Quoin,  and  is  one  of  the  stock- 
holders and  directors  in  the  Du  Quoin  Building 
and  Loan  Association.  He  started  out  in  life  for 
himself  with  no  capital,  but  has  steadily  worked 
his  way  upward  and  is  now  numbered  among  the 
substantial  citizens  of  Perry  County. 

W.  D.  Ward,  who  is  the  senior  member  of  the 
firm  of  Ward  &  Brother,  was  born  in  Litchfield, 
Conn.,  in  January,  1848,  and  came  with  his  i)arents 
to  the  west.  When  he  started  out  on  his  business 
career,  he  became  a  dry-goods  merchant  of  Carbon- 
dale, but  after  a  short  time  he  sold    his  store   and 


removed  to  Du  Quoin,  where  he  has  since  been  as- 
sociated with  his  brother  in  all  of  the  business  and 
pi'operty  interests  before  mentioned.  In  the  family 
were  five  brothers  and  one  sister,  but  the  latter, 
Elraira,  died  at  the  age  of  eighteen  years,  and  John 
died  at  the  age  of  six.  Another  brother,  George 
F.  M.,  is  an  extensive  clothing  dealer  of  Mt.  Ver- 
non, 111.,  and  Samuel  is  in  the  clothing  business  in 
Murphysboro.  W.  D.  Ward  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Jefferson  Snider, 
of  Carbondale,  and  to  them  were  born  four  chil- 
dren, two  of  whom  are  living.  Snider  aged  twelve, 
and  Myrtle,  three  years  of  age.  Mr.  Ward  is  an 
Odd  Fellow,  and  like  his  brother  has  alwa3's  been 
a  Democrat,  but  his  time  has  been  so  largely  taken 
up  by  business  interests  that  he  has  never  con- 
cerned himself  greatly  in  political  matters. 

— --S- ■.o«o.fcJ-/"V^5)"°*** *^'^ 

AJ.  JAMES  C.  HOLBROOK.  While  Ran- 
dolph County  has  much  in  the  way  of 
natural  resources  and  commercial  trans- 
actions to  commend  it  to  the  public  at 
large,  the  chief  interest  centres  in  the  lives  of  those 
citizens  who  have  achieved  success  for  themselves, 
and  at  the  same  time  benefited  the  comraunit}'  in 
which  they  reside.  Prominent  among  these  men 
is  the  subject  of  this  sketch.  Having  come  to  the 
county  in  1845,  he  has  since  that  time  taken  an 
active  part  in  laying  the  foundation  for  the  pres- 
ent prosperity  of  his  community. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  Sherborn.  Mass..  May 
27,  1817,  and  is  a  son  of  Clark  and  Betsey  (Bul- 
leu)  Holbrook.  The  father  was  a  large  sheep 
grower  in  his  native  place,  and  at  the  same  time 
carried  on  business  as  a  merchant.  He  was  the 
son  of  James  Holbrook,  who  was  also  a  native  of 
the  above  place  in  Massachusetts,  and  was  of  Eng- 
lish descent. 

Our  subject  obtained  his  early  education  in  the 
schools  near  his  home,  and  later  took  a  course  of 
study  in  an  academy  at  Brattleboro,  Vt.  It  being 
his  desire  to  become  a  lawyer,  he  began  his  legal 
studies  in  the  otlice  of  Gov.  William  Bebb,  of  Ham- 
ilton, Ohio,  to  which  place  he  went  in  1836, and  was 
graduated  from  the  law  school  in  Cincinnati  about 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


251 


1840.     After  being  admitted  to  the  Bar,  Mr.  Hol- 

l)rooii  went  to  Hamilton,  Oliio,  wiiere  he  engaged 
in  tlie  [iractice  of  liis  profession  until  1845,  the 
j'ear  of  his  advent  into  Sparta,  tiiis  county.  There 
he  built  up  a  large  practice  and  remained  until 
1852,  when  he  came  to  Chester  and  opened  up 
business  in  this  city.  In  1854  he  represented  his 
district  on  the  Whig  ticket  in  the  Legislature.  He 
was  residing  in  Chester  on  the  outbreak  of  the 
Civil  War,  and  later  was  appointed  Paymaster  in 
the  arin^'  b}'  President  Lincoln,  continuing  in  this 
position  until  the  close  of  the  war  in  1865.  He 
then  returned  to  Chester,  and  on  account  of  ill 
health  was  obliged  to  discontinue  his  law  prac- 
tice. He  was  later  elected  Police  Magistrate,  and 
served  eight  years. 

Mr.  Ilolbrook  was  married  May  15,  1845,  at  Ham- 
ilton, Ohio,  to  Miss  Eliza  Isabella  McDill.  She  was 
born  in  Hamilton,  December  28,  1822,  and  was  the 
daughter  of  the  Rev.  David  and  Lydia  McDill,  who 
were  of  Scotch  descent.  Tlie  maternal  grandfather 
of  Mrs.  Holbrook,  John  McDannell,  was  a  Colonel 
in  the  Revolutionaiy  War.  To  our  subject  and  liis 
wife  were  born  seven  children.  Their  eldest  son, 
a  graduate  of  Monmouth  College,  and  an  attor- 
ney-at-law,  died  in  his  twenty-fifth  year.  Two 
other  sons  died  in  infancy.  Clara,  now  Mrs. 
Henry  Smith,  is  quite  a  noted  lecturer  on  the 
science  and  laws  of  health,  and  in  the  fall  of 
1893  she  lectured  a  week  in  W^ashington,  D.  C. 
She  organized  the  Chautauqua  Assembly  in  Ches- 
ter, and  has  always  been  foremost  in  forwarding 
movements  for  the  benefit  and  development  of 
intellectual  culture.  She  is  now  a  widow,  and 
lives  with  her  children  on  a  ranch  in  California. 
Edward  is  a  druggist  in  Chester,  and  is  regarded 
as  one  of  the  most  skilled  in  his  calling  in  this 
part  of  the  state.  Elizabeth,  who  died  January  31, 
1893,  was  a  very  talented  j'oung  lady  and  was 
given  a  fine  musical  education.  She  also  won  a 
wide  reputation  as  an  authoress,  and  wrote  a  novel 
entitled  '-Old  Kaskaskia  Days,"  which  was  widely 
read.  She  was  a  young  lady  of  great  refinement  and 
sweetness  of  manner, and  of  broad  and  liberal  cul- 
ture. Her  active  mind  was  always  seeking  new 
avenues  of  investigation  and  aiding  in  the  enlarge- 
ment of  human  understanding.     Her  great  purity 


of  heart  and  nobility  of  character  were  among  the 
many  charms  which  made  her  society  sought  by 
the  best  people  in  the  community  in  which  she 
dwelt.  She  was  an  indefatigable  worker  in  the 
Columbian  Society,  and  by  her  energ}'  did  much 
to  help  to  make  a  proper  showing  for  this  old  spot 
of  historic  interest.  She  was  graduated  with  first 
honors  at  Monmouth  College.  Lydia,  a  lady  of 
intelligence  and  culture,  married  James  Reed,  of 
Sparta,  a  mechanic  for  building  bridges. 

Mr.  Holbrook  is  a  Democrat,  and  is  a  very  popu- 
lar man.  He  is  generous  and  open-hearted  and  is 
read\'  at  all  times  to  do  what  he  can  to  benefit 
both  business  and  social  circles.  He  and  his  wife 
are  members  of  the  Presbyterian  Church. 


HJHZ 


---^ 


..  M.  BATP^S,  who  is  numbered  among  the 
i/Av/  leading  business  men  of  Du  Quoin,  is  a 
^^J  native  of  Mississippi,  his  birth  having  oc- 
curred in  Woodville,  Januarj'  9,  1852.  His  father, 
James  G.  Bates,  was  a  native  of  Kentucky,  born 
in  1817,  and  was  a  harness  and  saddle  maker  by 
trade.  He  wedded  Mrs.  Mary  Ellen  (Smith)  Cot- 
ter, a  native  of  Wilkinson  County,  Miss.,  and  a 
representative  of  one  of  the  pioneer  families  of 
that  locality,  where  her  father  was  at  one  time  an 
extensive  slave  holder.  By  her  first  marriage  she 
became    the    mother  of  three    children,  John  M., 

i   Matilda  E.  and  Hlugene  M.     Mr.  Bates  served  as  a 

]  soldier  during  the  Mexican  War,  and  was  taken 
prisoner  during  that  struggle,  being  held  in   the 

I  city  of  Mexico  when  it  was  captured  by  General 
Scott.  When  the  war  was  over  and  the  countrj- 
no  longer  needed  his  services,  he   located  in    Mis- 

I  sissippi,  where  he  engaged  in  harness-making  un- 
til 1858.     That    year  witnessed  his  arrival  in  Du 

j  Quoin,  where  he  followed  the  same  trade  until  his 
death,  in  1863.  His  wife  passed  away  in  Du  Quoin 
in  1876.  He  had  a  brother,  William,  who  was  a 
Lieutenant  in  the  Mexican  War.  and  on  comino 
to  Illinois  settled  on  a  farm  in   Franklin    County, 

j    where  he  departed  this  life  in  1866. 

In  the  Bates  family  were  five  children,  of  whom 

!  our  subject  is  the  eldest.  He  had  two  brothers 
and  two  sisters.     One  of  the   former  is  livina:  in 


252 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL    RECORD. 


Arkansas.  Tlie  utlier,  Charles  P.,  disappeared  nine 
years  ago  and  has  not  been  heard  from  since.  His 
sisters  reside  in  Texas  and  in  Kansas  City,  Mo. 
W.  M.  Bates  has  been  familiar  with  harness-mak- 
ing since  liis  earlies't  days.  Wlien  in  his  eighth 
year  lie  began  lo  lielp  his  father  in  the  shop  wlien 
he  was  not  in  school.  Upon  his  father's  death  he 
was  thrown  npon  his  own  resources,  and  the  suc- 
cess of  his  life  is  therefore  due  to  his  own  efforts. 
For  seven  years  he  was  in  the  employ  of  J.  Mess- 
more,  after  which  he  went  to  St.  Louis,  where  he 
followed  the  trade  of  harness-making.  Later  he 
carried  on  the  same  pursuit  in  Dixon  and  in 
Marion,  111.,  and  in  1878  returned  to  Du  Quoin, 
where  he  established  the  business  which  he  has 
since   successfully  conducted. 

On  the  2d  of  October,  1879,  Mr.  Bates  was 
united  in  marriage  with  JSIiss  Elizabeth  Hughes, 
who  was  born  in  Aston.  Lancashire,  England,  and 
during  childhood  came  lo  America  with  her  par- 
ents, .lames  and  JIary  A.  (Ogden)  Hughes,  who 
settled  in  Du  Quoin.  They  have  had  six  children, 
but  lost  one  in  infancy.  Those  living  are,  Mary 
P.,  thirteen  years  of  age;  Ellen  A.,  aged  twelve; 
Charles  J.,  aged  eight;  Beatrice,  six  years  of  age; 
and  Paul  W.,  the  baby  of  two  yeare.  The  one  de- 
ceased bore  the  name  of  Clara.  The  parents  are 
both  members  of  the  Catholic  Church.  In  his  po- 
litical affiliations,  ftlr.  Bates  is  a  Democrat,  but  has 
never  sought  or  desired  public  office,  preferring  to 
give  his  entire  time  and  attention  to  his  business 
interests,  in  which  he  has  met  with  a  well  deserved 
success. 


y 


(Vi  )i>;ILEY  GRAY,  one  of  the  oldest,  best  known 
and  most  highly  respected  citizensof  Jack- 
son County,  now  makes  his  home  in  Elk- 
ville,  where  he  is  practically  living  a  retired  life. 
His  parents,  Russell  and  Martha  (Phelps)  Gray, 
were  natives  of  Hopkins  County,  Ky.,  and  there 
the  father  followed  farming  as  a  means  of  liveli- 
hood. On  the  1.5th  of  August,  1825,  a  son  was 
born  unto  them,  to  whom  the  name  of  Wiley  was 
given.  Two  years  later,  on  horseliack,  they  crossed 
the  state  of  Kentucky  to  Illinois  and  took  up  their 


residence  in  Perry  County,  where  the  boy  grew  to 

manhood,  his  time  being  passed  in  the  usual  man- 
ner of  farmer  lads  of  that  day,  while  with  the  fam- 
ily he  experienced  the  hardships  and  trials  of 
frontier  life. 

After  arriving  at  3'ears  of  maturity,  Mr.  Giay 
came  to  Jackson  County,  where  he  has  since  made 
his  home.  On  the  17th  of  September,  18.61,  he 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Julia  Glotfelty, 
and  to  them  were  born  four  children,  Philip. 
Franklin,  Martha  and  E^liza.  In  August,  1864, 
the  mother  passed  away,  and  was  laid  to  rest  in 
the  village  cemetery.  Two  years  later,  in  1866, 
Mr.  Gray  married  Miss  Pha?be  Porter,  a  daughter 
of  Russell  R.  S.  and  Dorothea  (Burnliam)  Porter. 
Her  parents  were  numbered  among  the  early  set- 
tlers of  Ohio,  and  in  1844  they  left  the  Buckeye 
State  and  emigrated  to  Jackson  County,  111.  Seven 
children  were  born  of  the  second  marriage,  of 
whom  fiveare  yet  living,  namely:  llattie.I.,  Annie, 
Russell,  Amy  and  Wiley. 

When  the  thi'eats  of  secession  were  carried  out 
and  the  south  attempted  to  destroy  the  Union,  Mr. 
Giay  entered  the  service  of  his  country  in  defense 
of  the  Old  Flag,  and  the  cause  it  represented.  He 
participated  in  many  of  the  most  noted  engage- 
ments of  the  Rebellion,  and  made  for  himself  an 
honorable  war  record.  As  a  private  he  joined 
what  was  popularly'  termed  the  "preachers'  regi- 
ment,'" the  Seventy-third  Illinois  Infantry,  which 
was  commanded  bj'  Col.  James  F.  Jacques.  His 
term  extended  over  nearly  four  years  of  hard  cam- 
paigning, during  which  time  he  followed  the  fort- 
unes of  General  Sherman  through  tlie  Atlanta 
campaign.  He  participated  in  the  hard-fought 
battles  of  Chattanooga,  F'ranklin,  Nashville  and 
others,  and  was  ever  found  faithful  to  his  dutj', 
although  the  service  was  hard  and  arduous.  When 
hostilities  had  ceased  and  the  preservation  of  the 
Union  was  an  assured  fact,  he  received  an  honor- 
able discharge,  and  returned  to  his  home  with  the 
consciousness  of  having  been  faithful  to  his  coun- 
try when  the  loyalty  of  its  citizens  received  a 
severe  test. 

Mr.  Gray  is  a  member  of  I)c  Soto  Post  No.  564, 
G.  A.  R.,  and  belongs  to  the  Lutheran  Church. 
He  is  an   honored  pioneer,  and  can  relate  many 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


253 


laughable  and  interesting  incidents  of  frontier  life. 
The  countj'  in  which  almost  his  entire  life  has  been 
passed  lie  has  secMi  developed  from  an  almost  un- 
broken wilderness,  and  has  ever  borne  his  part  in 
its  advancement  and  progress. 


?m 


ARMON  II.  FOX,  one  of  the  prominent 
early  settlers  of  Murphysboro,  foi'  many 
years  was  a  traveling  salesman,  and  later 
•))  was  appointed  by  Governor  Altgeld  pur- 
chasingagent  for  theSouthern  Illinois  Penitentiarv 
at  Cliester.  He  has  spent  his  entire  life  in  the 
county  which  is  still  his  iiorae,  his  birth  having 
occurred  in  Vergennes,  June  16,  1836.  His  father 
and  grandfather  both  bore  the  name  of  William, 
and  were  natives  of  Virginia.  Tiie  latter  came 
with  teams  to  Illinois  in  1824,  locating  in  Bradley 
Township,  Jackson  Count}',  where  he  carried  on 
farming  until  his  death. 

William  Fox,  Jr.,  was  a  3'oung  man  at  the  time 
of  the  removal  of  the  family.  In  Bradley  Town- 
ship he  married  Hannah  Cheatam,  a  native  of  Ten- 
nessee, who  came  with  her  parents  to  this  com- 
munitj'  during  her  girlhood.  They  began  their 
domestic  life  on  wild  land  near«Vergennes,  and 
Mr.  Fox  cleared  and  developed  a  farm.  In  the 
spring  of  1852,  he  went  overland  to  California 
with  ox-teams,  and  was  captain  of  tiie  company 
with  which  he  made  the  trip.  On  reaching  Trinity 
County,  he  engaged  in  mining  and  in  merchandis- 
ing, his  death  there  occurring  in  1867.  His  wife 
passed  away  on  the  old  homestead  in  tiiis  county, 
at  the  age  of  seventy -six.  Of  their  six  sons  and 
three  daughters,  all  grew  to  mature  years,  and  five 
are  yet  living. 

H.  H.  Fox,  the  fifth  of  the  family,  was  reared  on 
the  old  home  farm.  In  the  winter  season  he  at- 
tended school  for  three  months,  and  during  the 
remainder  of  the  year  aided  in  the  labors  of  the 
field.  On  attaining  his  majority  he  left  home,  and 
was  married  in  A'ergennes,  February  27,  1855,  to 
Miss  Julia  A.,  daughter  of  John  Gill,  a  native  of 
Virginia,  who  in  his   boyhood  came  to  this  state. 


For  man 3'  years  he  was  a  well  known  farmer  of 
Somerset  Township.  In  1864,  he  removed  to  De 
Soto  Township,  where  he  carried  on  agricultural 
pursuits  during  the  remainder  of  his  da^'s.  He 
wedded  Ann  Shumake,  a  native  of  Virginia,  and 
they  became  the  parents  of  eight  children,  two  of 
whom  are  yet  living.  Mrs.  Fox  was  born  in  Som- 
erset Township.  Our  subject  and  his  wife  have 
two  children,  Maiy  A.,  wife  of  W.  E.  Chambers,  a 
general  merchant  of  Murphysboro,  and  John,  who 
is  here  engaged  in  the  livery  business. 

On  leaving  home,  Mr.  Fox  began  the  cultivation 
of  a  forty-acre  farm,  which  he  afterward  traded 
for  a  tract  of  eighty  acres.  Upon  this  place  was 
a  log  house,  and  he  cleared  and  improved  the  land, 
transforming  it  into  rich  and  fertile  fields.  His  la- 
bors as  an  agriculturist  continued  until  1867,  when 
he  came  to  Murphysboro  and  embarked  in  the  hotel 
business,  becoming  proprietor  of  the  Henderson 
House.  A  year  later  he  entered  the  retail  groceiy 
trade  and  built  a  two-story  brick  building,  in  which 
he  carried  on  business  until  1872.  He  then  sold 
his  stock,  but  still  owns  the  store.  On  disposing 
of  his  goods  he  became  traveling  representative  for 
the  firm  of  J.  M.  Anderson  &  Co.,  wholesale  gro- 
cers of  St.  Louis.  In  the  fall  of  1880  he  was  elected 
Countj'  Sheriff  on  the  Democratic  ticket  for  a  term 
of  two  years.  He  faithfully  discharged  his  duties, 
and  when  his  time  had  expired  again  went  on  the 
road,  continuing  with  J.  H.  Brookmier,  of  St.  Louis, 
until  1889.  He  next  was  traveling  salesman  for 
Meyer,  Smith  &  Robyn,  wholesale  grocers  of  St. 
Louis,  with  whom  he  continued  until  January', 
1893,  when  he  became  purchasing  agent  for  the 
Southern  Illinois  Penitentiary.  To  this  work  he 
devoted  his  entire  energies  until  the  Governor  de- 
clared that  office  vacant  throughout  the  state.  He 
now  works  in  the  interest  of  the  Bauer  Grocery 
Corapanj',  of  St.  Louis. 

Mr.  Fox  is  a  member  of  the  (Jdd  Fellows'  lodge, 
and  his  wife  belongs  to  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church  South.  In  his  political  views  he  is  a  Demo- 
crat, and  has  several  times  served  as  Alderman 
from  the  First  Ward.  He  has  known  Murphys- 
boro since  it  was  a  small  hamlet  of  one  hundred 
inhabitants,  and  with  its  growth  and  upbuilding 
he  has   been   prominently  identified.     His  public 


254 

aud  private  life  are  alike  above  reproach,  and  an 
honorable,  upright  career  has  won  him  the  warm 
regard  of  all  with  whom  business  or  social  rela- 
tions have  brought  him  in  contact. 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHlCAL^ECORa 


]^      of  Du  Quoin,  who  is  recognized  as  one  of 
IjCU   the  progressive  young  men  of  Perry  County, 
is^mbered  among  the  native  sons  of  Illinois,  his 
birth  having  occurred  in  Abingdon,  Knox  County, 
on  the  21st  of  November,  1861.     His  father,  b.  H. 
Ritchey,  was  a  native  of  Kentucky,  and  was  a  law- 
yer by  profession.     In  an  early  day  he  emigrated 
to  this  state,  settling  in  Knox  County,  and  became 
a  prominent  man  in  the  early  history  of  that  com- 
munity.    He  there  practiced  law  and  took  quite  a 
leadina   part  in  politics,  being  a  stanch  supporter 
of  the'"principles  of  Democracy.  He  held  the  office 
of  Postmaster  of  Abingdon,  and  was  also  Justice 
of  the  Peace.     The  mother  of  our  subject  bore  the 
maiden  name  of  Nancy  Dodge,  and  is  a  native  of 
Indiana.     She  went  to  Knox  County,  HI.,  with  her   | 
mother,  her   father  having  died  during  her  early 
ahlhood,  and  is  still  living  in  Abingdon. 
°  The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  the  youngest  in  a 
family  of  five  children,  but  three   of  the  number 
died  in  early  life.     Frank   L..  the  only  brother,  is 
now  a  grocery  merchant  of  Abingdon.     The  sub- 
ject of  this  sketch    was  reared  in  Abingdon,  and 
received  his  education  in  the  public  schools  of  that 
place.     At  the  age  of  twelve  years  he  entered  a 
newspaper  office  to  learn  the  business,  thus  taking 
up   the  pursuit   which  he  has  made  his  life  work. 
Soon  after  he  went  into  the  office  of  the  Knox 
County  Democi-al,  of  which  his  brother  was  foreman 
at  the  tin>e,  and  there  remained  for  two  years,  dur- 
'i„<r  which  time  he  becime  thoroughly  familiar  with 
the  business  in  all  of  it«  details.    Later  his  brother 
established  what  was  known  as  the  Abingdon  Ex- 
press   and  E.  H.  Ritchey  continued  in  that  office 
for  eioht  years.     Later   he  attended  school  for  a 
time  Tnd  experience,  observation  and  study   have 
nroved  to  him  a  faithful  teacher,  and  made  him  a 
well  informed  man.  The  next  work  of  Mr.  Ritchey 
was  in  the  office  of  the  Enterprise,  where  he  con- 
tinued for  three  years. 

In    1890,   our  subject  was  united  in    marriage 


with  Miss  Ida  Burridge,  a  native  of  New  York. 
Their  union  has  been  blessed  with  one  child,  Cleta, 
now  two  years  of  age.  The  parents  have  already 
won  many  warm  friends  in  this  community  and 
rank  his;h  m  social  circles. 

On    leaving    Abingdon,    Mr.    Ritchey    went  to 
Manito,  Mason  County,  where  he  established  and 
carried  on  the  Manito  £j-jjress  for  two  years.     On 
the  expiration   of  that   period  he  sold  out,  and  in 
November,  1893,  came  to  Du  Quoin,  where  he  es- 
tablished the  Adcocate.     This  paper,  which  is  inde- 
pendent in  politics,  is  devoted  to  general  and  local 
news  and  to  the  best  interests  of  the  community. 
It   is  already   enjoying  a  good  ciiculati.m.  and  a 
liberal  patronage  promises  to  be  obtained.     In  his 
social  relations.  Mr.  Ritchey  is  an  Odd  Fellow  and 
a  member  of  the  Modern  Woodmen.     He  also  be- 
longs  to  the  Knights  of   Pythias,  and  is  a  Past 
Chancellor  of  that  lodge. 


\1)  AMES  D.  BAKER,  Warden  of  the  Southern 
III    Illinois  Penitentiary,    was    born     in    New 
I!    York  City.  March  16,  1854.  and  lived  there 
(^/'    until  1868,  receiving  his  primary  education 
i^Tthe  schools  of  that  city.     His  parents  moved  to 
St    Clair   County,  111-  in   1868,   and  here  he  re- 
mained engaged  in   clerking  and  teaching  school 
until  1874,  whan  he  engaged  in  the  banking  busi- 
ness at  Lebanon,  111.    He  followed  that  occupation 
continuously  until  January,  1894.  when  he  with- 
drew from  that  line  of  business.     During  his  resi- 
dence  in   St.  Clair  County,  he  served  as  Township 
Treasurer,  School  Treasurer,  County  Treasurer  and 
Mavor  of  Lebanon. 

Our  subject  is  a  son  of  Daniel  and  Mary  h. 
Baker,  natives  of  Ireland,  whose  family  comprised 
three  sons  and  one  daughter.  The  father  is  now 
a  merchant  in  Indian  Territory.  On  the  3d  of 
August,  1879,  Mr.  Baker  married  Miss  Ida  B. 
Blanck,  who  was  born  in  Lebanon,  111.,  and  is  a 
dau<Thter  of  Charles  and  Jennie  E.  Blanck. 

In  religious  belief  Mr.  Baker  is  a  ineml>er  of  the 
Methodist  Church.  Politically  he  is  a  strong  Demo- 
;  at,  and  in  the  deliberations  of  that  party  always 
takes  a  prominent  part.  His  ■"--f  3\«f  f^' 
penitentiary  has  been  most  successful,  and  his  fu- 
ture field  is  a  very  promising  one. 


l^fT^ 


U 


c^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


257 


)RYCE  CRAWFORD,  formerly  a  prominent 
l|i-:v,  farmer  and  stock-raiser  of  Randolph  Coun- 
f^ll;  ty,  now  resides  in  the  city  of  Sparta,  and 
devotes  his  attention  to  looking  after  his 
investments  there  and  elsewhere.  He  is  the  pro- 
prietor of  over  four  hundred  acres  of  land  in  this 
county,  twenty-seven  hundred  acres  in  Kansas, 
besides  valuable  town  property.  He  also  owns 
$1,080  worth  of  stock  in  the  gas  company  in  that 
place,  and  has  a  large  sum  of  money  to  his  credit  " 
in  the  bank. 

Our  subject  is  the  son  of  William  Crawford, 
who  was  born  in  Ayrshire,  Scotland,  about  1767, 
and  passed  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  his  native 
land,  dying  in  1842.  He  was  b}^  occupation  a  malt- 
ster, and  possessed  many  pleasant  personal  quali- 
ties, which  endeared  him  to  all  who  knew  him.  He 
was  a  thoroughly  Christian  man  and  a  member  of 
the  Presbyterian  Church.  The  maiden  name  of 
our  subject's  mother  was  Helen  Beverige.  She 
was  likewise  a  native  of  the  above  county  in  Scot- 
land, and  when  quite  young  was  taken  into  the 
home  of  her  eldest  sister.  Her  father  was  a  sea- 
man. The  parents  of  our  subject  reared  a  family 
of  fourteen  children,  all  of  whom  lived  to  man- 
hood and  womanhood  with  one  exception.  They 
bear  the  respective  names  of  Andrew,  John,  Will- 
iam, David,  Robert,  George,  Henry,  James,  Ellen, 
Benjamin,  Bryce,  Jane,  Margaret  and  Mary  Ann. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  the  j'ear  1815,  in  Ayr- 
shire, Scotland, and  resided  in  his  native  land  un- 
til 1838,  when  he  embarked  on  a  sailing-vessel 
bound  for  America.  After  landing  here,  he  made 
his  way  to  this  state,  and  for  two  years  was  em- 
ployed in  working  out  by  the  day  on  railroads. 
Later  he  located  in  Sparta  Township,  and  became 
the  owner  of  a  quarter-section  of  land,  which  he 
farmed  for  thirty-five  years.  Patient  industry  and 
perseverance,  which  were  the  marked  characteris- 
tics of  his  life,  gave  him  an  impetus  upward  to  as- 
sured financial  success.  In  1875  he  removed  to 
the  city  of  Sparta,  and  since  that  time  has  been  en- 
gaged as  administrator  for  many  valuable  estates. 

July  10,  1840,  Mr.  Crawford  was  united  in  mar- 
riage to  Miss  Marion  Barr,  who  was  also  born  in 
Ayrshire,  Scotland.  She  was  the  daughter  of  An- 
drew and  Jane  Barr,  and  at  her  death,  which  oc- 


curred in  August,  1892,  was  a  devout  member  of 
the  Presb3'terian  Church.  Her  union  with  our 
subject  resulted  in  the  birth  of  eight  children, 
namely:  William  D.,  Jane,  Nellie,  Andrew,  Mary, 
Margaret,  Marion  and  Andrew,  the  latter  of  whom 
died  in  infancy. 

In  his  political  relations,  our  subject  has  always 
been  a  stanch  Republican.  He  has  served  as  Treas- 
urer of  township  5,  and  was  School  Treasurer  for 
a  period  of  thirteen  years.  Deeply  interested  in 
all  matters  pertaining  to  local  and  national  wel- 
fare, he  is  ever  ready  to  lend  a  helping  hand  in 
the  promotion  of  progressive  enterprises.  Relig- 
iously, he  is  a  member  of  the  Presbyterian  Church, 
with  which  he  has  been  connected  since  1840,  and 
has  served  his  congregation  as  Trustee  for  nearly 
two-thirds  of  the  time. 

l(s),   ^^ ^ 


m^" 


'~^m 


ONRAD  DEHNER,  a  well   known    resident 
of  Red  Bud,  located  in  this  place  in  1859, 


^^^  and  has  since  been  numbered  among  its 
progressive  business  men.  The  record  of  his  life 
is  as  follows:  He  is  a  native  of  Prussia,  and  in 
that  country  passed  the  days  of  his  boyhood  and 
youth,  no  event  of  special  importance  occurring 
during  the  time.  In  1852  he  bade  adieu  to  home 
and  friends  and  sailed  for  America.  On  landing 
in  this  country  he  made  his  way  to  St.  Louis,  and 
in  that  city  continued  to  reside  until  1859,  when 
he  came  to  Red  Bud.  Here  he  worked  at  various 
employments  until,  through  his  industiy  and  en- 
terprise^  he  had  acquired  some  capital,  when  in 
1870  he  embarked  in  business  for  himself.  He 
has  since  bought  a  valuable  property,  on  which 
he  has  erected  a  good  building,  which  stands  as  a 
monument  to  his  thrift  and  enterprise. 

After  living  in  this  country  for  a  time,  Mr. 
Dehner  sent  for  his  mother  to  join  him.  She 
came  to  him,  and  acted  as  his  housekeeper  until 
her  death,  which  occurred  in  Red  Bud,  at  the  ad- 
vanced age  of  sixty-five  years.  She  was  a  devout 
member  of   the   Catholic   Church,  and    had  many 


258 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


warm  friends  in  this  community,  who  held  her  in 
high  esteem  for  the  many  excellencies  of  her  char- 
acter. 

During  the  earlier  years  of  his  residence  here, 
Mr.  Dehner  labored  early  and  late,  and  as  the  result 
of  his  untiring  efforts  and  strict  economy,  he  ac- 
quired capital,  which  has  since  been  increased  by 
judicious  investment,  until  he  is  now  numbered 
among  the  substantial  citizens  of  the  community. 
His  example  ma}'  well  serve  to  encourage  others 
who,  like  himself,  start  out  in  life  empty-handed. 
In  politics  he  is  a  stanch  Republican,  but  has  al- 
waj'S  steadily  refused  office.  Mr.  Dehner  has  many 
warm  friends  in  this  community,  and  has  the  con- 
fidence and  regard  of  those  with  whom  business 
and  social  relations  have  brought  him  in  contact. 


(^ 


^m\ 


m^ 


^ 


^®p^ 


^ 


ELIHU  B.  McGUIRE  is  the  efficient  and  pop- 
ular Mayor  of  Sparta,  and  a  man  whose 
business  ability  and  sterling  worth  have 
placed  him  among  the  leading  citizens  of  Ran- 
dolph County.  He  well  deserves  representation 
in  her  history,  and  it  is  with  pleasure  that  we 
present  his  record  to  our  readers.  The  family  is 
of  Irish  origin.  His  grandfather,  John  McGuire, 
was  born  on  the  Emerald  Isle,  and  on  leaving  that 
country  located  in  South  Carolina.  He  served  in 
the  War  of  1812. 

Henry  L.  McGuire,  the  father  of  our  subject,  was 
born  in  1805  in  the  Chester  District  of  South  Car- 
olina, where  he  lived  until  1832.  Thence,  with 
only  fifty  cents  in  his  possession,  he  started  north, 
and  arriving  in  Illinois,  located  in  Washington 
County.  In  1866  he  came  to  Sparta,  where  his 
death  occurred  in  1875.  By  occupation  a  farmer, 
he  entered  a  small  tract  of  land  in  Washington 
County,  and  to  this  he  added  from  time  to  time 
as  his  financial  resources  were  increased,  until  he 
had  about  five  hundred  acres.  On  removing  to 
Sparta,  he  purchased  a  house  and  lot  and  retired 
from  active  business.  In  politics  he  was  a  Repub- 
lican, and  for  a  long  period  was  a  member  of  the 
Reformed  Presb3'terian  Church,  in  which  he  served 


as  Elder  for  a  number  of  years.  Later,  however, 
he  joined  the  United  Presbj'terian  Church.  His 
school  privileges  were  ver}-  limited,  yet  he  became 
well  informed,  for  he  read  extensively,  and  in  bus- 
iness acquired  a  good  commercial  education. 

Henry  McGuire  was  twice  married.  He  wedded 
Eliza  Campbell,  bj'  whom  he  had  three  children: 
Jane  Matilda,  wife  of  Hugh  Matthews,  a  success- 
ful farmer  of  Jordan's  Grove;  Nancy  T.,  wife  of 
S.  W.  McKelve^',  who  is  represented  elsewhere; 
and  Eliza,  deceased.  His  first  wife  having  died, 
in  1837  Mr.  McGuire  wedded  Mary  Lyons,  who 
was  born  in  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  August  1, 
1 803,  and  when  two  years  of  age  was  brought  to 
America  by  her  father,  James  L3'ons,  also  a  native 
of  County  Antrim.  In  1805,  Mr.  Lyons  emigrated 
with  his  family  to  South  Carolina.  While  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic,  one  of  the  children,  a  babe  of 
six  months,  died.  In  1833  the  family  removed 
to  southern  Illinois,  settling  on  Elkhorn  Prairie. 
Their  nearest  trading  post  was  Sparta,  fourteen 
miles  awaj'.  Mrs.  McGuire  was  the  eldest  of  a 
large  family.  She  was  full  of  energy  and  deter- 
mination, was  industrious,  frugal  and  hopeful, 
and  was  a  worthy  example  for  the  early  settlers. 
She  had  six  children,  but  only  John  and  Elihu 
survive  her.  She  also  leaves  two  brothers  and  a 
sister:  John  R.,  of  Marissa;  Robert,  of  Houston; 
and  Mrs.  Jeff  Rainey,  of  Belleville. 

To  those  who  knew  Mrs.  McGuire  best  she  was 
ver3'  dear,  and  no  death  in  this  community  has 
been  more  widely  or  deeply  mourned.  She  brought 
happiness  to  those  around  her,  for  her  life  was 
ever  devoted  to  the  interests  of  others.  From 
earl}'  3'outh  she  was  a  member  of  the  church, 
but  for  many  years  she  was  unable  to  attend 
services,  yet  she  alwa3s  maintained  her  deep  in- 
terest in  religious  matters.  In  her  last  years  she 
many  times  expressed  herself  as  ready  and  will- 
ing to  go  to  the  home  beyond,  and  on  the  20th 
of  September,  1893,  she  passed  away,  at  the  ad- 
vanced age  of  ninety  years.  Surely  the  world  is 
better  for  her  having  lived. 

Elihu  B.  McGuire  was  born*  in  Washington 
County,  111.,  in  1814,  and  with  the  famil}-  came 
to  Randolph  Count}'.  He  continued  with  his 
parents  until  separated  from  them  by  death,  car- 


PORTRAIT  A^TD  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


259 


ing  for  them  in  their  declining  years  and  supply- 
ing them  with  all  the  comforts  he  could  command. 
His  business  interests  have  been  largely  in  the  line 
of  land  speculating,  although  for  a  number  of 
years  he  was  engaged  in  the  breeding  of  horses 
and  mules  with  Mr.  McConachie.  He  is  President 
of  the  Merchants'  Exchange  Bank,  which  was  or- 
ganized in  1892,  with  a  capital  of  825,000.  He  is 
a  stockholder  in  the  building  and  loan  association, 
a  Director  of  the  Sparta  Gas  Compan}',  and  Vice- 
President  of  the  Allen  Improvement  Compan3'. 
He  is  indeed  prominent  in  business  circles,  and  bj' 
his  connection  therewith  has  aided  materially  in 
the  growth  and  upbuilding  of  the  cit}-. 

In  politics,  Mr.  McGuire  is  a  Democrat,  and  in 
1888  was  elected  Chairman  of  the  Central  Com- 
mittee. In  1893,  he  was  elected  Ma3^or  of  Sparta, 
which  position  he  is  now  creditably  and  acceptablj^ 
filling.  His  philanthropic  and  generous  nature  has 
been  made  manifest  in  the  aid  he  has  given  to 
a  number  of  homeless  children  toward  securing 
their  educations.  His  life  has  been  well  and 
worthily  passed,  and  he  is  numbered  among  the 
most  valued  and  honored  citizens  of  Randoli)h 
Countv. 


i^^Gi 


JOHN  B.  HAMILTON  occupies  an  important 
place  in  the  farming  community  of  Ran- 
dolph County  and  is  active  in  advancing 
the  agricultural  interests  of  township  4, 
range  5.  His  father,  .John  Hamilton,  was  a  native 
of  Ireland,  while  his  mother,  who  prior  to  her 
marriage  was  Miss  Isabel  Boyd,  was  born  in 
Ohio.  They  were  married  in  the  latter  state, 
there  reared  a  large  family  of  thirteen  children, 
and  there  remained  until  death.  They  were  mem- 
bers of  the  United  Presbyterian  Church  and  stood 
well  in  their  communitj'. 

The  five  children  who  are  now  living  of  the 
parental  family  are,  John  B.  (our  subject),  Thomas, 
Johnston,  Margaret  and  Jane.  Alexander  died 
while  a  soldier  in  the  Civil  War,  in  which  conflict 
the  three  other  sons  also  took  part.  John  B.,  of 
this  sketch,  was  born  in  Coshocton  Count}',  Ohio, 
in  1839,  and  at  the  age  of  sixteen  j-ears  began  to 


make  his  own  way  in  the  world.  He  came  to  Illi- 
nois six  j^ears  prior  to  the  outbreak  of  the  Civil 
War,  and  after  spending  some  time  in  Blooming- 
ton  made  a  trip  to  Texas,  and  on  his  return  located 
in  Randolph  County. 

In  August,  1862,  our  subject  enlisted  in  the 
Union  army,  becoming  a  member  of  Coinpan\'  G, 
Eightieth  Illinois  Infantry,  which  was  organized  at 
Centralia.  With  his  company  he  joined  the  regi- 
ment at  Louisville,  Ky.',  and  later  participated  in 
the  battle  of  Perryville.  He  was  in  the  Atlanta 
campaign,  and  during  the  conflict  at  Peach  Tree 
Creek  was  shot  through  the  right  leg,  and  in  con- 
sequence was  confined  in  the  hospital  for  some 
time  at  Nashville.  Later  be  was  removed  to  Mound 
City,  111.,  where  he  remained  until  he  was  full}' 
recovered,  and  then  rejoining  his  regiment  at  Straw- 
berry Plain,  Tenn.,  he  went  with  them  to  Green- 
ville, that  state.  On  his  return  to  Nashville  some 
months  later,  he  received  his  honorable  discharge, 
after  a  faithful  service  of  three  years. 

After  the  establishment  of  peace,  Mr.  Hamilton 
came  to  Randolph  County,  where  he  has  since 
been  engaged  in  farming.  October  1,  1868,  he 
was  married  to  Miss  Sarah  M.,  daughter  of  Stewart 
and  Sarah  (Gillespie)  Burns.  The  father  was  born 
June  22,  1793,  in  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  and 
the  mother,  a  native  of  Chester  County,  S.  C,  was 
born  August  3,  1802.  Thev  were  married  March 
7,  1820,  in  South  Carolina,  and  on  coming  to  Illi- 
nois in  1830,  located  on  a  farm  in  Randolph 
County,  when  the  countiy  roundabout  was  very 
sparsely  settled.  The  father  departed  this  life  in 
the  year  1865,  and  the  mother  in  the  year  1890. 
They  reared  a  family  of  twelve  children,  ten 
of  whom  are  living,  the  youngest  being  forty- 
five  years  old.  Three  of  their  sons,  James  G., 
David  P.  and  William  G.,  served  in  the  late  war,  and 
the  father  was  a  soldier  in  the  War  of  1812.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Burns  were  members  of  the  Associate  Re- 
formed Church  and  weie  classed  among  the  earliest 
settlers  and  well-to-do  people  of  this  locality. 

Mrs.  Sarah  M.  Hamilton  was  born  April  19,  1841, 
and  has  become  the  mother  of  two  children, 
Sarah  F^tta,  now  the  wife  of  William  H.  Fulton,  and 
William  John,  who  resides  at  home.  The  estate 
of  our  subject  comprises  eighty-six  acres,  which  is 


260 


PORTRAIT  AKD  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


the  old  Burns  homestead,  and  the  house  whicR 
the  family  occupies  was  built  fifty-one  j^ears  ago. 
He  devotes  his  attention  to  mixed  farming,  and  in 
the  management  of  his  affairs  shows  that  he  is 
possessed  of  good  business  talent,  and  at  the  same 
time  has  proved  himself  invaluable  in  the  upbuild- 
ing of  his  township.  Our  subject  and  his  wife  are 
members  of  the  United  Presbyterian  Church  at 
Tilden,  and  Mrs.  Hamilton  is  an  active  worker  in 
the  missionary  society,  in  which  she  has  held  the 
office  of  President  for  two  terms.  In  politics  Mr. 
Hamilton  always  votes  with  the  Republican  party. 
The  brothers  and  sisters  of  Mrs.  Hamilton  are, 
Eliza  F.,  now  Mrs.  John  McDill;  James  G.,  who 
married  Mary  M.  Edgar;  Samuel,  who  married 
Nancy  Cooper;  Nan?y  L.,  the  wife  of  William  B. 
Taylor;  Joseph,  who  married  Mary  Lewis;  John  S., 
now  the  husband  of  Hannah  McMillen;  Archie, 
who  married  Marj'  B.  Hyndman;  David  P.,  who 
married  Jane  Roseborough;  and  William  G.,  who 
married  Josephine  Tovera. 

The  Burns  faniih'  holds  a  reunion  every  3'ear, 
and  their  sixth  annual  celebration  took  place  at 
the  residence  of  our  subject  October  14,  1893, 
when  a  goodly  number  of  the  family  were  in  at- 
tendance. A  double  interest  was  attached  to  the 
meeting,  inasmuch  as  it  was  the  twentj'-fifth  anni- 
versary of  the  marriage  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hamilton. 
After  an  excellent  and  bountiful  dinner,  James  G. 
Burns,  in  behalf  of  the  donors,  tendered  numerous 
valuable  wedding  gifts  to  the  couple,  who  in  re- 
turn responded  in  a  pleasant  manner.  After  a 
most  enjoyable  time  the  company  adjourned,  de- 
ciding to  meet  the  following  year  at  the  home  of 
Mr.  Hamilton. 


•N- 


"Sp^OBERT  BOYD  is  the  fortunate  possessor 
L;*^  of  a  farm  located  in  township  4,  range  5. 
'^\  Randolph  Count}'.  He  won  considerable 
^^  distinction  as  a  soldier,  having  served  for 
two  years  as  a  member  of  the  Union  army.  The  par- 
ents of  our  subject,  Samuel  L.  and  Jane  (Gibson) 
Boyd,  were  natives  of  South  Carolina,  while  his 
paternal  grandfather,  Samuel  Boyd,  Sr.,  was  born 
in  Ireland  in  1777.     The  latter,  after   emigrating 


to  the  United  States,  was  married  in  South  Caro- 
lina to  Nancy  Boyd,  and  came  to  Illinois  about 
the  year  1825,  locating  on  section  17,  township  4, 
range  5.  In  that  early  day  the  country  was  verj' 
thinly  settled,  and  not  an  improvement  detracted 
from  the  primitive  charm  of  his  home.  With 
characteristic  energy  he  set  about  the  clearing 
and  improving  of  his  estate,  on  which  he  reared 
his  family,  and  there  lived  until  his  decease.  Only 
one  son  of  that  family  is  now  living,  John  S., 
who  makes  his  home  in  Kansas. 

The  maternal  grandfather  of  our  subject,  Robert 
Gibson,  came  to  this  state  in  an  early  day,  and  made 
his  home  in  AVashington  County  at  a  time  when 
the  neighbors  were  few  and  far  between.  There 
he  was  married  and  there  he  made  his  permanent 
home.  Both  himself  and  wife  are  now  deceased. 
They  reared  a  family  of  nine  children,  of  whom 
John  is  deceased.  Those  living  are  Mar}-,  Rob- 
ert, Nancy,  James,  Jane  (the  mother  of  our  sub- 
ject), Samuel,  William  and  Margaret. 

Our  subject  was  born  November  7,  1843,  on  the 
section  where  he  is  at  present  residing,  and  received 
his  education  in  the  district  school  near  his  home. 
In  December,  1863,  when  the  Civil  War  was  at  its 
height,  he  left  home  and  enlisted  liis  services  with 
the  Union  army,  becoming  a  member  of  Company 
K,  Fifth  Illinois  Cavaliy.  He  joined  his  regiment 
at  Vicksbuig,  and  later  fought  on  the  Yazoo  River 
under  General  Custer,  and  after  that  was  stationed 
at  Vicksburg  until  the  following  summer.  Then, 
with  his  regiment,  he  went  into  Tennessee,  where 
they  were  engaged  in  fighting  General  Forrest, 
and  after  routing  that  officer  went  to  Memphis, 
and  later  to  Texas,  where  they  were  detailed  to 
skirmish.  He  received  his  honorable  discharge 
in  the  fall  of  1865,  and  during  his  entire  period 
of  service  was  never   wounded  or  taken  prisoner. 

Returning  home  from  the  war,  Mr.  Bo3'd  in  the 
spring  of  1866  was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss 
Marion  Bicket.  The  lady  is  a  native  of  this  coun- 
ty and  the  daughter  of  John  Bicket.  She  became 
the  mother  of  six  children,  and  departed  this  life 
in  1880.  Those  of  the  family  who  are  still  liv- 
ing are,  Mary  J.,  Maggie  B.,  John  H.,  Samuel  L. 
and  Robert  E. 

Our  subject  had   a    brother  who  was  also  a  sol- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


261 


dier  in  the  late  war,  and  who  died  in  1864, 
while  in  the  army.  Religiously,  Mr.  Boyd  is 
a  member  of  the  United  Presbyterian  Church. 
Socially,  he  is  a  Grand  Army  man,  and  holds 
membership  with  the  post  at  Coulterville.  In  poli- 
tics he  always  votes  with  the  Prohibition  party. 
He  has  been  quite  active  in  public  affairs  in  his 
township,  and  has  been  elected  School  Director 
of  District  No.  3. 


-,,.,  NDREW  BURNETT,  of  Baldwin,  is  one  of 
(^ytJIi  the  honored  pioneers  of  Randolph  Coun- 
t3%  who  since  an  early  day  has  been  fa- 
miliar with  the  history  of  this  community, 
has  watched  its  growth  and  upbuilding  and  has 
aided  in  the  work  ofj^rogress  and  development. 
He  is  recognized  as  one  of  the  valued  citizens  of 
the  community,  and  it  is  with  pleasure  that  we 
present  this  record  of  his  life  to  our  readers.  He 
is  a  native  of  the  Emerald  Isle,  and  a  son  of  An- 
drew and  Ann  (Wilson)  Burnett,  both  of  whom 
were  born  in  Count}'  Tyrone,  IreLand,  where  they 
grew  to  mature  years  and  were  married.  When  our 
subject  was  a  child  of  only  two  years,  they  crossed 
the  Atlantic  with  their  family  to  America,  and  lo- 
cated in  the  Abbey  ville  District  of  South  Carolina, 
where  they  spent  sixteen  years.  On  the  expiration 
of  that  period  they  came  to  Randolph  County,  in 
the  autumn  of  1840.  They  had  a  family  of  seven 
sons  who  grew  to  manhood,  namely:  .James, 
William,  Alexander,  John,  Francis,  Andrew  and 
Wilson. 

Andrew  Burnett  passed  most  of  his  boyhood  in 
South  Carolina,  and  at  the  age  of  nineteen  he  em- 
igrated westward,  taking  up  his  residence  in  R.an- 
dolph  County,  111.,  where  he  embarked  in  farming 
on  his  own  account.  He  managed  the  affairs  of 
his  father's  family,  and  in  his  control  of  the  same 
displayed  more  than  average  ability.  In  1844,  he 
entered  a  tract  of  wild  land  from  the  Govern- 
ment, and  with  characteristic  energj'  began  its 
development,  transforming  the  raw  tract  into 
richly  cultivated  fields.  As  his  financial  resources 
increased,  he  added  to  it  from  time  to  time,  until 


he  now  owns  nearly  six  hundred  acres  of  valuable 
land,  which  yields  to  him  a  handsome  income,  and 
he  is  now  numbered  among  Randolph  County's  sub- 
stantial agriculturists.  June  2,  1853,  Mr.  Burnett 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Rhoda  Preston, 
daughter  of  Daniel  Preston.  They  have  become  the 
parents  of  a  family  of  six  children,  namely:  Daniel 
F.;  W.  J.,  now  a  resident  of  Ottumwa,  Iowa; 
Andrew  W.;  Robert  A.;  James  P.,  now  a  resident 
of  St.  Louis;  and  C.  C,  who  completes  the  family. 
The  Burnetts  are  widel}-  and  favorably  known  in 
this  locality,  where  they  have  so  long  resided,  and 
in  social  circles  holds  an  enviable  position. 

In  his  political  views  Mr.  Burnett  is  a  Democrat, 
but  has  never  had  time  or  inclination  for  public 
office,  preferring  to  devote  his  energies  to  his  busi- 
ness interests.  He  has  been  an  industrious  and 
hard-working  man,  and  his  labors  have  been  re- 
warded by  a  comfortable  competence.  He  now  has 
a  beautiful  home  and  a  valuable  farm,  and  in  his  de- 
clining yeais  is  surrounded,  not  only  with  the  ne- 
cessaries, but  with  many  of  the  luxuries  of  life.  He 
has  reared  a  family  of  children  who  are  a  credit  to 
him,  and  his  career  h.as  been  one  which  has  gained 
him  high  regard. 


^Mf 


y'-jILLIAM  H.  CAMPBELL.  Among  the  men 
who  are  actively  advancing  the  stock- 
„  ^  raising  interests  of  Illinois  stands  our 
subject,  who  occupies  a  leading  position  among 
the  farmers  and  stock  growers  of  Evansville  Pre- 
cinct. He  has  horses,  cattle  and  hogs  of  standard 
grade  that  are  as  fine  as  any  to  be  found  in  the 
state.  His  beautiful  estate  consists  of  two  hundred 
acres  and  is  located  on  section  17.  He  was  born 
a  half-mile  from  where  he  now  lives,  August  12, 
184.5. 

Samuel  and  Nancy  (Glasgow)  Campbell,  the 
parents  of  our  subject,  were  natives  of  South  Car- 
olina, and  in  companj'  with  the  McBride  and 
Crozier  families,  came  to  Randolph  County  in  an 
early  day.  They  died  in  Evansville  Precinct,  the 
father  in  185G,  and  the  mother  twenty  years  later. 
The  former  was  an  influential  member  of  the  Pres- 
byterian Church,  while  his  good  wife   was  a  mem- 


262 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


ber  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  They 
reared  a  family  of  five  sons  and  three  daughters, 
of  whom  William  H.,  of  this  slvctch,  is  the  only  one 
living.  He  was  reared  in  this  precinct,  and  re- 
ceived his  education  in  the  district  schools  during 
the  winter  seasons.  His  father  d^'ing  when  he  was 
quite  3'oung,  he  was  obliged  to  aid  in  the  main- 
tenance of  the  famil}%  and  thus  learned  to  carry 
on  an  estate  in  the  best  possible  manner. 

Mr.  Campbell  and  Miss  Pauline  Schuline,  a  na- 
tive of  New  York,  were  united  in  marriage  Feb- 
ruary 16,  1874.  The  parents  of  Mrs.  Campbell 
were  early  settlers  in  this  county,  where  the3'  were 
prominent  and  wealth}'  farmers.  To  our  subject 
and  his  wife  have  been  born  the  following  five 
children:  Mary  C,  Albert  J.,  William  H.,  Anna 
V.  and  Agatha  E. 

Mr.  Campbell  cast  his  first  Presidential  vote  for 
Seymour,  and  voted  with  the  Democratic  party 
until  1892,  when  he  joined  the  People's  party. 
With  his  famil\-,  he  has  been  a  member  of  the 
Catholic  Church  since  1887.  He  has  taken  a 
prominent  part  in  educational  matters,  and  has 
been  School  Director.  He  is  now  serving  as  Trus- 
tee of  his  township.  A  part  of  the  farm  which  he 
owns  was  included  in  the  old  homestead,  which  he 
purchased  from  his  mother  in  1878.  It  is  beauti- 
fullj-  located  about  two  and  one-half  miles  east 
of  Evansville,  and  from  its  cultivation  he  reaps  a 
handsome  income. 


+= 


--■^ 


^AVID  McCONACHIE,  a  leading  business 
man  of  Sparta,  is  also  the  owner  of  one 
hundred  and  sixteen  acres  of  land  in 
Randolph  County,  which  valuable  prop- 
erty has  been  acquired  through  his  indomitable 
interest  and  good  management.  He  is  also  largely 
engaged  in  shipping  stock,  and  a  man  of  en- 
terprise, he  has  taken  an  active  part  in  the  devel- 
opment of  this  county,  and  has  been  a  prominent 
factor  in  the  promotion  of  various  important 
matters. 

David   McConachie,  the  father  of  our  subject, 
was  born  in  Count}-  Antrim,  Ireland,  in  1800,  and 


emigrated  to  America  in  1848,  landing  in  New  Or 
leans.  Thence  he  made  his  waj'  up  the  Mississippi 
River  and  lived  for  some  time  in  Chester,  but  later 
moved  on  a  farm  five  miles  south  of  Sparta,  where 
he  resided  until  a  few  years  prior  to  his  decease.  He 
was  a  farmer  by  occupation,  and  died  while  living 
in  Sparta  in  1885.  He  had  received  a  good  Eng- 
lish education,  and  on  coming  to  America  had 
sufficient  means  to  purchase  a  quarter-section  of 
land.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Convenanter 
Church  in  his  native  land,  and  when  he  died,  in 
1885,  it  was  felt  by  all  who  knew  him  that  a  good 
man  had  gone  to  his  final  reward.  The  paternal 
grandfather  of  our  subject,  David  McConachie, 
also  a  native  of  Count}-  Antrim,  was  a  prosperous 
farmer,  and  lived  to  the  advanced  age  of  one 
hundred  and  eight  j-ears. 

Mrs.  Violet  (Hunter)  McConachie,  the  mother  of 
our  subject,  was  born  in  County  Antrim,  Ireland, 
in  1816,  and  was  one  in  a  family  of  six  children, 
whose  parents  lived  and  died  in  the  Emerald  Isle. 
Eleven  children  were  included  in  the  parental 
family  of  our  subject,  namely:  John  H.,  David  (of 
this  sketch),  Violet  H.,  Robert  C,  Eliza  Jane, 
W^illiam  A.,  Jennie,  Alexander,  Ann,  Thomas  and 
James.  His  first  wife  having  died,  the  father  of 
our  subject  was  married  in  1881  to  Mrs.  Elizabeth 
HoUida}',  who  departed  this  life  in  April,  1893. 

David  McConachie,  who  was  born  February  11, 
1834,  in  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  accompanied  his 
parents  at  the  time  of  their  emigration  to  America, 
and  remained  at  home  until  1852.  He  had  been 
given  a  good  common-school  education,  and  when 
reaching  his  eighteenth  year  began  to  earn  his 
own  money  by  working  out  on  farms.  He  was 
thus  emploj'ed  only  for  a  twelvemonth,  when  he 
rented  and  cultivated  land  on  his  own  account. 
In  addition  to  tilling  the  soil,  he  operated  a  thresh- 
ing machine  until  186 hand  in  that3-ear,  the  Civil 
War  being  in  progress,  he  bought  and  sold  Gov- 
ernment cattle,  horses  and  mules.  Mr.  McCona- 
chie was  thus  employed  until  the  close  of  the  war, 
when  he  engaged  in  the  mercantile  business  in 
company  with  his  father-in-law,  A.  P.  Foster, 
which  connection  lasted  for  two  j'ears.  At  the 
end  of  that  time  our  subject  again  began  dealing 
in  stock,  this  time  shipping  mules  to  Mississippi, 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


263 


in  which  branch  of  business  he  has  been  engaged 
for  tlie  past  twenty-five  years. 

The  lady  who  became  tlie  wife  of  our  subject 
April  22,  1862,  was  Miss  Eliza  Foster,  a  native  of 
this  county.  She  is  a  well  educated  lady  and  the 
daughter  of  A.  P.  and  Mary  (Crawford)  Foster, 
the  former  of  whom  came  to  this  section  as  early 
as  1832  from  South  Carolina.  His  first  location 
was  made  on  a  farm  ten  miles  south  of  Sparta, 
which  he  continued  to  operate  until  1846,  when 
he  removed  to  Preston  and  engaged  in  the  mer- 
cantile business  for  one  summer.  Later  he  be- 
came identified  with  the  business  interests  of  Ches- 
ter, forming  a  partnership  with  Alexander  Beard. 
In  the  year  1851,  however,  he  returned  to  his 
farm,  and  after  two  years  spent  there,  Mr.  Foster 
went  again  to  Chester  and  operated  a  general 
store  until  1854.  In  that  year  he  came  to  Sparta, 
and  here  made  his  home  until  1869,  whence  he 
went  to  Shiloh.  Later,  he  made  his  home  in  Oak- 
dale,  and  on  returning  to  Sparta  departed  this 
life,  February  11,  1871.  In  early  life  a  Democrat, 
he  later  voted  with  the  Republican  party,  and  was 
a  man  who  kept  himself  thoroughly  posted  on  the 
issues  of  the  hour.  He  served  as  County  Judge 
of  Randolph  County  in  1848,  and  was  a  popular 
and  gifted  man.  He  was  a  member  of  the  United 
Presbyterian  Church  and  aided  greatly  in  the 
spread  of  the  Gospel  in  this  section.  The  pater- 
nal grandparents  of  Mrs.  McConachie  were  James 
and  Ann  (Morrow)  Foster,  natives  of  Ireland  and 
the  United  States,  respectiveh'.  The  former  on 
coming  to  the  United  States  with  his  family  made 
his  iiome  in  South  Carolina. 

Of  the  three  children  born  to  our  subject  and 
his  wife,  we  make  the  following  mention:  Lauros 
G.  is  engaged  as  a  teacher  in  the  Rugby  school  in 
Philadelphia.  He  is  a  finely  educated  young 
man,  is  a  graduate  of  Knox  College  at  Galesburg, 
and  has  been  a  student  in  the  Pennsylvania  Uni- 
versity, also  in  the  Johns  Hopkins  University.  Will- 
iam E.,  the  second  son  of  our  subject,  is  engaged 
in  business  in  Sparta,  and  Mary  V.,  who  is  a  grad- 
uate of  the  Sparta  High  School,  remains  at  home 
with  her  parents. 

While  his  private  affairs  naturally  receive  the 
major  part  of  his  time  and  attention,  yet  Mr.  Mc- 


Conachie is  interested  in  public  affairs  and  in  prin- 
ciple and  belief  is  a  Republican.  His  wife  is  a 
member  of  the  United  Presbyterian  Church,  and 
is  foremost  in  aiding  religious  and  benevolent 
enterprises. 


OHN  DAUER,  whose  sketch  we  now  have 
the  pleasure  of  presenting,  is  a  German  by 
birth,  having  been  born  in  Bremen,  Ger- 
many, in  1830.  He  is  the  son  of  John  and 
Robe  (Storey)  Dauer,  and  grew  to  man's  estate  in 
his  native  country,  where  he  learned  to  cultivate 
the  soil  and  acquired  the  principles  of  successful 
farming.  His  education  was  limited,  but  natural 
ability  and  fondness .  for  knowledge  more  than 
atoned  for  the  lack  of  what  is  commonly  called 
"schooling." 

The  parents  of  our  subject  were  likewise  natives 
of  Germany,  where  thej'  died,  the  father  in  1849, 
and  the  mother  in  1834.  John  Dauer  was  a  farmer 
and  shoemaker,  and  was  twice  married,  the  mother 
of  our  subject  being  his  first  wife.  Only  two  chil- 
dren of  this  marriage  are  living:  Peter,  and  John, 
of  this  sketch.  Tbe  latter  emigrated  to  the  United 
States  in  1852,  and  after  remaining  for  a  time  in 
Maryland,  went  to  Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  where  he  spent 
a  few  days,  and  from  there  journeyed  to  Ohio,  later 
to  Kentucky,  and  finally  made  a  permanent  settle- 
ment in  Illinois,  arriving  in  Randolph  County  in 
1855.  Here  he  was  variously  engaged,  working 
bj-  the  day  and  month  for  about  three  years,  when 
he  located  on  a  fort3'-acre  tract  of  land,  and  has 
since  followed  farming. 

Miss  Margaret  Meyeroth  and  John  Dauer  were 
united  in  marriage  September  21,  1858.  The  lady 
was  born  in  Germany,  and  the  six  children  of 
which  she  became  the  mother  are,  Frederick  G., 
Andrew  T.,  August  J.,  Dora  B.,  Magdalena  M.  and 
Theodore  H.  Soon  after  his  marriage,  Mr.  Dauer 
located  upon  the  tract  above  mentioned,  where  he 
resided  for  thirteen  j'ears,  and  then  disposing  of 
his  forty  acres,  purchased  the  quarter-section  where 
he  now  makes  his  home,  and  which  is  located  in 
township  5,  range  6.     He  has  made  this  place  his 


264 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


home  since  1870.  Like  most  of  tlie  early  settlers, 
he  was  obliged  to  put  up  with  numerous  incon- 
veniences, but  finally  made  good  headway,  and  has 
rapidly  gained  a  competence  and  many  friends. 
He  and  his  wife  are  sincere  Christian  people,  and 
the  German  Lutheran  Church  has  in  tliem  two 
of  its  best  members.  Our  subject  is  a  Republican 
in  politics,  casting  his  first  ballot  for  Abraham 
Lincoln. 

' ^^P • 


W^-^  ENRY  HITZSMANN.  Randolph  County  is 
if  )!■  greatly  indebted  for  its  present  wealth  and 
/^^^  I'igli  standing  to  the  sturdy,  intelligent  and 
\^)j  enterprising  tillers  of  the  soil  who  came 
from  Germany,  and  who  have  been  instrumental 
in  developing  the  vast  agricultural  resources  of 
their  adopted  state.  As  a  worthy  member  of  the 
farming  communit}'  who  have  contributed  toward 
its  material  advancement,  it  gives  us  pleasure  to 
present  Mr.  Ilitzsraann  in  this  volume.  He  has 
long  been  associated  with  the  agricultural  interests 
of  township  4,  range  8,  where  he  h.as  built  a  com- 
fortable home,  and  owns  a  valuable  estate  of  four 
hundred  and  thirtj'  acres. 

The  birth  of  our  subject  occurred  January  4, 
1839,  in  Furstentuhm,  Schaumburg-Lippe,  Bucke- 
burg,  Germany,  where  also  his  parents,  Fred  and 
Wilhelmena  (Me3-er)  Hitzsmann,  were  born,  the 
father  in  1811,  and  the  mother  in  1810.  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Fred  Hitzsmann  emigrated  to  the  United 
States  in  1858,  and  after  locating  in  Randolph 
County,  the  father,  who  was  a  poor  man,  rented 
land,  which  he  operated  four  years.  Being  a  hard 
worker  and  a  good  financier,  he  managed  to  save 
enough  of  his  earnings  to  purchase  land,  and  at 
the  date  of  his  death,  December  29,  1877,  he  was 
proprietor  of  one  hundred  and  eighty  acres  of 
good  land,  located  on  Horse  Prairie.  His  wife, 
the  mother  of  our  subject,  reared  a  family  of  seven 
children,  and  is  still  living. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  received  a  good  edu- 
cation in  Germanj',  and  was  a  lad  of  seventeen 
years  when  he  crossed  the  Atlantic,  determining 
to  make  a  fortune  for  himself  in  the  New  World. 
This  was  one  year  previous  to  the  emigration  of 


his  parents,  and  it  was  through  him  that  they  lo- 
cated in  this  county.  He  has  always  followed  the 
occupation  of  a  farmer,  and  that  he  has  met  with 
good  fortune  in  the  prosecution  of  his. calling  is 
made  sure  when  we  announce  that  he  is  the  pro- 
prietor of  four  hundred  and  thirty  acres  of  land, 
and  is  one  of  the  solid  men  of  his  township. 

The  marriage  of  Mr.  Hitzsmann  with  Miss  Wil- 
helmena Wiebke  occurred  December  18,  1862. 
Mrs.  Hitzsmann  was  born  in  Randolph  County,  and 
is  the  daughter  of  Fred  and  Wilhelmena  (Schrieber) 
Wiebke.  Of  the  ten  children  of  which  she  became 
the  mother,  only  six  are  living,  namelj':  Ernest, 
Hcnr}-,  AVilliam,  Charles;  Wilhelmena,  Mrs.  Charles 
Fair;  and  Lena,  the  wife  of  Rudolph  Attman. 
The  Democratic  partj'  ever  finds  in  our  subject  a 
faithful  supporter.  He  is  a  thoroughly  upright, 
honest  man,  always  dealing  fairly  and  squarely 
by  all,  and  his  estimable  character  has  given  him  a 
high  place  among  his  fellow-townsmen.  He  and 
his  good  wife  are  members  of  the  Lutheran  Church, 
and  heartilj-  aid  in  its  everj'  good  work. 


foreign  birth  who  have  contributed  their 
quota  toward  the  development  of  their 
adopted  land,  and  who  by  patience  and  persever- 
ance have  made  America  what  it  is,  may  be  prop- 
erly mentioned  this  gentleman,  who  is  well  known 
for  his  integrity  as  a  citizen.  He  is  an  active 
farmer,  making  his  home  in  township  5,  range  7, 
Randolph  County,  where  he  is  carrying  on  opera- 
tions with  more  than  ordinary  thrift  and  sagacity. 
He  owns  one  hundred  and  fifty-three  .acres  of  land, 
which  is  considered  one  of  the  model  farms  of  the 
township. 

The  parents  of  our  subject,  who  were  also  na- 
tives of  the  Fatherland,  were  Christopher  and 
Fredreka  (Nasstedt)  Meineke.  They  reared  a 
familj'  of  ten  children,  and  spent  their  entire 
lives  in  their  native  land.  Fritz,  of  this  sketch, 
received  his  education  in  the  Old  Countr}-,  where 
his  birth  occurred  June  19,  1830.  He  remained 
there  until  1869,  when,  liaving  heard  glowing  ac- 
counts  of  the  New  World,  he  decided  to  tr^'  his 


/."^.M^^^ 


PORTRAIT  AND    BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


26? 


fortunes  in  America,  and  came  hither  in  1869. 
Finding  his  way  lo  Randolph  County,  he  located 
in  Ellis  Grove,  where  he  worked  out  by  the  day 
for  four  j'ears.  Then  finding  himself  able  to  rent 
land,  he  operated  a  farm  near  Ellis  Grove  for  a 
year,  and  then  moved  to  Evansville  Precinct, 
where  he  was  similarly  employed  and  rented  prop- 
erty for  two  years. 

At  the  time  of  localing  on  his  present  property, 
it  contained  but  niuet^'-six  acres,  and  Mr.  Meineke 
worked  hard  to  place  the  land  under  cultivation 
and  clear  the  sixty-six  acres  which  were  in  a  wild 
state.  He  erected  as  good  buildings  on  the  place 
as  circumstances  would  allow,  added  to  his  acreage, 
and  at  the  present  time  everything  on  the  farm 
betokens  the  industry  and  thrift  of  the  owner. 

Miss  Minnie  Hopfe,  also  a  native  of  Germany, 
became  the  wife  of  our  subject  in  1855.  She  ac- 
companied her  husband  in  his  trip  to  the  United 
States,  and  by  her  union  has  become  the  mother  of 
three  children:  Fritz,  William  and  Minnie  (now 
Mrs.  William  Ricknagle).  She  is  a  devoted  mem- 
ber of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  with  which 
denomination  Mr.  Meineke  is  also  connected.  In 
political  affairs  he  always  casts  his  vote  with  the 
Republican  part}'.  He  has  held  the  oflice  of  School 
Director  for  manj'  3'ears,  and  is  an  incumbent  of 
that  position  at  the  present  time. 


^T/OHN  H.  WILSON,  who  is  now  living  a  re- 
tired life  in  Columbia,  Monroe  County,  was 
born  in  this  county  August  8,  1819,  and  is 
a  representative  of  one  of  its  honored  pio- 
neer families.  His  father,  William  Wilson,  was 
born  in  AVashington  County,  Ky.,  and  when  about 
five  years  old  was  brought  to  this  place  by  Mrs. 
Tolbott.  Here  he  grew  to  manhood,  and  after  ar- 
riving at  mature  years  he  entered  from  the  Gov- 
ernment large  tracts  of  land.  He  married  Ma- 
tilda Wallace,  and  then  located  on  a  farm  a  mile 
from  Columbia,  where  in  the  midst  of  the  forest 
he  hewed  out  a  good  home,  transforming  wild, 
unimproved  land  into  rich  and  fertile  fields.  This 
worthy  couple  became  the  parents  of  nine  children, 
seven  of  whom  reached  manhood  and  womanhood, 
while  four  are  yet  living,  namel}':  Catherine,  wife 


of  John  S.  Morgan,  who  resides  near  Columbia; 
Deborah, of  Monroe  County;  George  and  John  H., 
both  of  Columbia. 

Upon  the  old  homestead  farm  our  subject  spent 
the  daj's  of  his  boyhood  and  youth,  and  in  the 
subscription  schools  acquired  his  education.  When 
about  twentj-three  3eai-s  of  age  he  was  appointed 
Deputy  Sheriff  of  the  countj',  and  so  well  did  he 
fill  the  position  that  in  1846  he  was  elected  Sheriff 
for  a  term  of  two  years.  He  proved  a  capable 
officer, discharging  his  duties  with  promptness  and 
fidelity.  In  1848  he  was  again  elected  to  the 
same  oflice,  and  in  1851  was  re-elected,  filling  the 
position  for  a  term  of  eight  years.  He  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Constitutional  Convention  which  in 
1870  framed  the  present  constitution  of  the  state, 
and  served  on  the  finance  and  other  important 
committees. 

In  May,  1844,  Mr.  Wilson  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Sarah,  daughter  of  Edward  T.  Morgan, 
a  native  of  Kentucky,  and  one  of  the  early  settlers 
of  Monroe  County.  The  lad}'  was  born  and  reared 
near  Columbia,  and  after  their  marriage  the  young 
couple  located  on  a  farm  two  miles  and  a-half  from 
this  place.  After  two  years  they  came  to  the  town, 
and  Mr.  AVilson  embarked  in  general  merchandising 
under  the  firm  name  of  Wilson  &  Winel.  This 
partnership  continued  for  four  years,  when  Mr. 
Wilson  formed  a  partnership  with  L.  Warnock, 
and  purchased  the  Columbia  Star  Mills.  He  fol- 
lowed milling  for  about  four  years,  when  he  sold 
his  interest  to  Ernest  Gross,  and  resumed  agricult- 
ural pursuits,  which  he  has  since  carried  on. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wilson  was  born  a  son, 
Joshua,  a  lawyer  of  Waterloo,  and  the  present 
State's  Attorney  for  Monroe  County.  In  politics 
our  subject  is  a  Democrat,  and  he  has  frequently 
served  as  a  delegate  to  the  county,  congressional 
and  state  conventions  of  his  party.  Socially  he  is 
connected  with  the  Odd  Fellows'  society,  in  which 
he  has  held  various  offices.  He  now  has  a  com- 
fortable home  in  Columbia,  besides  his  valuable 
farm  of  four  hundred  acres.  He  has  been  a  resi- 
dent of  Monroe  County  since  1819,  and  is  there- 
fore one  of  its  earliest  settlers  and  honored  pio- 
neers. Through  life  he  has  been  a  hard  worker, 
and  by   his    diligence   and   perseverance   he    has 


ie^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


achieved  success.  He  is  a  man  of  straightforward 
purpose,  whose  life  has  been  characterized  by  hon- 
esty, and  he  is  ever  spoken  of  in  the  highest  terms, 
being  respected  by  young  and  old.  rich  and   poor. 


r^.;..}..^.}..;.^.^.- 


'illOHN  R.  ALLEN.  In  the  perusal  of  this 
volume  the  reader  is  doubtless  impressed 
with  the  fact  that  it  is  not  accident  that 
helps  a  man  on  in  the  world,  hut  persistent 
energ\'  and  unceasing  industry.  The  life  of  John 
R.  Allen  affords  an  illustration  of  the  fact  that  he 
who  is  shrewd  to  discern  opportunities  and  quick 
to  grasp  them  will  attain  a  high  place  in  the  re- 
gard of  his  fellow-men.  A  laborious,  painstaking 
man,  his  was  a  life  of  diligence,  honor  and  suc- 
cess, and  when  the  sun  of  time  sank  below  the 
horizon  of  eternity  it  was  felt  bj'  all  who  knew 
him  that  a  good  man  had  gone  to  his  final  reward. 
At  his  death,  which  occurred  August  26,  1890,  he 
was  one  of  the  leading  business  men  of  Sparta, 
and  had  for  many  years  been  intimately  identified 
with  the  progressive  interests  and  rapid  advance- 
ment of  the  city.  The  people  of  his  community 
attested  to  their  esteem  for  him  by  electing  him 
Maj^or  of  Sparta  in  1889,  which  position  was  un- 
solicited bj'  him. 

Andrew  M.  Allen,  the  father  of  our  subject,  was 
born  in  the  year  1810,  in  Preble  County,  Ohio, 
and  when  a  lad  of  six  years  removed  with  his 
parents  to  this  county,  locating  near  Evansville. 
Andrew  M.  continued  to  reside  at  home  until 
1827,  when,  his  mother  having  died  the  previous 
year,  the  household  was  broken  up,  and  his  fa- 
ther made  his  home  thereafter  with  his  children 
until  his  decease,  which  occurred  July  5,  1845,  at 
the  home  of  his  son,  William  Allen,  near  Preston. 
The  father  of  our  subject  was  a  tanner  by  trade, 
but  spent  the  greater  part  of  his  active  life  on  the 
farm.  Politically,  he  was  a  Jacksonian  Democrat. 
A  devout  member  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  he 
allowed  no  man  to  excel  him  in  hospitality  or  kind- 
ness. The  paternal  grandparents  of  our  subject, 
John  and  Sarah  (Allen)  Allen,  are  natives  respec- 
tively of  New  Jersey  and  South  Carolina.  The 
former  accompanied  his  parents  at  the  time  of 
their  removal  to  Savannah,  Ga.,and  while  residing 


in  Jefferson  County,  that  state,  was  married  to 
Miss  Sarah  Allen,  who  was  born  in  Soutli  Carolina, 
and  located  with  her  parents  in  Georgia.  John 
Allen  and  his  wife  then  moved  north  to  Preble 
County,  Ohio,  thence  to  Randolph  Count}-,  this 
state,  where  their  decease  occurred.  The  grand- 
father, who  was  a  prosperous  farmer,  was  a  Demo- 
crat in  politics  and  served  in  the  War  of  1812. 
The  great-grandfather  of  our  subject,  Robert  Allen, 
was  a  native  of  England,  and,  coming  to  America 
prior  to  the  Revolutionary  War,  located  in  New 
Jersey.  Being  the  eldest  of  his  father's  familj',  he 
inherited  the  estate,  as  was  the  custom  of  that 
countiy,  and  as  a  consequence,  was  in  very  afflu- 
ent circumstances.  He  was  an  extensive  ship- 
owner, and  also  held  large  possessions  in  Jamaica. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  is  a  native  of  this 
count}',  having  been  born  March  21,  1839,  near 
Evansville,  and  continued  to  reside  at  home  un- 
til the  outbreak  of  the  Civil  War.  Although  a 
mere  boy,  he  enlisted  in  Company  I,  Twenty- 
second  Illinois  Infantry,  under  John  E.  Dedrick, 
who  is  now  in  the  Pension  Department  at  Wash-" 
ington,  D.  C.  As  a  soldier,  young  Allen  served 
in  some  of  the  most  decisive  battles  of  the  Re- 
bellion, such  as  the  siege  and  capture  of  New 
Madrid,  Stone  River,  Belmont,  Farmiugton,  siege 
of  Corinth,  Resaca  and  Chickaniauga.  While  in 
the  latter  battle  he  was  sliot  in  the  leg.  September 
9,  1863,  and  was  taken  to  the  hospital  at  Crawfish 
Springs,  where  his  limb  was  amputated.  As  that 
hospital  was  later  captured  by  the  Confederates, 
our  subject  was  taken  to  Chattanooga,  and  on  the 
7th  of  October,  1863,  was  exchanged  and  soon 
thereafter  discharged.  He  was  a  quiet,  unobtru- 
sive soldier,  and  won  not  only  the  respect  of  his 
comrades,  but  the  confidence  and  esteem  of  his 
superior  officers. 

After  his  return  from  the  arm.y,  John  R.  Allen 
established  the  first  regular  provision  store  in 
Sparta,  which  he  continued  to  operate  until  within 
eighteen  months  of  his  death.  A  man  of  enter- 
prise, he  always  took  an  active  part  in  the  devel- 
opment of  every  measure  set  on  foot  for  the  ad- 
vancement of  the  cit3%  and  was  a  prominent  factor 
in  the  promotion  of  various  matters  of  mutual 
welfare.     He  was  very  charitable  and  benevolent, 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


269 


and  established  the  cash  system  in  business, 
pa3'ing  the  fanners  either  in  cash  or  goods  for 
their  produce.  During  the  financial  depression 
early  in  the  '70s,  in  order  to  help  restore  confi- 
dence, Mr.  Allen  sent  to  St.  Louis  for  gold  to  pay 
the  farmers,  which  fact  not  onlj'  helped  to  in- 
crease his  own  business,  but  stimulated  trade 
throughout  tlie  city. 

April  29,  1864,  John  R.  Allen  married  Miss 
Mar\'  C,  daughter  of  Samuel  and  Nancy  McClin- 
ton,  and  to  them  has  been  born  one  son,  C.  F. 
Allen.  .  In  his  political  relations  our  subject  was 
an  uncompromising  Republican,  but  at  the  same 
time  conceded  to  everyone  else  the  rights  he 
claimed  for  himself.  It  was  while  on  his  way  to 
the  Republican  Convention  which  was  held  in 
Evansville  that  death  claimed  him  as  his  own. 
That  sad  event  occurred  August  2G,  1890.  In 
early  life  he  was  a  member  of  the  United  Presby- 
terian Church,  but  later  joined  the  Presbyterian 
*  Church,  in  which  he  was  an  Elder  for  many 
3' ears. 


AVID  B.  BOYD,  a  progressive  farmer  re- 
siding in  township  5,  range  6,  Randolph 
Count}-,  has  risen  to  a  position  in  agri- 
cultural affairs  which  many  might  envy. 
He  is  the  owner  of  five  hundred  acres  of  valuable 
land,  and  has  been  largely'  instrumental  in  bring- 
ing about  man}'  of  the  new  and  successful  meth- 
ods of  advancing  business,  educational  and  social 
standards.  His  father,  Thomas  Boyd,  was  born  in 
County  Antrim,  Ireland,  in  1784,  and  emigrated 
to  America,  locating  in  South  Carolina  about 
1801. 

Thomas  Boyd  made  his  home  in  the  above 
named  slate  until  1830,  when  he  decided  to  try 
his  fortunes  in  the  Prairie  State,  and  coming  to 
Randolph  County,  located  in  township  5,  range  6, 
where  he  was  residing  at  the  time  of  his  decease, 
January  11,  1849.  His  occupation  was  that  of 
farming.  He  was  pressed  into  the  British  service, 
and  while  on  a  vessel,  lost  his  hearing  by  the 
concussion  of  guns.  In  politics  he  was  a  Whig.and 
religiously  was  a  member  of  the  Reformed  Pi-esby- 


terian  Church.  Thomas  Boyd  was  the  son  of  John 
and  Susan  (Neally)  Boj'd,  natives  also  of  Coun- 
ty Antrim,  Ireland.  Like  man}-  of  their  fellow- 
countrymen,  they  made  their  way  to  the  United 
States.  They  died  in  South  Carolina,  where  they 
were  farmers.  Previous  to  coming  to  America, 
the  grandfather  of  our  subject  was  a  weaver  and 
ganger.  His  famih'  consisted  of  three  sons  and 
two  daughters,  John,  Thomas,  Samuel,  Susan  and 
Marj'. 

Mrs.  Mary  (Humes)  Boyd  was  likewise  born  in 
the  Emerald  Isle,  and  when  her  parents,  David  and 
Elizabeth  (Montgomery)  Humes,  emigrated  to  the 
New  World,  she  accompanied  them  on  the  journey 
and  located  in  South  Carolina.  There  her  father, 
who  was  a  prosperous  farmer,  was  an  active  member 
of  the  Presb^'terian  Church.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thomas 
Bo3'd  were  married  in  1807,  and  the  children  born 
to  them  were:  Elizabeth  and  Susan,  now  deceased; 
John,  who  died  in  1849;  William,  who  departed 
this  life  in  his  twenty-second  3'ear;  David  B.,  of 
this  sketch;  Thomas,  and  one  who  died  in  infanc}'. 

Our  subject  was  born  IMa}*  22, 1819,  in  the  New- 
bury District,  S.  C,  and  there  continued  to  reside 
until  the  decease  of  his  parents.  He  was  given 
but  few  educational  advantages,  and  upon  reach- 
ing mature  3-ears  engaged  in  farming  pursuits. 
After  coming  to  this  count}-,  in  1830,  he  first  pur- 
chased eighty  acres  of  land  from  his  father,  and 
on  the  death  of  the  latter,  came  into  possession  of 
the  old  homestead,  which  he  has  occupied  for  over 
sixt}'  3'ears. 

December  30,  1847,  Miss  Tabitha  Jane  Brown 
and  our  subject  were  united  in  marriage.  Mrs. 
Boyd  was  born  within  two  miles  of  where  she  is 
now  living.  She  is  the  daughter  of  David  and 
Margaret  (Morrow)  Brown,  natives  respectively 
of  South  Carolina  and  Kentuck}-.  Her  parents  were 
married  in  the  Blue  Grass  State,  and  coming  to 
Illinois,  in  1826,  located  on  Livel3- Prairie.  David 
Brown  was  the  son  of  Isaac  and  Jane  (Means) 
Brown,  natives  of  South  Carolina.  The  grand- 
father died  in  Kentuck3';  his  good  wife  came  to 
Illinois, and  departed  this  life  in  Randolph  Count}'. 

To  Mr.  and  Mrs  Bo}'d  have  been  born  nine  chil- 
dren: Maggie,  Mrs.  Samuel  Wasson,  of  this  coun- 
ty; Mary,  who  lives  at  home;   Anna,  Mrs.  Samuel 


270 


PORTRAIT  A]ST)   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Fulton,  of  this  county;  William,  who  is  a  coal 
dealer  in  St.  Louis;  David,  who  is  engaged  in  the 
coal  business  at  Sparta;  Thomas  A.,  who  nialies  his 
home  with  his  parents,  and  three  who  died  in  in- 
fanc}'.  A  man  of  untiring  energy,  Mr.  Boyd's 
success  in  life  is  proved  by  the  fact  that,  although 
he  started  without  money  or  land,  he  has  accumu- 
lated over  five  hundred  acres,  upon  which  he  is  en- 
gaged in  general  farming.  In  politics  he  is  a  stanch 
Republican.  He  is  an  Elder  in  the  Presbyterian 
Church,  with  which  denomination  his  wife  also 
holds  membership. 


If/  OHN  KNOX  BLAIR  is  one  of  the  shrewdest 
and  most  intelligent  agriculturists  of  town- 
ship 5,  range  6,  Randolph  Countj',  as  is 
showu  bj'  the  success  which  has  crowned 
his  eflforts.  He  was  born  February  6,  1828,  in 
Tennessee,  and  is  the  son  of  James  and  Jane 
(Wiley)  Blair,  natives  of  .South  Carolina,  where 
the  former  was  born  in   1797. 

James  Blair,  the  father  of  our  subject,  accom- 
panied his  parents,  William  and  Elizabeth  Blair, 
on  their  removal  to  Tennessee  in  1816.  The 
latter  were  both  natives  of  Ireland,  but  the  grand- 
father of  our  subject  died  in  Tennessee.  In  that 
state  the  parents  of  our  subject  were  married,  and 
in  1832  came  to  Randolph  County  and  lived  on 
what  is  now  known  as  the  Rile3'  McKelvy  Farm. 
Two  years  later  the  father  entered  land  from  the 
Government,  which  is  the  same  property  owned 
b\'  the  3'oungest  brother  of  our  subject,  James  F. 
The  old  homestead  contains  two  hundred  acres, 
which  tlie  father  cleared,  and  of  which  he  made  a 
valuable  estate.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New 
Light  Covenant  Church,  in  which  he  was  an  Elder. 
He  departed  this  life  February  25,  1860.  The 
mother  of  our  subject  was  born  in  1799  and  died 
in  1890,  at  the  advanced  age  of  ninety-one  years. 
She  was  also  a  member  of  the  Covenant  Church. 

Our  subject  was  the  fourth  in  order  of  birth 
of  a  family  of  seven  children,  his  brothers  and 
sisters  bearing  the  respective  names  of  Samuel 
W.,  William  R.,  Tirza   M.,  James  F.,  Martha  and 


Louisa.  John  K.  was  only  four  j'ears  of  age  at 
the  time  his  parents  removed  to  Randolph  County, 
and  here  he  received  a  limited  education  in  the 
district  schools.  He  remained  at  home  until  his 
marriage  in  1852  with  Miss  Mary  E.  McCoughan, 
who  was  born  in  this  couutv. 

After  his  marriage,  Mr.  Blair  removed  to  Perry 
County,  where  he  resided  for  five  years,  and  then, 
his  wife  having  died  October  5,  1857,  he  returned 
to  this  county  with  his  children,  Gilbert  S.,  Lem- 
uel and  Mary  E.,  the  latter  of  whom  is  now  de- 
ceased. 

Gilbert  S.,  the  elder  son,  married  Miss  Ida  Mc- 
Guire,  and  resides  in  Parsons,  Kan;  Lemuel,  the 
second  son,  is  a  graduate  of  the  Chicago  Homeo- 
pathic Medical  College,  and  a  practicing  physician 
in  Edgerton,  Kan.;  he  married  Sabina  Reed,  of  Ced- 
arville,  Ohio,  who  is  deceased.  Mre.  Mary  Blair  was 
a  faithful  member  of  the  New  Light  Covenant 
Church,  in  which  bodj-  her  father  was  an  Elder. 

The  lady  whom  Mr.  Blair  married  in  1862  was* 
Mrs.  Mar}-  Catherine  (Brown)  Wj-lie.  By  her 
marriage  with  Samuel  Wiley  she  became  the 
mother  of  three  children,  onlj-  one  of  whom. 
Flora,  now  Mrs.  James  M.  Hathorn,  is  living. 
By  this  union  Mr.  Blair  had  a  family  of  three 
children,  of  whom  James  is  deceased.  Those  liv- 
ing are  Samuel  L.,  Jr.,  and  John  Riley.  After  his 
second  marriage,  our  subject  removed  to  the  farm 
owned  by  his  wife,  where  the}-  resided  until  1880. 
He  then  purchased  his  present  farm,  it  being  the 
place  where  Mrs.  Blair's  father  located  upon  com- 
ing to  the  county.  In  politics,  Mr.  Blair  voted 
with  the  Republican  partj-  until  two  j-ears  ago, 
when  he  joined  the  ranks  of  the  Prohibitionists, 
and  now  casts  his  ballot  fou  the  candidates  of  that 
organization. 

Mrs.  Blair  was  born  in  this  count}-  in  1830,  and 
is  the  daughter  of  Joseph  and  Elizabeth  (Morrow) 
Brown,  natives  of  South  Carolina,  w-ho  migrated 
to  Kentucky,  and  thence  in  1827  came  to  Ran- 
dolph County.  Here  Mr.  Brown  entered  the  land 
which  is  now  owned  by  our  subject,  cleared  and 
made  valuable  improvements  on  the  same  and  re- 
sided there  for  fifty-five  years.  He  was  born  in 
1797,  and  six  years  prior  to  his  decease,  in  1884, 
was  afflicted    with  the  loss  of  his  eye-sight.     He 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


271 


was  four  times  married,  his  first  wife  being  a  Miss 
Steele,  by  wbom  lie  had  one  child,  who  is  now  de- 
ceased; his  second  union  was  with  Miss  Elizabeth 
Morrow.  His  thirti  wife  was  Miss  Chambers,  and 
his  fourth  a  Miss  Woodside.  Joseph  and  Eliza- 
beth (Morrow)  Brown  had  a  large  family  of  cliil- 
dren,  as  follows:  James  M.,  deceased;  Elizabeth  J.; 
David,  now  deceased;  Mary  Catherine,  ]\Irs.  Blair; 
Joseph;  Alvira  A;  John  B.;  Nancy  M.  and  William 
M.  The  parents  were  members  of  the  Associate 
Reformed  (now  the  United  Presli^'terian)  Church, 
in  which  the  father  held  the  office  of  Elder. 


(^ 


-^^ 


(3= 


■'?^|ll^^^'" 


^ 


^1|_  UGH  EASDALE.  One  by  one  the  pioneers 
i[)|!  of  Randolph  County  are  passing  away,  and 
1^^^'  their  labors  and  struggles  will  soon  be  a 
(^)  matter  of  history.  It  is  well  to  preserve  a 
brief  account  of  the  privations  and  difficulties  un- 
der which  the}'  labored  in  laying  the  foundation 
of  our  material,  civil  and  religious  prosperity. 
For  this  purpose  a  few  facts  regarding  the  honored 
gentleman  above  named  will  be  presented  to  our 
readers. 

The  subject  of  this  brief  sketch  was  of  Scotch 
birth,  and  was  born  in  Ayrshire  in  October,  1814. 
He  was  reared  to  manhood  in  Scotland,  and  for 
many  years  made  his  home  on  a  farm  with  his 
grandmother  in  that  country.  He  was  given  a 
good  education,  and  deciding  to  come  to  America 
in,  1840,  he  crossed  the  Atlantic,  and  after  landing 
in  the  New  World,  made  his  way  to  Illinois  and 
located  in  Randolph  County. 

The  marriage  of  our  subject,  which  took  place 
in  1849,  was  with  Miss  Mary  Aitken,  who  was 
born  in  Ayrshire  March  31,  1831.  Mrs.  Easdale 
was  the  daughter  of  James  and  Barbara  (Stephen- 
son) Aitken,  also  natives  of  the  above  place,  where 
the  mother's  decease  occurred.  The  wife  of  our 
subject  came  to  America  in  1849,  in  company  with 
two  of  her  brothers,  and  with  them  made  her  home 
in  this  county.  After  her  marriage  with  our  sub- 
ject, the  young  people  located  upon  a  tract  of 
land  in  township  4,  range  5,  which  in  that  early 
day  bore  no  improvement.     The  estate  comprised 


three  hundred  and  fifty  acres,  and  at  his  death 
Mr.  Easdale  had  placed  two  hundred  and  seventy 
acres  under  good  tillage.  The  farm  is  supplied 
with  a  comfortable  residence  and  all  the  accom- 
paniments in  the  waj'  of  barns,  sheds,  etc.,  that  are 
needed  in  properly  carrying  on  a  farm.  Our  sub- 
ject was  engaged  in  mixed  farming,  and  made  a 
specialty  of  breeding  fine  blooded  horses. 

Of  the  ten  children  born  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Eas- 
dale, we  make  the  following  mention:  Mary  mar- 
ried William  Crawford,  and  resides  in  Kansas; 
Maggie  is  the  wife  of  John  Stephenson,  and  makes 
her  home  in  this  township;  Janet  is  the  wife  of 
Samuel  Boyd;  Ida  married  James  Lindsey;  and 
Hugh  A.,  Helen  and  Robert  are  at  home.  Mr. 
Easdale  was  Treasurer  of  the  United  Presbyterian 
Church,  of  which  he  was  a  member  for  many 
years.  He  was  School  Director  of  this  district  for 
many  years,  and  also  served  as  Township  Trustee. 
A  stanch  Republican,  he  represented  his  party  as 
delegate  to  the  various  conventions.  He  possessed 
those  noble  personal  qualities  which  justl}'  classed 
him  among  the  best  citizens  of  the  county.  The 
farm  is  managed  by  Mrs.  P'.asdale  and  tlie  three 
children  who  are  at  home.  She  is  an  intelligent 
and  capable  woman,  and  is  a  member  of  the  United 
Presbyterian  Church. 


'^\  OSEPIl  R.  PRESTON,  a  well  known  .agri- 
culturist residing  on  township  4,  range  7, 
is  one  of  the  native  sons  of  Randolph 
County  and  a  representative  of  one  of  its 
honored  pioneer  families.  In  1839  there  came  to 
Randolph  County  Robert  H.  Preston,  with  his  wife 
and  children.  Tliej'  located  on  a  farm  adjacent 
to  Baldwin,  purcliasing  land  of  Jack  Boyd,  an 
earlj'  settler  of  the  community.  The  journey 
westward  was  made  with  a  one-horse  wagon. 
While  in  tlie  east,  Mr.  Preston  worked  in  woolen 
mills,  being  a  weaver  by  trade.  He  brought  with 
him  to  the  west  $600,  which  he  invested  in  land, 
and  at  once  engaged  in  farming.  Although  he 
was  unfamiliar  witli  this  pursuit,  he  met  with  most 
excellent  success  in  his  undertakings.  His  wife, 
who  bore  the   maiden   name   of  Elizabeth  Flem- 


272 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD 


ing,  was  a  native  of  New  Jei-sey.  Their  family 
numbered  three  sons  and  a  daughter:  vSarah  H., 
widow  of  John  A.  Spaeth,  who  resides  with  her 
family  in  Wilson  County,  Kan.;  Joseph  R.,  of  this 
sketch;  and  Albert  L.  and  Alfred  L.  (twins).  The 
latter  now  resides  near  Baldwin,  but  the  former 
died,  leaving  one  son,  who  now  makes  his  home 
in  Baldwin.  The  father  of  this  family  was  very 
successful  and  acquired  a  handsome  competence. 
He  was  a  faithful  member  of  the  Methodist  Epis- 
copal Church  South,  and  gave  liberally  of  his 
means  for  the  erection  of  the  house  of  worship  in 
Baldwin.  He  was  always  ready  to  support  any 
worthy'  enterprise,  and  the  poor  and  needj*  found 
in  him  a  friend. 

Joseph  R.  Preston  was  born  on  the  old  home- 
stead farm  in  1841,  and  his  boj'hood  and  }'outh 
were  spent  amidst  pla^'  and  work.  He  early  be- 
came familiar  with  all  the  duties  of  farm  life,  and 
in  the  common  schools  of  the  neighborhood  he 
acquired  a  good  English  education.  At  the  age 
of  twenty-  years  he  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Margaret,  daughter  of  William  Cox,  one  of 
the  earl3'  settlers  of  Randolph  Count}-.  They  be- 
gan their  domestic  life  upon  the  old  homestead, 
and  Mr.  Preston  erected  the  house  which  is  still 
their  home,  and  in  which  manj'  happy  years  have 
been  passed.  Seven  cliildren  were  born  to  them,  of 
wliom  four  are  living,  namel}':  WiHiara  R.,who  mar- 
ried Sarah  F.Carter  and  is  engaged  in  merchandis- 
ing in  Baldwin;  Absalom  K.,  M.  Ma}-  and  John  C, 
who  are  still  under  the  parental  roof.  Elizabeth  E. 
died  at  tlie  age  of  sixteen  years,  and  the  others  died 
in  early  childhood. 

The  home  farm  of  Mr.  Preston  comprises  two 
hundred  and  eighty  acres,  and  in  connection  with 
this  he  operates  one  hundred  acres  about  a  mile 
west.  His  lauded  possessions  aggregate  seven 
hundred  acres,  the  greater  part  of  which  he  has 
cleared  and  developed  himself.  For  several  3^ears 
he  devoted  his  time  and  energies  chiefly  to  gen- 
eral farming,  but  for  some  years  past  he  has 
been  quite  extensively  engaged  in  stock  dealing. 
His  business  career  has  been  a  prosperous  one, 
owing  to  his  diligence  and  well  directed  efforts, 
and  he  is  recognized  as  one  of  the  practical  and 
progressive  farmers  of  the  community.     In  poli- 


tics he  is  a  stanch  Democrat,  but  has  alwaj-s  re- 
fused public  office.  He  contributes  liberally  to 
worth}-  enterprises  calculated  to  advance  the  gen- 
eral welfai'e,  and  jierforms  many  acts  of  kindness 
and  charity,  but  all  are  done  in  a  quiet  and  unos- 
tentatious manner. 


<^T  UGUST  H.  KOCH,  who  is  numbered  among 
lO///  II  ^jjg  leading  business  men  of  Red  Bud,  con- 
tl  ducts  a  harness  establishment,  and  is  also 
i@y  a  dealer  in  road  vehicles  and  farm  imple- 

ments. He  is  a  native  of  the  town  which  is  still 
his  home,  his  birth  having  occurred  here  in  1855. 
His  parents,  Henr}'  and  Sophia  (Reinhart)  Koch, 
were  both  natives  of  Germany,  and  in  that  coun- 
try were  reared  and  married.  The  year  1840  wit- 
nessed their  emigration  to  America.  The}-  located 
in  St.  Louis,  but  after  a  short  time  came  to  Red 
Bud,  where  the  father  engaged  in  business  as  a 
merchant-tailor  until  his  death.  The  family  num- 
bered six  children,  but  with  the  exception  of  our 
subject  all  are  now  deceased.  One  brother,  Henry, 
grew  to  manhood  and  married,  leaving  at  his 
death  two  children. 

August  H.  Koch  spent  the  first  fourteen  years  of 
his  life  under  the  parental  roof,  and  then  went  to 
St.  Louis,  where  he  served  an  apprenticeship  of  a 
term  of  four  years  to  a  harnessmaker.  He  thor- 
oughly mastered  the  business,  becoming  an  expert 
workman,  and  then  returned  to  Red  Bud,  where 
he  opened  his  store.  His  trade  has  constantly  in- 
creased from  the  beginning,  and  he  now  does  as 
large  a  business  as  any  harness  dealer  in  the  coun- 
ty. In  1889  he  had  purchased  a  stock  of  spring 
wagons,  and  the  following  year  he  added  a  stock 
of  carriages,  buggies,  farm  implements,  etc.  His 
enterprise  and  business  ability  have  been  the  im- 
portant factors  in  his  success,  and  have  placed  him 
among  the  substantial  citizens  of  the  community. 

In  the  year  1878  Mr.  Koch  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Sliss  Katrina  Diehl,  a  native  of  Monroe 
County,  III.  By  their  union  have  been  born 
eleven  children,  seven  of  whom  are  still  living. 
The  parents  hold  membership  with  the  Lutheran 
Church,  contribute  liberally  to  its  support,  and 


PORTKAIT  AND  BTOGRAPHTCAL  RECORD. 


273 


take  an  active  part  in  its  growth  and  iipbuilding, 
doing  all  in  their  power  to  advance  tiie  cause. 
Mr.  Koch  exercises  his  right  of  franchise  in  sup- 
port of  tlie  Republican  party,  and  is  a  warm  ad- 
vocate of  its  principles.  He  served  for  one  term 
as  City  Treasurer,  but  has  never  been  an  office- 
seeker,  preferring  to  devote  his  entire  time  and 
attention  to  his  business  interests.  A  well  and 
worthily  spent  life  has  won  him  the  high  regard 
of  a  large  circle  of  friends  and  acquaintances,  and 
we  take  pleasure  in  presenting  to  our  readers  this 
record  of  one  of  the  native  sons  of  Randolph 
County. 

• 0^P • 


bllOMAS  B.  STEPHENSON.  A  man  of  un- 
tiring energy,  the  subject  of  this  sketch  has 
been  successful  in  life,  which  is  proved  by 
the  fact  that,  although  he  started  for  himself  with- 
out money,  he  has  accumulated  a  comfortable  home 
and  is  now  one  of  the  prominent  citizens  of  Ran- 
dolph County.  He  resides  in  Sparta,  where  he  is 
Secretary  and  Treasurer  of  the  Sparta  Pressed 
Brick  Company,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the  organ- 
izers. He  is  also  a  stockholder  and  Director  in 
the  Sparta  Creamery,  and  has  been  prominentlj' 
connected  with  the  organization  of  the  building 
and  loan  association,  of  which  he  is  the  Secretary. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  Edward  Stephenson, 
was  born  in  Lancashire,  England,  in  1829,  and  at 
the  early  age  of  nineteen  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Elizabeth  Preston.  "With  his  wife  and 
a  family  of  five  small  children,  he  left  his  native 
land  to  seek  a  home  in  the  New  World.  He  natu- 
rally turned  to  Her  Majesty's  province  of  Canada, 
and  having  acquired  an  education  for  the  profes- 
sion of  a  school  teacher,  he  turned  his  attention  to 
that  in  his  new  home.  But  only  a  few  more  years 
were  allotted  him  in  this  world.  The  hardships 
and  anxieties  of  frontier  life  overcame  him,  and 
while  yet  a  young  man  he  laid  aside  his  armor 
and  entered  into  eternal  rest. 

After  a  few  years  of  widowhood,  our  subject's 
mother  married  the  brother  of  her  deceased  hus- 
band, John  D.  Stephenson,  who  was  born  in  1836 
in  Lancashire,  England.     In  1857  he  emigrated  to 


America,  and  locating  in  Canada,  remained  at  To- 
ronto until  1860.  when  he  came  to  the  States  and 
made  his  home  in  Sparta.  The  following  j'ear  he 
moved  to  a  farm  four  miles  northeast  of  the  city, 
which  he  cultivated  and  resided  upon  until  1892, 
whea  he  returned  to  Sparta,  and  is  now  living  a 
retired  life.  He  is  a  carpenter  by  trade,  but  fol- 
lowed farming  through  the  greater  part  of  his 
active  life.  His  early  education  was  received  in 
the  common  schools,  and-although  his  advantages 
were  not  of  the  best,  he  improved  his  spare  mo- 
ments, and  became  one  of  the  well  posted  men  of 
the  section.  In  politics  he  is  a  stanch  Republican, 
and  is  deeply  interested  in  all  matters  pertain- 
ing to  the  advancement  of  his  community.  He 
held  the  oflices  of  Road  Commissioner,  Township 
Commissioner,  .Justice  of  the  Peace  and  School 
Trustee,  and  is  recognized  as  a  man  of  extended 
influence.  He  was  formerly  an  official  member  of 
the  Baptist  Church,  but  is  now  associated  with  the 
Brethren. 

The  paternal  grandparents  of  our  subject,  Chris- 
topher and  Margaret  (Walker)  Stephenson,  were 
also  natives  of  Lancashire,  England,  where  they 
lived  and  died.  The  grandfather,  who  was  a. 
canal-keeper,  was  the  son  of  William  Stephenson, 
a  Scotch  sailor.  The  maiden  name  of  our  subject's 
mother  was  Elizabeth  Preston.  She  likewise  was 
born  in  the  above  shire  in  England,  and  was  a 
daughter  of  John  and  Ann  Preston,  prosperous 
farmers,  who  spent  their  entire  lives  in  their  native 
land.  During  the  latter  3'earsof  her  young  woman- 
hood, Mrs.  Stephenson  made  her  home  with  her 
eldest  brother,  Roger,  who  was  a  Quaker,  and 
through  him  received  a  good  education. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  was  first  married 
about  1848,  and  tiie  union  was  blessed  with  the 
following  named  children:  Roger  P.,  Christopher, 
John,  Edward,  Thomas  B.,  Margaret  and  Elizabeth 
A.  To  her  second  marriage  five  children  were  born, 
James,  William  R.,  Sarah  J.,  Mary  and  Alonzo  J. 
Tlie  eldest  son  is  now  living  in  Salma,  Kan.,  where 
he  is  pastor  of  the  First  Baptist  Church;  Christo- 
pher makes  his  home  in  Denver,  Colo.,  and  is  a 
prominent  lawyer  of  that  place;  John  lives  on  the 
old  homestead  near  Sparta;  Edward  makes  his 
home   in  Jackson,  Mich.,  and  has  charge  of    the 


274 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


Baptist  Church  there;  Margaret  is  the  wife  of  R. 
S.  Burns,  a.  carpenter  residing  in  Sparta;  Elizabeth 
married  Michael  S.  (Crawford,  a  farmer  in  Crawford 
County,  Kan.;  James  is  a  member  of  the  firm  of 
Stei)henson  Brothers,  in  Sparta;  AVilliam  R.  is  the 
junior  member  of  the  same  firm;  Alonzo  is  em- 
ployed in  the  pressed  brick  works,  in  which  our 
subject  is  interested;  Sarah  J.  and  Mary  are  at 
home. 

Thomas  B.  Stephenson  was  born  November  20, 
1855,  in  Lancashire,  England,  and  accompanied 
his  parents  on  their  removal  to  Canada  in  1857. 
He  was  reared  to  manhood  in  Randolpli  Countj', 
111.,  in  the  meantime  attending  school  when  oppor- 
tunity offered,  and  also  engaged  in  farming  pur- 
suits. Later,  his  knowledge  gained  in  the  public 
sciiools  was  supplemented  by  attendance  at  the 
Carbondale  Normal  University,  where  he  was 
a  student  for  about  two  years.  He  earned  his 
first  money  by  teaching  school  in  Cumberland 
County,  III.  After  being  thus  engaged  for  two 
years  in  that  place,  young  Stephenson  returned  to 
Randolph  County,  and  was  employed  as  teacher 
in  this  vicinity  for  four  years,  the  last  two  terms 
of  which  time  he  taught  in  the  liigli  school  at 
Sparta. 

In  1881,  while  teaching  school,  Mr.  Stephenson 
purchased  the  stock  of  goods  from  S.  F.  Hyndman, 
of  Sparta,  and,  associated  with  his  brother-in-law, 
J.  L.  Beattie,  continued  to  carry  on  business  as 
Stephenson  &  Beattie  until  1890.  In  1888,  prior 
to  disposing  of  his  interests  in  that  line,  our  sub- 
ject became  book-keeper  in  the  bank  of  F.  R. 
Crothers  &  Co.,  with  whom  he  remained  until  Feb- 
ruary of  1892.  Mr.  Stephenson  assisted  in  incor- 
porating the  Sparta  Pressed  Brick  Company,  which 
was  organized  with  a  capital  of  $14,000.  It  is  a 
valuable  acquisition  to  the  town  and  gives  employ- 
ment to  many  men.  Tiie  building  and  loan  asso- 
ciation, which  was  incorporated  in  April,  1886,  in 
a  measure  owes  its  existence  to  our  subject,  as  does 
also  the  Sparta  Creamer}',  of  which  he  is  a  stock- 
holder and  Director.  The  latter  was  organized  in 
1884,  and  now  has  a  capital  of  ?!10,000.  The  com- 
pany paj'S  out  for  milk  each  year  from  S50,000  to 
$60,000,  and  the  product  of  the  factory  finds  a 
ready  sale  in  this  vicinity.     The  Gas  and  Oil  Com- 


pany of  Sparta,  of  which  Mr.  Stephenson  is  now 
Treasurer,  operates  twelve  wells,  and  has  a  capital 
stock  of  $15,000. 

October  8,  1879,  IMiss  Mary,  daughter  of  Jacob 
B.  and  Elizabeth  (McMillan)  Beattie,  became  the 
wife  of  our  subject.  She  is  a  native  of  Sparta, 
while  her  father  was  born  in  Allegheny  County, 
Pa.,  and  her  mother  was  born  in  Paisley,  Scotland. 
Mr.  Beattie  came  to  Randolph  County  in  1818, 
and  located  in  township  4,  range  5.  February  9, 
1853,  he  married  Elizabeth  McMillan,  and  the}' 
still  reside  upon  the  old  homestead.  To  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Stephenson  have  been  born  three  children, 
Edward  B.,  Bertha  E.  and  Carl  C.  In  his  political 
relations,  our  subject  always  votes  with  the  Repub- 
lican party,  and  few  residents  of  the  county  are 
more  widely  known,  and  none  more  favorablj',  than 
he.  With  his  wife  he  is  associated  with  the  Brethren. 


■^-- 


'-■^ 


EUSADE  PALMIER.  This  gentleman  may 
truly  be  called  a  self-made  man,  as  will  be 
/-  -ii  seen  by  the  perusal  of  his  history.  He  oc- 
cupies a  valuable  estate  of  five  hundred  acres  lo- 
cated in  Prairie  du  Rocher  Precinct,  Randolph 
County,  and  ranks  among  the  highly  respected 
citizens  of  the  county.  He  is  an  enterprising 
farmei',  prudently  changing  his  crops  in  order  to 
keep  up  the  fertility  of  the  soil,  and  devotes  the 
greater  amount  of  his  land  to  grain,  without 
neglecting  other  articles  of  produce,  however. 

Joseph  and  Mary  L.  (Chilcot)  Palmier,  the  par- 
ents of  our  subject,  were  natives  of  St.  Clair  Coun- 
ty, this  state,  and  were  of  French  descent.  They 
came  from  Canada  in  an  early  day  and  located  in 
St.  Clair  County,  where  tlie  father  of  our  subject 
departed  this  life.  His  good  wife  is  still  living, 
at  the  advanced  age  of  eighty-four  j'cars.  They 
were  the  parents  of  eight  children,  of  whom  three 
sons  and  two  daughters  are  yet  living. 

Eusade  Palmier,  of  this  sketch,  was  born  May  7, 
1845,  in  St.  Clair  County,  this  state,  and  there  re- 
mained with  his  parents  until  reaching  his  twelfth 
year,  when,  his  father  having  died,  he  accompanied 
his  mother  on  her  removal  into  Randolph  County, 


X 


"J-^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


277 


where  be  has  since  made  his  home.  At  the  usual 
age  he  began  attending  school,  receiving  his  edu- 
cation in  a  rude  log  cabin,  which  bore  little  resem- 
blance to  the  modern  structures  of  to-day. 

January*  3,  1866,  our  subject  and  Miss  Sophia 
Mougin  were  united  in  marriage,  and  to  them 
were  born  nine  children,  namely:  Arsen,  Alfred, 
Cora,  Louise,  Vita,  Marcel,  Eddie,  Harry,  and  Lean- 
der,  wlio  died  when  twelve  j-ears  old.  INIr.  Palmier 
lias  been  one  of  the  important  factors  in  promo- 
ting the  growth  and  prosperit}-  of  his  precinct,  and 
being  a  progressive,  liberal,  public-spirited  man, 
occupies  a  high  place  in  social  and  educational 
matters.  His  fine  farm  is  pleasantly  located  one 
and  one-half  miles  southeast  of  Prairie  du  Rocher, 
and  from  its  tillage  be  reaps  large  profits. 

In  politics,  our  subject  gives  his  allegiance  to 
the  Democratic  part3',  and  he  cast  his  first  vote 
for  .Sej-mour.  He  has  never  sought  office,  but  at 
tlie  solicitation  of  his  fellow-citizens,  he  has  served 
with  satisfaction  as  Trustee  of  Prairie  du  Rocher, 
and,  all  in  all,  is  an  influential  citizen. 


^  I^ILLIAM  SCHUCHERT,  ex-Mayor  of  the 
\r\///  city  of  Chester,  and  one  of  the  leading 
\^/^  citizens  of  the  place,  is  engaged  in  the  diy- 
goods  and  grocerj-  business,  carrjing  in  bis  estab- 
lishment a  full  line  of  all  articles  used  in  city  and 
country  households.  He  has  done  much  toward 
advancing  the  prospentj-  of  the  citj',  and  by  his 
unceasing  application  to  business  has  secured  a 
competency,  while  his  unwavering  honesty  and 
true  nobilitj'  of  character  have  won  him  the  high 
regard  of  his  fellow-men. 

Like  many  of  the  best  citizens  of  Randolph 
County,  our  subject  was  born  across  the  waters  in 
Germany,  the  date  of  his  birth  being  September 
28,  1832.  He  is  the  son  of  J.  F.  W.  and  Mary  (Selig- 
man)  Schuchert.  The  father,  who  was  a  black- 
smith by  occupation,  emigrated  to  the  United 
States  in  1848,  and  on  landing  in  New  Orleans, 
made  his  waj'  from  the  Crescent  Citj^  up  the  Mis- 
sissippi River  to  Chester,  where  be  arrived  in 
February  of  that  year. 

The  parental  family  comprised  two  children,  our 
5 


subject  and  John  F.,  the  latter  being  a  resident  of 
Cape  Girardeau,  Mo.  "William  was  a  lad  of  six- 
teen 3-eais  when  he  accompanied  his  father  to  the 
New  World,  prior  to  which  he  had  received  a  good 
education  in  the  model  schools  of  his  native  land. 
On  arriving  in  Chester,  be  assisted  his  father  in 
opening  up  a  blacksmitli  shop,  and  remained  with 
him  for  two  years,  when  be  went  to  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
and  for  six  months  was  engaged  as  a  clerk  in  a 
hotel.  Returning  to  this  City,  lie  again  associated 
himself  with  bis  father  in  the  blacksmith's  trade, 
and  continued  thus  employed  until  1852, at  which 
time,  having  caught  the  gold  fever,  be  went  to 
California  and  engaged  in  mining.  Not  being  very 
successful  in  this  venture,  be  retraced  bis  steps  to 
Ciiester  in  1858,  and  entering  the  store  of  H.  C. 
Cole,  worked  for  him  until  1867.  He  then  pur- 
chased the  stock  of  goods  from  his  employer  and 
engaged  in  business  on  his  own  account.  In  1883 
he  moved  into  bis  large  slore-room,  33x68  feet  in 
dimensions,  located  on  Water  Street. 

In  1860,  William  Schuchert  and  Miss  Luami  Cas- 
tellaw  were  united  in  marriage.  Mrs.  Schuchert 
was  born  in  Haj'wood  County,  Tenn.,  and  is  the 
daughter  of  Alfred  Castellaw.  In  his  political  re- 
lations our  subject  is  a  stanch  Democrat,  and  finds 
time  in  the  midst  of  his  business  interests  to  bear 
an  active  part  in  the  political  affairs  of  his  neigh- 
borhood, and  for  six  years  held  the  office  of  Maj'or. 
He  is  also  interested  in  educational  matters,  and 
indeed  in  all  movements  which  contribute  to  the 
general  welfare  of  the  citj-.  Socially,  he  is  a  mem- 
ber of  Chester  Lodge  No.  57,  I.  O.  O.  F.,  which 
he  is  serving  as  Treasurer.  He  represented  this 
order  in  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1867,  and  Sovereign 
Grand  Lodge  in  1885. 

^^EV.  ,J.  B.  SCHLOTMANN,  rector  of  St. 
Augustine's  Church,  at  Hecker,  was  born 
at  Hausstette,  Grand  Duchy  of  Olden- 
^^  burg,  Germany,  August  7,  1860.  He  at- 
tended the  parochial  school  of  bis  native  place, 
and  afterward  attended  the  gj^mnasium  at  Vechta. 
He  emigrated  to  America  October  1,  1880,  and 
continued  bi§  studies  at  St.  Francis  Solanus  Col- 


«7« 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


lege  at  Quincj',  111.,  graduating  at  the  end  of  the 
scholastic  year,  in  1884,  having  obtained  the  de- 
gree of  A.  M.  He  studied  tlieology  witli  tlie  Bene- 
dictine Fathers  at  St.  Meinrad,  Ind.,  and  was  or- 
dained priest  June  9,  1887.  Rev.  J.  B.  Schlot- 
mann  became  rector  of  St.  Augustine's  Church  Oc- 
tober 16,  1887,  whicli  position  he  still  holds. 


\T_^  UGH  R.  GUTHRIE,  M.  D.,  is  not  only  one 
rjj^  of  the  oldest  ph3'sicians  in  Randolph  Coun- 
i^^  ty,  but  is  one  whose  extensive  practice  and 
(^)  high  standing  in  professional  circles  prove 
conclusively  his  mental  and  phj'sical  endowment, 
his  careful  culture,  and  his  painst.aking  efforts  to 
continually  add  to  his  theoretical  linowledge  and 
practical  sivill. 

Our  subject  is  a  son  of  Thomas  C.  Guthrie,  who 
was  born  in  1797,  in  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  and 
emigrated  to  tlie  United  States  in  1817.  His  first 
location  in  the  New  World  was  made  in  Crawford 
County,  Pa.,  where  he  taught  school  for  one  year, 
having  received  an  academic  education  before 
leaving  his  native  land.  '  Thence  Thomas  Guthrie 
went  to  the  Smoky  City,  and  entering  the  West- 
ern University  of  Pittsburgh,  was  graduated  from 
that  institution  in  1822.  While  there  he  was  a 
student  under  General  Black's  father,  who  was 
professor  of  Latin,  Greek  and  theologJ^  The 
father  of  our  subject  was  licensed  to  preacli  by  the 
Pittsburgh  Presbytery  in  182.5,  and  as  a  minister 
of  the  Gospel  he  first  located  at  Pine  Creek,  Alle- 
gheny County,  Pa.,where  he  had  a  charge  for  thirtj-- 
five  years.  Thence  lie  went  to  Mt.  Pleasant,  nine 
miles  from  that  place,  where  he  established  a  mis- 
sion and  continued  to  preach  for  twelve  years. 
At  the  expiration  of  that  time,  on  account  of  his 
failing  health,  he  gave  up  the  active  duties  of  a 
pastor,  and  in  April,  1874,  came  to  Sparta  and 
made  his  home  with  his  son,  the  subject  of  this 
sketch,  until  bis  decease,  wliich  occurred  in  1876. 
The  paternal  grandparents  of  our  subject  were 
Hugh  and  Sarah  (Cathcart)  Guthrie,  natives  of 
Countj'  Actrirn,  Ireland,  where  the  former  passed 
away;  the  latter  died  in  Pennsylvania.     'Phe  pa- 


ternal great-grandparents  were  natives  of  Scot- 
land, who,  after  removing  to  Ireland,  located  in 
County  Antrim.  Our  subject's  mother,  whose 
maiden  name  was  Eliza  Caskey,  was  a  native  of 
Pennsylvania  and  the  daughter  of  Joseph  and 
Martha  (Thompson)  Caskej',  wlio  were  born  in  Ire- 
land, and  after  emigrating  to  the  llnited  States 
made  their  home  in  Pennsylvania.  The  parents 
of  our  subject  were  married  by  Dr.  Black,  in  Pitts- 
burgh, December  30,  1828,  and  reared  a  family  of 
four  children,  namelj':  Joseph  C,  Hugh  R.,  Samuel 
and  Lizzie  M.  They  are  all  deceased  with  the  ex- 
ception of  Dr.  Guthrie.  Lizzie  M.  was  a  mission- 
ary to  India  in  1873,  and  while  there  was  sent  to 
Japan,  where  she  remained  about  five  years.  In 
October,  1878,  she  returned  to  the  United  States, 
and  departed  this  life  at  San  Francisco  in  April, 
1880. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  having  died,  Thomas 
Guthrie  was  married  January  26,  1837,  to  Mrs. 
Nancy  McLean ,  the  daughter  of  Barnard  Gilleland, 
a  native  of  western  Pennsylvania.  She  became 
the  mother  of  four  children,  and  died  June  1, 
1847.  Her  children  were  named  Margaret,  James, 
Barnet  and  John  K.  In  1848  the  father  of  our 
subject  married  Mary  McFann,  who  died  in  1889, 
at  the  advanced  age  of  ninety-one  j-ears. 

Dr.  Hugh  Guthrie  was  born  February  23,  1831, 
in  Allegheny  Count}',  Pa.,  and  there  resided  with 
his  parents  until  the  spring  of  1855,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  a  few  months,  in  the  meantime  having 
taken  a  literary  course  in  Duquesne  College. 
Upon  leaving  home  he  came  west,  and  tauglit 
school  for  ten  months  in  Perry  Countj',  111.,  and 
then  returning  to  Allegheny  County,  began  the 
study  of  medicine.  He  attended  lectures  in  the 
Universitj'  of  Pennsylvania,  and  received  his  di- 
ploma as  Doctor  of  Medicine  in  1855.  When 
ready  to  locate  for  ttie  practice  of  his  profession, 
he  went  to  Madison',  Wis.,  and  after  a  residence 
there  of  two  years  came  to  Sparta,  111.,  and  con- 
tinued here  until  1864.  Januaiy  1  of  that  year, 
he  went  to  St.  Louis,  and  took  a  post-graduate 
course  in  the  St.  Louis  Medical  College.  Tiien  re- 
turning to  Sparta,  he  made  his  home  in  this  city 
for  one  summer,  when  he  went  to  Philadelphia, 
and  there  also  took  a  post-graduate  course  in  the 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


279 


University  of  Pennsylvania,  after  which  he  at- 
tended lectures  on  surgery  in  the  Jefferson  Medi- 
cal College.  Returning  to  St.  Louis  in  1866,  he 
practiced  for  a  short  time,  and  the  following  year 
came  again  to  Sparta,  where  he  has  since  made  his 
home,  and  is  now  one  of  the  oldest  and  most 
prominent  citizens  in  the  county. 

March  7,  1861,  Dr.  Hugh  Outhrie  and  Miss 
Helen  B.,  daughter  of  Dr.  Joseph  and  Mary  Ann 
(Miller)  Farnan,  were  united  in  marriage.  Dr. 
and  Mrs.  Farnan  were  natives  respectively  of  Ire- 
land and  New  York,  and  after  coming  to  Illinois 
they  located  in  Sparta.  To  our  subject  and  his 
wife  have  been  born  three  children:  Mary  E.,  the 
wife  of  W.  G.  Pardee,  an  attorney  at  Santa  Fe; 
Ada,  who  is  a  graduate  of  tiie  Jacksonville  Musi- 
cal College;  and  Margaretta. 

In  liis  political  relations  the  Doctor  is  a  strong 
Republican,  and  socially'  is  a  member  of  the  South- 
ern Illinois  Medical  Association,  the  Illinois  State 
Medical  Society,  the  American  Medical  Associa- 
tion and  the  Mississippi  Yallej'  Association.  He 
was  reared  in  the  faith  of  the  Presbj'terian  Church, 
and  for  a  number  of  years  has  held  the  position  of 
Trustee.  He  is  now  President  of  the  School  Board, 
and  a  member  of  the  local  Board  of  Health. 


^PE 


E^- 


W[OHN  J.  HELBER  was  a  native  of  Stras- 
I  burg,  Germany,  and  at  the  age  of  ten  years 
was  brought  by  his  father  to  America,  the 
family  locating  in  Darke  Count}',  Ohio. 
There  the  father  died,  leaving  two  sons,  John  J. 
and  his  j'ounger  brother.  Christian.  They  were 
reared  to  manhood  in  the  Buckeye  State,  and  hav- 
ingattained  to  mature  3'ears,  they  madetlieir  home 
in  the  city  of  Cincinnati  until  after  their  mar- 
riage. 

Mr.  Helber  was  joined  in  wedlock  to  Miss  Bar- 
bara Stoehr,  and  with  his  wife  removed  to  Farm- 
ington,  Mo.,  in  the  _year  1852.  A  year  later  his 
brother  and  his  wife  also  became  residents  of  that 
place.  The  brothers  were  both  shoemakers,  hav- 
ing learned  the  business  in  their  youth  in  Cin- 
cinnati, and  in  Farmington  they  carried  on  a 
large  shoe   factory,  manufacturing  shoes  for  the 


slaves  of  the  planters  in  that  locality.  Mr.  Hel- 
ber was  appointed  Postmaster  of  Farmington  by 
President  Lincoln,  and  held  the  office  for  two 
3'ears,  but  was  then  forced  to  leave,  as  on  account 
of  his  political  views  the  lives  of  himself  and  fam- 
ily were  in  danger.  He  had  to  sacrifice  his  prop- 
erty in  this  removal  and  thereby  lost  heavily. 

In  1861,  his  brother  Christian  enlisted  in  the 
Union  armj',  and  became  second  Lieutenant  o 
the  company  to  which  he  belonged.  He  served 
until  about  the  close  of  the  war,  when  he  was 
drowned  in  Duck  River,  Tenn.  He  left  at  his 
death  five  children:  Jacob,  Laura,  Emma,  Wesley 
and  Edward,  residents  of  Farmington,  Mo. 

On  leaving  Farmington, our  subject  determined 
to  locate  where  slavery  was  not  permitted,  for  he 
was  a  stanch  advocate  of  Abolition,  and  in  conse- 
quence took  up  his  residence  in  Iroquois  County, 
111.,  where  for  a  year  he  engaged  in  merchan  Using. 
At  the  end  of  that  time,  in  August,  1865,  on  ac- 
count of  the  ill-health  of  liis  wife,  he  came  to  Red 
Bud.  Resuming  work  at  the  trade  of  shoemak- 
ing,  he  followed  it  until  1869,  when  he  opened  a 
general  merchandise  store  and  continued  in  that 
line  of  business  until  his  death,  which  occurred  in 
1883,  at  the  age  of  fifty-eight  years.  He  was  a 
stanch  Republican  in  politics  and  alwa^-s  took  an 
active  part  in  the  campaigns.  Mr.  Helber,  who 
was  greatly  interested  in  the  study  of  ethnology, 
collected  many  curious  and  interesting  Indian 
relics  and  made  a  special  study  of  the  customs  and 
modes  of  life  of  the  different  tribes  and  the  imple- 
ments they  used  in  warfare  and  work.  An  hon- 
orable, upright  man,  possessed  of  man}'  excellen- 
cies of  character,  Mr.  Helber  had  the  high  regard 
of  a  wide  circle  of  friends,  and  his  death  was  deeply 
mourned. 

Mrs.  Helber  still  survives  her  husband  and  is 
living  in  Red  Bud.  In  the  family  were  seven 
children:  Emil}',  now  the  wife  of  W.  J.  Perkins, 
of  Red  Bud;  Maggie;  William,  who  is  engaged  in 
the  livery  business;  John  C;  Alfred,  who  carries 
on  a  jewelry  store  in  St.  James,  Minn.;  and 
Arthur,  a  resident  of  Red  Bud. 

Charles  T.  Helber,  the  eldest  of  the  familj',  be- 
came interested  with  his  father  in  merchandising 
in   1875,  and  they  carried  on  business  under  the 


280 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


firm  name  of  J.  J.  Helber  &  Son  until  1879,  when 
W.  J.  Perkins  was  admitted  to  partnership,  and 
the  firm  name  was  changed  to  Helber  &  Co.,  un- 
der which  style  business  is  still  conducted. 

The  senior  member  of  the  firm,  as  it  now  stands, 
was  married  in  1876,  the  lad^-  of  his  choice  being 
Miss  Alice  Spence.  To  them  have  been  born  five 
sons,  Orloff,  C.  Julian,  C.  Roland,  Spence  L.  and 
S.  Verdi. 

In  his  political  views,  Charles  Helber  is  a  Repub- 
lican. For  a  year  and  a-half  he  served  as  mail 
agent  on  the  Mobile  ife  Ohio  Railroad,  and  carried 
the  first  mail  on  this  road  from  Murpli3'sboro  to 
Cairo.  He  possesses  the  business  ability  for  which 
his  father  was  noted,  and  the  firm  of  Helber  &  Co. 
isenjo^'ing  a  large  and  lucrative  trade. 


'^-- 


=+ 


eONRAD  YOGES,  a  worth}'  representative 
of  the  agricultural  interests  of  Randolph 
Count}',  who  now  follows  farming  in  town- 
ship 4,  range  8,  claims  German}'  as  the  land  of  his 
birth.  He  was  born  near  Hanover  in  1836,  and  is  a 
son  of  Conrad  and  Sophia  (Kothe)  Voges,  who  were 
also  natives  of  the  same  country.  In  1852,  they 
came  with  their  family  to  America,  and  their  first 
location  was  made  in  Randolph  County.  They 
owned  a  part  of  the  land  on  which  the  village  of 
Red  Bud  now  stands.  At  that  time  the  town  con- 
tained only  five  houses.  The  parents  afterward 
removed  to  Monroe  County,  where  their  remain- 
ing days  were  passed.  Their  family  numbered 
the  following  children:  Conrad,  of  this  sketch; 
Henry,  who  is  living  in  Monroe  County;  Sophia, 
wife  of  William  Schuck;  Wilhelmina,  wife  of  John 
Boren,  of  Red  Bud;  Hannah,  wife  of  August  Reib- 
bick,  who  is  living  in  Belleville;  August  and  Ham- 
mond, both  of  whom  are  residents  of  Monroe 
County. 

Our  subject  spent  the  first  sixteen  years  of  his 
life  in  Germany,  and  then  accompanied  his  parents 
on  their  emigration  to  America.  In  this  county 
he  was  reared  to  manhood,  and  became  familiar 
with  farming  in  all  its  details  as  carried  on  in  a 
frontier  settlement.     Having  arrived  at  years  of 


maturity,  he  was  married  in  Randolph  County  to 
Miss  Wilhelmina  Kroemer.  Only  three  of  their 
children  are  now  living:  Dora,  wife  of  William 
Hettehiemer,  of  this  county;  Sophia,  wife  of  Fred 
Mehring,  and  Henry,  who  is  at  home  and  aids  in 
the  operation  of  the  farm. 

Mr.  Yoges  is  the  owner  of  more  than  four  hun- 
dred acres  of  rich  land,  all  of  which  he  has  accu- 
mulated through  his  own  efforts.  His  farm  is  now 
under  a  high  state  of  cultivation,  and  the  well 
tilled  fields  and  many  improvements  seen,  indicate 
the  careful  supervision  of  tbe  owner.  Mr.  Yoges 
is  also  Secretary  of  the  Creamery  Association,  and 
is  Secretary  of  the  Horse  Prairie  Township  Mutual 
Insurance  Company.  He  belongs  to  the  Lutheran 
Church,  and  in  politics  is  a  stalwart  Democrat,  who 
does  all  in  his  power  to  insure  the  success  of  his 
party.  His  fellow-townsmen  have  frequently 
called  upon  him  to  fill  positions  of  public  trust. 
He  held  the  office  of  County  Commissioner  for 
one  term,  and  for  over  twenty  years  has  been 
School  Director.  For  the  past  four  years  he  has 
served  as  Justice  of  the  Peace,  and  is  now  filling 
that  oflSce.  In  the  discharge  of  his  public  duties, 
his  faithfulness  and  promptness  have  won  him  high 
commendation  and  led  to  his  re-election.  He  is 
true  to  every  public  and  private  trust,  and  a  well 
spent  life  has  won  him  the  confidence  and  good 
will  of  all  with  whom  business  or  social  relations 
have  brought  him  in  contact. 


^IJ^ICHGLAS  HAMMEL.  It  is  a  well  estab- 
[  jjj  lished  fact  that  a  man  of  natural  ability,  if 
'lv2^  possessed  of  integrity  and  energy,  can  ac- 
complish almost  any  given  purpose  in  life.  Every 
day  furnishes  examples  of  men  who  commenced  in 
life  empty  handed  and  in  a  brief  period  of  time 
accumulated  considerable  fortune.  Such  is  the 
case  with  our  subject,  who  was  born  in  Germany 
May  11,  1828,  and  has  been  a  citizen  of  this  coun- 
try since  1840. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  died  when  he  was  two 
years  old.  He  remained  in  his  native  land,  where 
he  was  given  a  fair  education,  until  1840,  when, 
in  company  with  his  father,  Jacob  Hammel,  he  em- 


POETRAIT  A^'D  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


281 


barked  on  a  sailing-vessel  for  the  United  States. 
Their  destination  was  St.  Clair  Count}-,  this  jtate, 
and  there  the}-  made  their  home  until  the  decease 
of  the  father  in  1855.  In  that  3-ear  our  subject 
came  to  Randolph  Count}-,  and  after  various  re- 
movals, located  upon  his  present  property  in  1866. 

After  locating  here,  Mr.  Hammel  did  hard  pio- 
neer work  in  improving  his  property  for  many 
years.  He  devotes  his  entire  time  to  agriculture, 
and  to  the  quarter-secticn  which  he  first  owned  he 
has  added  until  his  possessions  number  three  hun- 
dred and  ten  acres.  It  is  well  improved  with  all 
the  modern  machinery  found  on  the  estate  of  an 
intelligent  farmer,  and  is  pleasantly  located  one 
mile  northeast  of  Preston  and  eight  miles  west  of 
Sparta.  In  connection  with  his  farming  operations 
Mr.  Hammel  for  eighteen  years  operated  a  thresh- 
ing machine. 

In  1851  our  subject  and  Miss  Dorothy  Armstuch, 
who  was  born  in  Pennsylvania,  were  united  in  mar- 
riage, and  to  them  have  been  born  ten  children,  of 
whom  the  five  living  are,  Catherine,  Mrs.  William 
Rinehart;  George;  Tracy,  the  wife  of  Daniel  Liber; 
Frank,  and  Sophia,  Mrs.  Albert  Rinehart.  In  his 
political  relations  Mr.  Hammel  has  always  voted 
with  the  Republican  party.  Religiously  he  is  a. 
member  of  the  Lutheran  Church,  with  which  de- 
nomination his  wife  is  also  connected. 


ASPER  HORSCHMAXX,  who  is  engaged  in 
farming  on  section  29,  township  3,  range  8 
west,  Monroe  County,  was  born  in  Deburg, 
Germany,  November  4,  1839,  and  is  a  son  of  .John 
and  Elizabeth  Horschmann,  who  in  1840  came 
with  their  family  to  this  country,  and  located  in 
Round  Prairie  Precinct,  of  Monroe  County,  where 
the  father  entered  one  hundred  and  twenty  acres 
of  land  from  the  Government.  He  also  bought 
one  hundred  and  sixty  acres,  and  liad  a  fine  farm 
of  two  hundred  and  eighty  acres,  which  he  opened 
up  from  a  wild  and  uncultivated  tract.  He  cleared 
tl\e  land  and  transformed  the  raw  prairie  into  rich 
and  fertile  fields.  He  w.as  one  of  the  honored 
German  settlers  of  this  community  and  a  leading 
farmer.     In  the   family    were  five  sons  and  two 


daughters,  of  whom  the  following  are  yet  living: 
Peter,  a  resident  of  New  Design  Precinct;  Casper; 
Jacob,  of  Prairie  du  Long;  Matt,  of  Randolph 
County;  Dora,  who  is  living  near  Belleville,  111.; 
and  Lizzie,  wife  of  William  Meuerich.  The  father 
of  this  family  died  February  8,  1865. 

Mr.  Horschmann  of  this  sketch  was  reared  on 
the  old  homestead  farm,  which  he  helped  to  clear 
and  develop,  and  was  educated  in  the  public 
schools,  but  bis  privileges  in  that  direction  were 
quite  limited.  He  worked  as  a  farm  hand  for  a 
time,  and  then  learned  the  butcher's  trade  at  Cen- 
treville,  where  he  was  also  employed  in  a  brewery. 
During  two  spring  seasons  he  was  engaged  in 
steamboating.  Thus  to  various  pursuits  he  de- 
voted his  energies  in  order  to  get  a  start  in  life. 

On  the  4th  of  April,  1864,  Mr.  Horschmann  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miis  Caroline  Burker, 
daughter  of  Louis  Burker,  who  was  a  native  of 
Germany,  and  who  came  to  the  United  States  in 
1847.  He  first  settled  in  Randolph  County,  but  af- 
terward removed  to  Duquom,  where  he  made  his 
home  for  some  time.  Later  he  became  a  resident 
of  Springfield,  111.  Our  subject  and  his  wife  be- 
gan their  domestic  life  upon  the  farm  which  has 
since  been  their  place  of  residence,  and  their  union 
has  been  blessed  with  the  following  daughters: 
Dora  Josephine,  wife  of  Melcha  Sauer,  who  is  liv- 
ing in  Monroe  County, near  Red  Bud;  Mary  Eliza- 
beth, wife  of  Michael  Bell,  who  makes  his  home  in 
Prairie  du  Round  Township;  and  Gertrude,  wife 
of  Anton  Scherle,  of  the  same  township. 

During  the  late  war,  Mr.  Horsclimann  was 
drafted  for  service,  but  on  account  of  ill  health 
was  exempted  from  duty.  He  is  recognized  as  one 
of  the  leading  agriculturists  in  this  community, 
where  he  owns  and  operates  one  hundred  acres  of 
fine  land.  He  carries  on  farming  and  stock-rais- 
ing, and  is  quite  successful  in  his  undertakings. 
The  improvements  upon  his  place  stand  as  monu- 
ments to  his  thrift  and  enterprise.  His  residence 
is  a  comfortable  and  commodious  dwelling,  which 
is  situated  in  the  midst  of  well  tilled  fields,  which 
yield  to  the  owner  a  good  income.  He  also  owns 
a  house  and  three  lots  in  Red  Bud.  He  and  his 
family  are  all  members  of  the  Catholic  Church, 
and  in  politics,  he  is  a  stalwart  Republican.     For 


282 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


twelve  years  he  served  as  Constable,  proving  a 
capable  officer.  Mr.  Horscliniaun  is  a  self-made 
man,  and,  aided  by  his  wife,  he  has  achieved  success 
in  life.  He  is  a  highly  respected  citizen,  and  with 
pleasure  we  present  to  our  readers  this  sketch  of 
his  career. 

^^=:0#P •   . 


■{flOSEPH  LINDSAY,  a  native  of  Randolph 
most  intelligent  and 
farming  commu- 
I  and  carrying  on  the 
extensive  agricultural  interest  of  township  4,  range 
6.  He  owns  one  hundred  and  cight\'-three  acres 
of  finely  developed  land  located  on  section  24, 
where  he  and  his  family  are  enjoying  the  comforts 
of  life. 

Thomas  and  Jane  (Strahan)  Lindsay,  the  parents 
of  our  subject,  were  natives  respectively  of  Ken- 
tucky and  Pennsylvania,  the  father  having  been 
born  February  7,  1792,  and  the  mother  July  24, 
1801.  Mrs.  Jane  Lindsay  was  the  daughter  of 
James  and  Ann  (Blair)  Strahan,  early  settlers  in 
this  county.  The  father  of  our  subject  was  a  pa- 
triot in  the  War  of  1812,  and  during  that  period 
took  part  in  the  battle  of  New  Orleans.  On  com- 
ing to  Illinois,  he  located  on  the  outskirts  of  the 
Irish  settlement  in  Randolph  County.  Soon  after- 
ward he  was  married,  and  witli  liis  wife  made  his 
home  on  the  farm  upon  which  our  subject  is  resid- 
ing, and  which  was  then  a  wild  and  uncultivated 
tract.  For  many  years  the  only  living  creatures 
near  his  home  were  wild  animals  and  Indians; 
here  the  parents  continued  to  reside,  giving  their 
entire  attention  to  the  improvement  and  thor- 
ough cultivation  of  their  farm.  The  father  died 
in  April,  1854,  while  his  good  wife,  who  survived 
him  many  years,  departed  this  life  August  24, 1880. 

The  parental  family  included  five  sons  and  four 
daughters,  of  whom  six  are  living.  Joseph,  of  this 
sketch,  was  born  December  16,  1840,  on  the  old 
homestead,  and  when  old  enough  conned  his  les- 
sons in  a  school  which  was  carried  on  by  means 
of  subscriptions.  He  remained  at  home  until  at- 
taining mature  years  and  tlius  received  a  thor- 
ough training  in   farm  duties,  so  that  when  the 


estate  came  into  his  possession  he  was  well  fitted 

to  supcessfully  manage  it. 

The  lady  who  became  the  wife  of  our  subject 
in  1874  was  Miss  Margaret,  daughter  of  Thomas 
and  Ann  (Edgar)  Dock,  natives  of  Scotland.  On 
emigrating  to  America  in  1853,  the  parents  came  to 
Illinois,  making  their  first  home  near  Marissa,  St. 
Clair  County,  and  later  made  permanent  settlement 
in  township  4,  range  5.  Mrs.  Lindsay  was  born  in 
July,  1842,  in  Scotland,  and  has  become  the  mother 
of  three  children,  Fred,  Frank  and  Alfred. 

Mr.  Lindsay  has  always  resided  upon  the  old 
homestead  and  devotes  his  time  to  mixed  farm- 
ing. His  tract  is  in  a  perfect  state  of  cultivation, 
and  by  proper  rotation  of  crops  is  made  to  yield 
a  good  increase.  He  has  given  his  children  good 
educations,  and  his  eldest  son  is  attending  the 
Sparta  High  School.  He  is  a  close  observer  and 
is  thoroughly  in  sj-mpathy  with  movements  of  a 
political  and  religious  nature.  In  regard  to  the 
latter  point  he  is  a  member  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church  at  Sparta.  In  politics  he  is  identified  with 
the  Republican  part}-  and  is  well  known  through- 
out the  community  as  an  honest,  upright  and 
warm-hearted  man. 


\f  ACOB  MELLY,  who  resides  in  Red  Bud 
and  is  one  of  its  representative  business  men, 
deserves  honorable  mention  in  this  volume, 
and  with  pleasure  we  present  the  record  of 
his  life  to  our  readers.  He  is  now  engaged  in  the 
manufacture  of  brick  and  is  doing  a  good  business. 
He  claims  Illinois  as  the  state  of  his  nativity,  his 
birth  having  occurred  in  Belleville  in  1858.  His 
parents,  Michael  and  Sophia  (Rudolph)  Melly, 
were  both  natives  of  Alsace-Lorraine,  France,  and 
in  childhood  came  to  America.  Their  marriage 
was  celebrated  in  Centreville,  111.  They  afterward 
removed  to  Belleville,  and  about  1859  went  to 
Evansville,  111.,  whence  they  came  to  Red  Bud  a 
year  later. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Melly  was  born  a  family  of 
six  children,  all  of  whom  are  yet  living,  namely: 
Mary,  Sophia,  Jacob,   Joseph,  Emil   and    Willie. 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


283 


The  father  here  established  a  brick  manufactory, 
and  from  his  yards  came  nearly  all  llie  brick  which 
has  been  used  in  the  building  of  this  place.  Evi- 
dences of  his  handiwork  are  therefore  seen  on 
everj'  side  and  indicate  his  thrift  and  enterprise. 
He  continued  business  along  that  line  until  his 
death,  which  occurred  in  1882.  In  politics  he  was 
a  stanch  Democrat,  was  an  active  Christian  gen- 
tleman and  a  man  of  sterling  worth,  who  had  the 
high  regard  of  all  with  whom  business  or  social 
relations  have  brought  him  in  contact. 

Under  the  parental  roof  Jacob  Melly  was  reared 
to  manhood,  spending  his  boyhood  days  amidst 
play  and  work  in  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads. 
The  public  schools  of  the  neighborhood  afforded 
him  his  educational  privileges.  From  early  life 
he  was  more  or  less  in  his  father's  brick-yard  and 
soon  became  familiar  with  the  business  in  all  its 
departments,  so  that  upon  his  father's  death,  in 
1882,  he  immediatel3-  took  charge  of  the  business, 
which  he  has  carried  on  continuously  since,  enlarg- 
ing his  facilities  to  meet  the  demand  of  his  in- 
creasing trade.  He  now  does  an  extensive  busi- 
ness, orders  coming  from  long  distances,  for  the 
product  of  his  yards  is  of  the  best  quality  and 
therefore  finds  a  ready  sale  on  the  market. 

Mr.  Melly,  his  sister  and  mother,  live  together 
in  the  old  home,  which  has  now  been  the  abode  of 
the  famil}'  for  a  number  of  years.  They  are  all 
members  of  the  Catholic  Church  and  are  people  of 
prominence  in  the  communitj',  where  they  liave 
many  friends. 

~ -S-^-i'^^^'S  ■  ;• 

ylLLIAM  MARTIN  SCHUWERK,  attorney- 
at'law  at  Evansville,  is  one  of  the  ablest 
and  most  popular  men  in  his  profession. 
He  was  born  near  Cleveland,  Ohio,  April  12,  1856, 
and  is  a  son  of  Peter  Paul  and  Elizabeth  (Mosser) 
Schuwerk.  The  father  of  our  subject  was  a  native 
of  Wurtemberg,  German j-,  where  his  birtii  occurred 
in  1814.  In  1852,  when  a  young  man,  prior  to 
his  marriage,  he  emigrated  to  the  United  States, 
and  two  3-ears  later  was  married  in  Cuyahoga 
Count}-,  Ohio. 

In  the  fall  of  1859,  the  parents  of  our  subject 
made  their  advent  into  Randolph  County  and  lo- 


cated on  a  farm  near  Evansville,  where  the  father 
was  living  at  the  time  of  his  decease  ten  j'^ears 
later.  After  his  death,  the  mother  of  our  subject 
removed  to  the  citj',  where  her  decease  occurred 
in  1888.  She  reared  a  family  of  six  children,  of 
whom  Rosa,  Fred  and  Paul  are  deceased.  Those 
living  besides  our  subject  are  Mary  and  Anna. 

■William  Schuwerk,  of  this  sketch,  accompanied 
bis  parents  on  their  removal  to  Illinois  in  1859, 
and  received  his  primary  education  in  the  scliools 
of  Randolph  County.  Later  he  entered  McKen- 
dree  College,  and  was  graduated  from  that  insti- 
tution and  its  law  department  in  1882.  The  fol- 
lowing year  he  began  to  practice  his  profession, 
and  to-day  has  a  large  clientage  and  is  one  of  the 
leading  lawj'ers  in  thejjouuty. 

June  7,  188.3,  our  subject  and  Miss  Mary  M. 
Hoffman  were  united  in  marri.age.  Mrs.  Schuwerk 
was  born  in  Macon  Countv,  111.,  in  1862,  and  was 
the  daughter  of  Miciiael  and  Josephine  Hoffman, 
wlio  at  present  make  their  home  near  this  city.  To 
our  subject  and  his  wife  have  been  born  two  chil- 
dren. Myrtle  M.  and  William  H. 

The  popularity  of  Mr.  Schuwerk  is  indicated  by 
the  fact  that  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the 
Thirty-sixth  General  Assembljof  the  Illinois  Leg- 
islature in  1888,  serving  a  term  of  two  years.  His 
record  is  that  of  a  man  interested  in  public  im- 
provement, liberal  in  his  views  regarding  appro- 
priation, but  averse  to  extravagance  or  fraud.  In 
his  political  views  he  always  afiiliates  with  the 
Democratic  party,  and  cast  his  first  vot«  for  Sam- 
uel J.  Tilden. 

Socially  Mr.  Schuwerk  is  a  Mason,  and  joined 
Kaskaskia  Lodge  No.  86  in  1885.  He  is  also  an 
Odd  Fellow,  being  a  member  of  Egypt  Star  Lodge 
No.  285,  of  Red  Bud,  111.  He  is  a  ciiarter  member 
of  Hercules  Lodge  No.  228,  K.  of  P.,  at  Chester, 
111.,  and  is  connected  with  Lodge  No.  2658,  K.  of  H. 
at  Red  Bud,  and  the  Odd  Fellows'  encampment  at 
Chester.  He  has  been  very  influential  in  these 
different  orders  and  represented  the  Masons  in  the 
Grand  Lodge  at  Chicago  during  1887-88-90-92. 

The  Hon.  Mr.  Schuwerk  was  admitted  to  prac- 
tice in  the  United  States  Courts  in  June,  1890.  He 
sees  at  a  glance  the  difficult  point  in  question  and 
readily  sees  the  means  to  be  adopted  to  carry  it. 


284 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Stanch  in  principles,  clear  in  perception  and  de- 
cided in  character,  he  deserves  the  good  things 
which  have  come  to  him  and  the  high  character 
for  probit\-  which  he  has  gained  through  his  busi- 
ness and  social  acquaintance. 


jlL^ENRY  VOSS,  one  of  the  worthy  German 
W)f)  citizens  of  Monroe  County,  now  follows 
l^^  farming  on  section  36,  township  3,  range  8 
(^)  west,  where  he  owns  and  operates  one  hun- 
dred and  forty-seven  acres  of  good  land.  With 
the  exception  of  twenty  acres,  the  entire  amount 
is  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation  and  well  im- 
proved. He  raises  grain  principally,  and  the 
waving  fields  tell  of  bountiful  harvests  and  indi- 
cate to  the  passer-by  the  thrift  and  enterprise  of 
the  owner. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  Fred  Voss,  was  born 
in  the  province  of  Hanover,  Germany,  on  the  18th 
of  May,  1821,  and  there  married  Miss  Dora  Tott. 
He  was  a  carpenter  by  trade,  and  followed  that 
business  in  his  native  laud.  In  1856  he  emigrated 
with  his  family  to  the  New  World,  and  took  up 
his  residence  in  Randolph  County,'IIl.,  where  he 
followed  carpentering  until  1868.  He  also  owned 
and  operated  one  hundred  acres  of  land  in  that 
community.  In  the  j-ear  just  mentioned  he  came 
to  Monroe  County,  and  located  upon  the  farm 
which  is  now  the  home  of  our  subject,  there  se- 
curing two  hundred  acres  of  land.  It  was  an  un- 
improved tract,  but  ere  his  death  he  had  trans- 
formed it  into  one  of  the  fine  farms  of  the 
neighborhood.  He  passed  away  April  20,  1893,  in 
the  faith  of  the  Lutlieran  Church,  of  which  he  was 
a  member.  In  his  political  views  he  was  a  Demo- 
crat. 

The  Voss  family  numbered  eight  children,  five 
of  whom  are  still  living,  as  follows:  Henr^-,  whose 
name  heads  this  record;  Fred,  a  resident  farmer  of 
township  3;  Fredericka,  wife  of  AVilliam  Nagel,of 
Randolph  County;  Anna,  wife  of  Herman  Nagel, 
also  of  l^ndolph  County;  and  Sophia,  wife  of  An- 
drew Wickelheim,  of  Montgomery  Count}',  Mo. 

Henry  Voss  was  born  in  Germany  April  26, 
1848,  and  was  a  youth   of   onl}-   eight   summers 


when  he  crossed  the  ocean  to  this  country.  His 
education  was  acquired  in  the  public  schools  of 
Randolph  County,  and  he  was  early  inured  to  the 
labors  of  the  farm.  On  the  21st  of  October,  1873, 
he  was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Sophia  Nagel, 
daughter  of  Ernest  Nagel,  one  of  the  early  settlers 
of  Randolph  County,  and  a  native  of  Germany. 
Six  children  grace  their  union:  Henry,  Caroline, 
Herman,  Charles,  Ernst  and  August. 

After  his  marriage,  Mr.  Voss  located  upon  the 
farm  which  has  since  been  his  home,  and  to  the  cul- 
tivation of  which  he  has  since  devoted  his  energies. 
He  is  recognized  as  one  of  the  leading  agricult- 
urists of  the  community.  In  religious  belief  he  is 
a  Lutheran, and  in  political  faith  he  i.s  a  Democrat. 
He  has  served  as  School  Director  of  his  township, 
and  takes  an  active  interest  in  evcrj-thing  per- 
taining to  the  welfare  and  advancement  of  the 
com  muni  t3\ 


AMUEL  W.  McKELVEY.  Among  those 
to  whom  Randolph  County  owes  a  debt  of 
gratitude  for  their  share  in  the  develop- 
ment of  her  great  agricultural  resources 
and  the  various  affairs  through  which  the  interests 
of  society  are  advanced,  the  name  of  Samuel  Mc- 
Kelvey  should  not  be  passed  unnoted.  He  was 
born  in  township  4,  range  6,  of  this  county,  Jan- 
uary 26,  1829,  and  is  still  residing  on  the  home 
farm  located  on  section  36,  where  he  is  the  propri- 
etor of  four  hundred  broad  acres.  The  early  recol- 
lections of  our  subject  are  of  a  country  much  more 
primitive  in  appearance  than  that  upon  which  his 
eyes  now  rest.  The  pioneer  school  which  he  at- 
tended during  his  bo3'hood  was  held  in  a  log 
house  with  primitive  furnishings. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  Charles  McKelvey, 
was  born  in  the  Chester  District,  S.  C,  in  Novem- 
ber, 1789.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Hugh  Mc- 
Kelvej",  a  native  of  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  who 
came  to  America  and  located  in  South  Carolina 
about  1787.  The  grandfather  of  our  subject  came 
to  Illinois  the  year  it  was  admitted  into  the  Union 
as  a  state,  and  located  upon  the  farm  now  occupied 
by  the  widow  of  William  McElheiney,  situated  on 


'.W 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


28? 


the  Sparta  road  from  Coulterville,  In  this  county. 
He  was  one  of  the  very  early  settlers  in  tliis  local- 
ity and  accumulated  a  large  amount  of  land.  He 
had  three  sons  and  three  daughters,  all  of  whom 
are  now  deceased,  and  he  departed  this  life  about 
1836. 

Mrs.  Mary  (Hunter)  McKelvey,  the  mother  of 
our  subject,  was  also  a  native  of  South  Carolina, 
where  her  birth  occurred  July  22,  1797.  She  was 
the  daughter  of  John  Hunter,  who  lived  and  died 
in  that  state.  The  parents  of  our  subject  were 
married  March  26,  1817,  in  South  Carolina,  and 
in  the  fall  of  1823  came  overland  to  Illinois, 
locating  on  the  farm  which  our  subject  is  now  oc- 
cupying. The  tract  included  a  quarter-section  of 
oak  openings,  and  at  the  time  of  his  decease,  April 
26,  1856,  Charles  McKelvey  had  placed  one  hun- 
dred acres  under  good  improvement.  His  wife 
died  January  22,  1881,  after  having  become  the 
mother  of  ten  children,  only  five  of  whom  are  liv- 
ing, Alexander  R.,  James  R.,  our  subject,  Sarah 
(Mrs.  John  C.  Ritchie)  and  Amelia  (Mrs.  William 
Walker).  The  parents  were  active  members  of  the 
Reformed  Presbyterian  Church  and  had  many  sin- 
cere friends  throughout  tiieir  community. 

Samuel  W.  McKelvey  has  spent  his  entire  life 
on  the  home  farm.  He  supplemented  the  knowledge 
gained  in  the  primitive  schools  of  his  locality  by 
attendance  at  the  Sparta  Academy.  After  the  de- 
cease of  his  father  he  took  charge  of  the  farm, 
which  now  embraces  four  hundred  acres  all  in  one 
body,  and  which  is  devoted  to  general  farming. 
He  is  also  one  of  the  largest  stock-raisers  in  the 
county,  having  included  this  branch  of  farming 
with  his  other  large  interests  in  1880.  He  now  has 
a  herd  of  over  eighty  head  of  registered  Jersey 
cattle  on  his  estate  and  supplies  one  creamery  in 
this  locality  with  cream.  He  has  paid  great  atten- 
tion to  the  breeding  of  his  cattle,  and  it  is  safe  to 
say  he  has  one  of  the  finest  herds  in  the  United 
States.  He  was  one  of  the  first  to  establish  the 
Sparta  Creamery,  which  is  still  in  existence,  and 
in  many  other  waj's  he  has  aided  in  the  industrial 
development  of  this  country. 

May  18,  1858,  Samuel  W.  McKelvey  and  Miss 
Nancy  T.,  daiigliter  of  Henry  L.  and  Elizabeth 
(Campbell)    McGuire,  were    united  in    marriage. 


The  lady  is  a  native  of  Washington  County,  111., 
where  her  birth  occurred  April  12,  1833.  Her 
father  was  a  native  of  South  Carolina,  and  her 
mother  was  born  near  Erie,  Pa.  By  her  union 
■with  our  subject  have  been  born  five  children,  viz.: 
Charles  Sumner,  Eliza,  Ella,  Henr^'  Elmer  and 
Samuel  W.  The  eldest  son  married  Miss  Lizzie 
Gaud,  and  makes  his  home  in  Santa  Anna,  Cal., 
where  he  is  practicing  law.  He  is  a  graduate  of 
Knox  College,  Galesburg,  111.,  while  the  remaining 
children  completed  their  studies  in  the  Monmouth 
College.  The  family  are  members  of  tiie  United 
Presbj'terian  Church  at  Sparta,  and  our  subject  is 
one  of  its  most  active  members,  having  been  Trus- 
tee, a  member  of  the  session  and  a  delegate  from  his 
church  to  the  synod  held  at  Hanover,  III.  He  has 
always  been  a  great  worker  in  the  Sunday-school, 
and  held  the  Superintcndency  for  thirteen  jears. 
Mr.  McKelvey  never  fails  to  cast  his  vote  in 
favor  of  Republican  candidates,  and  although 
frequently  solicited  to  do  so,  always  refuses  to 
a(!cept  office  of  any  kind.  In  1870  he  erected  a 
fine  brick  residence  on  his  place  which  cost  $5,500, 
and  wiiich  is  finished  and  furnished  in  modern 
style.  The  estimable  character  and  useful  life  of 
our  subject  have  secured  for  him  the  respect  of 
his  acquaintances  and  the  deep  regard  of  those 
who  know  him  best. 

g<.;,,>is_^  -^ 

3<~T^^B— — ■ — -m 


\1l.^  ERMANN  F.  WIEBUSCII  is  engaged  in  the 
l/jj;  hotel  and  retail  liquor  business  at  Chester, 
i^^  being  proprietor  of  the  Wiebusch  Hotel.  He 
(^)  is  a  native  of  this  cit}',  where  his  birth  oc- 
curred November  11,  1857.  He  is  the  fourth  child 
born  to  Claus  and  Mary  (Kipp)  Wiebusch,  the 
former  of  whom  is  a  native  of  Germany,  and  came 
to  America  when  a  young  man  of  eighteen  years. 
A  brick  mason  by  trade,  he  followed  that  occupa- 
tion during  his  active  years  in  Chester.  He  has 
now  attained  his  seventy-second  year,  while  his 
good  wife  has  lived  to  see  her  seventieth  birthday. 
In  his  boyhood  the  subject  of  this  sketch  was  a 
student  in  the  Lutheran  school  at  Chester,  where 
he  acquired  a  pr.actical  education.  He  became  self- 
supporting  at  an  early  age,  and  for  a  time  worked 


28d 


JPORTRAIT  A]S'D  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


out  on  farms,  and  was  also  engaged  as  a  teamster. 
When  twent^'-two  years  of  age  he  began  in  busi- 
ness for  iiiinself  by  establishing  a  retail  liquor 
store  in  Chester,  of  which  he  is  still  the  proprietor, 
and  at  the  same  time  is  '"mine  host"  of  the  "Wie- 
busch  Hotel.  In  1881  he  married  Miss  Wilhel- 
nnna,  daughter  of  William  and  Sophia  (Crumve- 
der)  Sternberg,  natives  of  Germany,  who  settled 
upon  a  farm  near  Blair,  Randolph  County.  The 
union  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wiebusch  was  blessed  by 
tlie  birth  of  two  children,  one  of  whom  died  in 
infancy.  George,  who  is  still  living,  makes  his 
horae  with  his  parents. 

Mrs.  Wiebusch  is  a  consistent  member  of  the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  Our  subject  is  a 
stanch  Democrat  in  politics,  and  while  his  private 
affairs  naturally  receive  the  major  part  of  his 
time  and  attention,  yet  he  is  interested  in  the  wel- 
fare of  the  public,  and  is  prominent  in  local  mat- 
ters. He  has  served  as  Alderman  of  the  Third 
Ward  for  four  years,  and  has  been  Director  of  the 
Fair  Association  for  six  years.  Socially,  he  is  a 
member  of  the  American  Legion  of  Honor,  and 
has  been  Treasurer  of  that  order  for  six  j-eais,  and 
at  the  present  time  holds  the  office  of  Commander. 
In  1884  and  1886  he  was  Chairman  of  the  Chester 
Democratic  Club,  and  indeed  his  name  has  been 
inseparably  associated  with  the  political  affairs  of 
this  county  for  a  number  of  years. 

jr..,  LEXANDER  WILSON  was  for  man}'  j-ears 
SLj!    a  leading  and  influential  citizen  of  Ran- 

111  li  dolph  County.  Here  he  was  born  and 
^  .  reared,  and  iiere  he  spent  his  entire  life. 
He  comes  of  a  family  of  Irish  lineage,  his  grand- 
father, Alexander  Wilson,  haA'ingbeen  a  native  of 
the  Emerald  Isle.  He  was  also  the  founder  of  the 
family  in  America.  After  his  emigration  to  this 
country,  he  took  up  his  residence  in  Randolph 
County,  where  he  spent  his  remaining  days. 

Foster  Wilson,  the  father  of  our  subject,  was 
born  in  this  county,  and  b}-  occupation  was  a 
farmer.  Throughout  life  he  followed  that  pursuit, 
and  in  his  undertakings  met  with  g«od  success. 
His  death  occurred  about  the  3'ear  1880.     He  mar- 


ried Rachel  Stephenson,  also  a  native  of  Illinois, 

as  were  her  parents.  She  was  called  to  her  final  rest 
in  the  year  1849.  To  Mr.  and  Jlrs.  Wilson  were 
born  three  children:  Alexander,  whose  name  heads 
this  record;  Margaret  T.,  who  became  the  wife  of 
James  Anderson,  and  died  leaving  four  children, 
Nancy,  Alex  (deceased),  William  and  Loiene,  of 
Sparta;  and  John,  the  youngest,  who  died  at  the 
age  of  seventeen. 

Alexander  Wilson  was  born  in  1843,  and  re- 
mained with  his  parents  on  the  farm  until  after 
his  mother's  death.  At  the  age  of  eight  years  he 
went  to  live  with  his  uncle,  Isaac  Nelson,  with 
whom  he  continued  until  1864,  when,  having  at- 
tained his  majority,  he  started  out  in  life  for  him- 
self. He  followed  various  emploj'ments,  but  the 
greater  part  of  his  time  and  attention  were  de- 
voted to  farming.  Wiicn  the  war  broke  out  he  re- 
sponded to  the  country's  call  for  troops,  and  did 
valiant  service  as  one  of  the  boj-s  in  blue  of  Com- 
pan3'  C,  One  Hundred  and  Fift3'-fourth  Illinois 
Infantry. 

On  the  24th  of  October,  1867,  Mr.  Wilson  and 
Miss  Elizabeth  Lawson  were  united  in  marriage, 
and  bj'  their  union  were  born  nine  children: 
Louisa,  wife  of  Charles  Thompson;  Jessie  and 
Ella,  who  are  in  St.  Louis;  Maggie,  at  home;  John 
Alex,  who  died  at  the  age  of  nine  years;  Mattie, 
at  home;  and  three  who  died  in  infancj'.  The  fa- 
ther of  this  famil\'  continued  his  agricultural  pur- 
suits for  a  number  of  3'ears,  and  by  good  manage- 
ment, industry  and  enterprise  acquired  a  comfort- 
able competence.  He  never  took  a  very  prominent 
part  in  public  affairs,  but  was  alwa\'S  found  on  the 
side  of  those  enterprises  calculated  to  promote  the 
general  welfare.  In  politics,  he  was  a  stanch  sup- 
porter of  the  Republican  part}',  and  socially  was 
connected  with  the  Grand  Arm}'  of  the  Republic. 
He  was  alike  true  to  his  country  in  times  of  peace 
and  in  war,  and  no  trust  reposed  in  him  was  ever 
betrayed.  His  death  occurred  February  26,  1884, 
and  was  deeply  mourned  b}-  many  friends,  who 
held  him  in  high  regard. 

After  the  death  of  her  husband,  Mrs.  Wilson 
married  James  B.  Anderson,  who  was  born  in  Ran- 
dolph County  in  1826,  on  a  farm  southeast  of 
Sparta.     There  he  spent  his  entire  life  with  the  ex- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


289 


ception  of  a  short  time  passed  in  Pittsburgh,  where 
he  worked  in  a  cotton  factory.  By  occupation  he 
Was  a  farmer.  He  started  out  in  life  for  himself 
empty-lianded,  and  not  only  provided  for  his  own 
wants,  but  also  supported  his  motiier,  giving  her  a 
home  until  her  death.  He  first  married  Matilda 
Nimoek,  and  unto  them  were  born  two  sons,  one 
who  died  in  early  childhood,  and  .James,  who  died 
at  the  age  of  twenty-one.  By  the  second  marriage 
there  was  a  daughter,  Mary,  who  died  when  only 
three  weeks  old. 

In  his  political  views,  Mr.  Anderson  was  a  Re- 
publican, and  took  quite  an  active  part  in  local 
politics.  For  several  j-ears  he  served  as  School 
Trustee,  and  was  an  efficient  ofHcer.  He  held  mem- 
bership with  the  Presbj'terian  Church,  and  served 
as  Elder  for  some  time.  He  took  quite  an  active 
part  in  church  and  benevolent  work,  and  was  al- 
wa3-s  found  on  the  side  of  riglit.  He  was  called 
to  his  final  rest  July  12,  1893. 


¥1' 


^  j^ILLIAM  EDMISTON.  The  result  of  en- 
ergy and  perseverance  is  nowhere  better 
illustrated  than  in  the  career  of  Mr.  Ed- 
miston,  who  began  life  with  only  the  ability  with 
which  Nature  had  endowed  him.  He  is  at  the 
present  time  one  of  the  well  known  and  highly 
respected  citizens  of  Tilden,  Randolph  County. 
He  is  the  son  of  William  Edmiston,  who  was  born 
in  Virginia  in  1795.  The  paternal  grandparents 
of  our  subject  removed  from  the  above  state  to 
Lincoln  County,  Tenn.,  about  1810,  where  Will- 
iam, Sr.,  entered  the  War  of  1812,  taking  part  in 
the  battle  of  New  Orleans.  The  family  is  of 
Scotch  origin. 

Mrs.  Sarah  (Askins)  Edmiston,  the  mother  of 
our  subject,  was  a  native  of  Tennessee.  She  was 
the  daughter  of  George  and  Sarah  (Muelharan)  As- 
kins. the  former  of  whom  was  born  October  23, 
1755,  and  the  latter  January  27  of  the  same  3-ear. 
They  had  a  familj-  of  four  children,  and  the 
mother  of  our  subject  was  born  April  5,  1799.  In 
1815  she  married  William  Edmiston,  a  son  of 
Susan  (Hanah)  Edmiston,  and  they  resided  in 
Tennessee  until  1832,  when  thej^  emigrated  to  Illi- 


nois, arriving  in  Randolph  County  April  19.  They 
immediately-  located  on  section  5,  township  4, 
range  5,  and  there  the  father  erected  a  log  cabin, 
which  rude  structure  was  his  home  for  many  years. 
The  wife  and  motiier  departed  this  life  July  19, 
1833.  the  year  after  coming  hither,  and  her  hus- 
band continued  to  reside  upon  the  home  farm  un- 
til reaching  advanced  years.  He  afterward  made 
his  home  with  our  subject  until  his  death,  which 
occurred  in  1885,  at  the  age  of  ninety-one  years. 

In  the  parental  family  of  eight  children,  the 
subject  of  this  sketch  is  the  only  survivor.  His 
mother  was  a  member  of  the  Reformed  Presbyte- 
rian Church,  and  although  his  father  never  united 
with  an}'  congregation,  was  alwa3's  a  strict  observer 
of  the  Sabbath.  In  early  life  a  Whig,  he  later 
joined  the  Republican  part}',  and  during  the  late 
war  was  a  strong  Union  man.  He  was  very  prom- 
inent and  influential  in  this  county,  and  aided  in 
the  organization  of  the  various  townships. 

Our  subject  was  born  March  21,  1823,  in  Lincoln 
County,  Tenn.,  and  was  a  lad  of  nine  years  when 
he  came  to  this  county,  and  he  grew  to  manhood  on 
the  pioneer  farm.  He  has  spent  sixt3'-two  3-ears 
of  his  life  in  Randolph  County,  and  has  thus  been 
an  e3'e-witness  of  the  wonderful  changes  through 
which  it  has  passed,  and  has  aided  very  materiall3' 
in  bringing  it  to  its  present  high  standing  among 
its  sister  counties  in  the  state. 

Miss  Nancy,  daughter  of  Thomas  and  Jane 
(Stralian)  Lindsa}',  became  the  wife  of  our  suliject 
Februar}'  28,  1844.  The  parents  of  Mrs.  Edmiston 
were  natives  respectively  of  Penns3'lvania  and 
Kentucky,  and  were  married  after  coining  to  this 
county,  in  Red  Bud,  in  1821.  They  located  on 
Flat  Prairie  in  1827,  where  they  passed  the  re- 
maining 3-ears  of  their  lives,  the  father  d3ing  in 
1855,  and  the  mother  in  August,  1880.  The3^ 
were  the  parents  of  eight  children,  of  whom  those 
living  are,  Eliza  Ann,  Mrs.  Edmiston,  Margaret 
Jane,  Samuel,  Thomas  B.  and  Joseph.  Her  parents 
were  members  of  the  Associate  Reformed  Church, 
in  which  Mr.  Lindsay  was  an  Elder.  He  was  a  prom- 
inent man  in  his  localit3',  and  during  the  War  of 
1812  was  a  patriot  in  its  ranks. 

Mrs.  Edmiston  was  born  May  2,  1827,  in  Red 
Bud,  this  county,  and  after  her  union  with  our 


290 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGlLAl»MlCAL  RECORD. 


subject  located  on  section  9,  township  4,  range  5, 
whicli  was  then  an  undeveloped  tract.  They  be- 
gan life  in  a  little  log  cabin,  which  was  pro- 
vided witli  a  chimney  built  of  clay  and  sticljs, 
and  during  the  first  night  spent  in  this  rude 
structure  the  snow  covered  the  floor  to  a  depth 
of  six  inches.  They  continued  to  make  their 
home  in  that  cabin  until  the  year  1864,  wiien 
Mr.  Edmiston  erected  a  fine  brick  residence,  which 
contained  nine  rooms  and  a  basement,  and  wiiich 
cost  liim,  exclusive  of  his  own  labor,  $8,000.  It 
bears  all  the  modern  improvements,  is  furnished  in 
a  tasteful  manner,  and  is  one  of  the  best  residences 
in  the  precinct.  In  1862  he  built  a  fine  barn  on 
his  estate,  which  was  valued  at  $1,000. 

In  1871  our  subject  gave  each  of  his  five  chil- 
dren land  and  other  gifts  amounting  to  about 
$7,000,  and  removed  with  his  wife  into  the  village 
of  Tilden,  where  for  some  time  he  was  successfully 
engaged  in  the  grain  business.  Of  their  family, 
James  Henry  married  Maggie  Bicket  and  lives  on 
the  old  homestead;  William  Thomas,  who  married 
Martha  Goren,  makes  his  home  on  section  16, 
of  this  township;  John  Harmon  married  Josephine 
McGuire,  and  is  also  a  resident  of  the  above  town- 
ship, where  Jane  Ann  and  Charles  Fremont  are 
living.  The  former  is  the  wife  of  Alexander  Bicket 
and  resides  on  section  17,  and  the  latter  married 
Martha  E.  Stephenson,  and  makes  his  home  on 
section  9. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Edmiston  have  been  .active  mem- 
bers of  the  United  Presbyterian  Church  for  a  quar- 
ter of  a  century.  Our  subject  has  been  interested 
in  Sunday-school  work,  and  has  taught  a  class  for 
ten  years.  He  is  a  strong  Republican  in  politics, 
and  has  represented  his  party  frequently  as  dele- 
gate to  the  various  conventions. 


^^EORGE  II.  CAMPBELL,  a  well  known  citi- 


to 


I  ^^  zen  of  Sparta,  who  since  1881  has  been  one 

Of   of  tl 


tiie  editors  and  proprietors  of  the  Sparta 
Plain  Dealer,  is  a  representative  of  an  old  family 
of  this  community.  His  grandfather,  Abel  Camp- 
bell, was  born  in  Mansfield,  Conn.,  and  his  wife  in 
Norwich,  Conn.     He  was  of  Scotch-Irish  lineage, 


and  was  descended  from  one  who  served  as  a 
soldier  under  Charles  the  Pretender,  and  after  the 
battle  of  Culloden,  fled  to  Ireland,  where  he  mar- 
ried, and  then  emigrated  to  America. 

Lewis  H.  Campbell,  father  of  our  subject,  was 
the  sixth  in  a  family  of  eight  children,  and  was 
born  in  Middlebury,  Vt.,  in  1818.  At  the  age  of 
twent3'-five  he  went  to  Troy,  N.  Y.,  where  he 
worked  in  the  car  factory  of  Eaton,  Gilbert  &  Co. 
In  1846,  he  emigrated  to  St.  Louis,  where  he  en- 
gaged in  painting,  and  in  1858  came  to  Sparta, 
but  in  1879  again  returned  to  St.  Louis,  where  he 
now  makes  his  home.  In  politics  he  is  a  Republi- 
can, and  he  has  served  as  Justice  of  the  Peace  in 
this  count}'.  He  is  a  faithful  member  .and  active 
worker  in  the  Baptist  Church. 

In  Albany,  N.  Y.,  Mr.  Campbell  wedded  Mary 
Scott,  a  native  of  that  city,  and  a  daughter  of 
Marshall  Scott.  Her  grandfather  was  LTriah  Scott, 
of  Sharon,  Conn.,  and  there  her  father  was  born. 
When  a  3'oung  man,  he  went  to  Albany,  and  there 
married  Maria,  daughter  of  Leonard  Lewis.  She 
died  of  cholera  in  1832,  leaving  Mrs.  Campbell, 
then  a  babe  of  two  years.  The  parents  of  our  sub- 
ject had  a  famil}'  of  five  children.  Lewis  P.,  the 
eldest,  now  of  St.  Louis,  wedded  Mary  Gorsuch,  of 
Sparta,  daughter  of  Dr.  Gorsuch,  a  druggist  and 
physician  of  this  place.  Thej"^  have  one  cliild, 
Frank.  Charles  M.,  who  is  business  manager  for 
the  Word  &  Works  Publishing  Company  of  St. 
Louis,  married  Clara  Morrow,  and  they  have  two 
children. 

Our  subject  started  out  in  life  for  himself  at  the 
age  of  fifteen,  beginning  work  as  a  printer  in  Mon- 
mouth, III.  Since  that  lime  he  has  been  identified 
with  newspaper  work.  In  1881,  lie  became  con- 
nected with  the  Sparta  Plain  Dealer,  in  company 
with  Don  E.  Detrich,  and  is  now  a  member  of  the 
firm  of  Campbell  &  Smith,  editors  and  proprietors 
of  that  paper.  Tliis  is  a  well  conducted  sheet  and 
receives  from  the  public  a  liberal  patronage. 

Mrs.  Campbell  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Marian 
Crawford.  She  was  born  in  this  county,  and  is  a 
daughter  of  Bryce  Crawford,  who  now  resides  in 
Sparta.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Caaipbell  have  one  child, 
Grace.  They  are  members  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church.     In  politics,  he  is  a  Republican,  and  has 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


291 


served  as  a  member  of  the  City  Council.  Socially 
he  is  a  Master  Mason,  and  belongs  to  Hope  Lodge 
No.  162,  A.  F.  &  A.  M. 


'•i-***'^^  •i"5"J"i-F 


llJOHN  MURPHY.  In  every  state  in  the 
I  Union,  Irish-American  citizens  are  to  be 
^^  1  found,  making  their  way  steadily  onward 
^^f/  in  the  accumulation  of  property,  and  se- 
curing their  means  by  honest  industry  and  untir- 
ing zeal.  In  Randolph  County  a  good  position 
among  the  farmers  and  land-owners  is  held  by  Mr. 
Murphy,  who  is  a  native  of  Ireland,  born  in  Coun- 
ty Antrim  in  April,  1823.  He  grew  to  manhood  in 
the  Old  Country,  and  there  received  a  good  edu- 
cation. 

In  the  spring  of  1849,  when  determining  to 
try  his  fortunes  in  the  New  World,  our  subject 
boarded  a  sailing-vessel,  and  after  a  tedious  voy- 
age landed  on  American  shores.  Spending  six 
months  in  New  York  City,  young  Murphj^  came 
further  west  and  purchased  a  farm  located  a  short 
distance  from  his  present  estate.  This  he  later 
sold  for  $17,000,  and  invested  that  money  in  sec- 
tion 3,  township  4,  range  5,  which  he  immediately 
set  about  clearing  and  improving,  and  where  he 
still  makes  his  home. 

The  lady  whom  our  subject  married  in  1853  was 
also  a  native  of  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  and  bore 
the  maiden  name  of  Mary  Smith.  They  have  seven 
children  now  living,  who  bear  the  respective  names 
of  .John,  Annie,  Mar}',  .Jane,  Thomas,  Roliert  and 
Gracie.  They  have  all  been  given  good  educa- 
tions, and  Annie  is  married  and  resides  in  Ne- 
braska. John  makes  his  home  at  Oakdale,  Wash- 
ington Count3%  111.,  and  Robert  is  at  Monmouth 
College. 

In  1864  Mr.  Murphy  enlisted  his  services  in  the 
Union  army,  joining  Company  F,  Twenty-eighth 
Illinois  Infantry.  After  joining  his  regiment  at 
Memphis,  Tenn.,  he  participated  in  the  battles  of 
Mobile  and  Whistler.  He  was  in  the  service  for 
twelve  months,  and  during  that  period  was  neither 
wounded  nor  taken  prisoner. 

Receiving  his  honorable  discharge  October  19, 
1865,  at  Brownsville,  Tex.,  Mr.  Murphy  returned 


home,  and  has  ever  since  given  his  time  and 
attention  to  farm  pursuits.  In  addition  to  rais- 
ing the  various  cereals  he  makes  a  specialty  of 
breeding  fine  draft  horses,  and  has  a  number  of 
splendid  animals  on  his  place.  With  his  wife  he 
IS  a  member  of  the  United  Presbyterian  Church  at 
Tilden.  As  might  be  expected,  he  is  a  (irand 
Army  man,  holding  membership  with  Post  No.  209, 
at  Coulter ville.  He  is  a  worthy  representative  of 
the  Republican  party,  lias  taken  an  active  part  in 
local  affairs,  and  has  been  called  upon  by  his  fel- 
low-citizens to  serve  as  a  member  of  the  School 
Board,  which  office  he  has  filled  with  entire  satis- 
faction. 


\Yl  OHN  G.  IIOY^,  who  carries  on  general  farm- 
ing near  Red  Bud,  Randolph  County, 
where  he  owns  and  operates  forty  acres  of 
<^^  good  land,  was  born  on  Ralls  Ridge  in 
1848.  His  father,  Bartholomew  Hoy,  was  a  native 
of  Ireland.  He  came  to  this  country,  and  having 
arrived  ai. years  of  maturity  married  Julia  Whalen, 
a  native  of  Maryland.  They  became  the  i)arents 
of  eight  children,  namely:  Thomas,  a  resident  of 
Red  Bud;  James  M.,  of  New  Mexico;  Mary;  Bridget, 
deceased;  Patrick,  of  California;  Agnes,  wife  of 
William  Jakle,  of  St.  Louis;  John  G.,  and  Isa- 
bella, wife  of  James  Roscow,  of  Red  Bud. 

The  father  of  this  family' emigrated  to  Randolph 
County  in  1832,  locating  in  Prairie  du  Rocher, 
where  he  engaged  in  merchandising  for  two  years. 
He  then  sold  out  and  came  to  this  locality,  where 
he  purchased  a  half-section  of  land  which  he 
fenced  and  improved,  transforming  it  into  richly 
cultivated  fields.  He  was  a  consistent  member  of 
the  Catholic  Church,  and  in  politics  was  a  Repub- 
lican. In  his  business  he  was  sagacious  and  far- 
sighted  and  won  success.  His  death  occurred  about 
1870. 

Mr.  Hoy  whose  name  heads  this  sketch  was 
reared  to  manhood  on  Ralls  Ridge, and  the  greater 
part  of  his  life  has  there  been  passed.  In  his 
youth  he  became  familiar  with  the  duties  of  farm 
life,  and  to  agricultural  pursuits  he  yet  devotes 
his  energies.     His   fields   are  well  tilled,  and  the 


292 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


neat  and  thrifty  appearance  of  the  place  indicates 
the  careful  supervision  of  the  owner.  He  man- 
ages the  Rail  farm  of  three  luindred  and  forty 
acres,  and  also  engages  in  raising  sheep,  cattle  and 
horses,  making  a  specialty  of  llolstein  cattle. 

In  1880  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  Mr.  Hoy 
and  Miss  Mary  A.,  daughter  of  T.  Leo  Mudd, 
whose  people  were  the  very  earliest  settlers  of  the 
countj'.  Six  children  have  been  born  of  their 
union,  namely:  Julia  M.,  Agnes  A.,  T.  James, 
Clara,  Patrick  A.  and  John  B.  Mr.  Hoy  and  his 
family  are  members  of  the  Catholic  Church  and 
contribute  liberallj'  to  its  support.  In  politics  he 
is  a  stanch  Democrat  and  warmly  advocates  the 
principles  of  his  party.  For  four  years  he  has 
served  .is  Justice  of  the  Peace,  proving  a  capable 
and  efficient  officer.  His  life  has  been  a  bus}'  and 
useful  one,  devoted  almost  entirely  to  farm  labor. 


,  OLON  R.  BOYNTON,  M.  D.,  who  is  en- 
gaged in  the  practice  of  medicine  in 
vSparta,  comes  of  one  of  the  oldest  Amer- 
ican families.  They  came  originally  from 
Yorkshire,  England,  emigrating  to  America  about 
the  year  1620.  Our  subject's  great-grandparents 
were  Richard  and  Charlotte  Boynton,  and  the 
former  reached  the  advanced  age  of  ninety  3'ears. 
The  grandparents  were  Richard  and  Elizabeth 
(Davis)  Boynton,  natives  of  New  Hampshire.  The 
former  was  a  member  of  the  Masonic  fraternity 
until  the  death  of  Morgan.  He  served  two  ye.ars 
in  the  Revolutionary  War.  His  father  was  a 
merchant  of  Salem,  JIass.,  and  died  when  on  board 
bis  own  vessel  on  the  Atlantic. 

John  Bo3'nton,  the  Doctor's  father,  w.as  born 
in  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1816,  and  there  remained  un- 
til he  had  attained  his  majority.  In  1838  he  mar- 
ried Harriet  Whitney,  who  was  born  in  Boston  in 
1817,  and  was  a  daughter  of  Stephen  and  Ruth 
(Whitmore)  Whitney.  Her  grandparents,  William 
and  Rebecca  (Cody)  Whitney,  were  natives  of 
Roxbur}',  Mass.,  and  the  former  served  in  the 
Revolutionary  War,  in  which  he  was  wounded. 
He  afterward  received  a  pension  in  recognition 
of  his  services.     Upon  their  marriage,  Mr.  Boj'n ton 


and  his  wife  removed  to  Quincy,  111.  When  a 
youth  he  had  served  a  seven  years'  apprenticeship 
to  the  carpenter's  trade,  which  he  followed  through- 
out life.  In  1841  he  went  to  St.  Louis,  where  he 
was  employed  as  a  contractor.  His  last  days  were 
spent  in  Ridge  Prairie,  St.  Clair  County,  111., 
where  he  died  in  1888.  He  held  membership  with 
the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  for  many  years 
was  one  of  its  local  ministers,  and  by  his  labors 
did  much  good  in  the  world. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bo3''nton  were  born  eleven 
children.  Willis  and  the  child  next  in  order  of 
birth  are  both  deceased.  John  R.,  an  eminent 
surgeon,  who  is  connected  with  a  medical  school 
of  Chicago,  married  Framelia  Curtis  and  has  two 
children,  Hattie  and  Nonine.  Georgia  is  the  wife 
of  William  Bodiker,  a  coal  dealer  of  Murpbys- 
boro,  by  whom  she  has  a  daughter,  Susa.  js[^ilia 
is  now  deceased.  The  Doctor  is  the  next  younger. 
Otis,  deceased,  was  a  contractor.  Susie  is  the 
widow  of  John  Aylmer,  of  Murphysboro,  and  the 
mother  of  one  child,  Hattie.  Joseph,  who  is  a 
master  mechanic  living  near  Duquoin,  married 
Maggie  Reed,  and  they  have  three  children:  Lillie, 
Joseph  and  John  R.  Two  children  of  the  Boyn- 
ton family  died  in  infancy. 

Dr.  Boynton  was  born  in  1852  in  St.  Louis 
County,  Mo.,  in  the  old  Seven  Mile  House  on  the 
St.  Charles  Rock  Road.  He  there  lived  until  five 
years  of  age,  when  his  father  removed  to  Ridge 
Prairie.  In  his  boyhood  he  was  emploj'ed  in  farm 
labor  and  in  aiding  his  father  as  a  carpenter.  He 
then  studied  engineering,  and  in  his  leisure  hours 
read  medicine.  He  took  his  first  course  of  lectures 
in  1880,  in  the  St.  Louis  Homeopathic  Medical 
College,  from  which  he  was  graduated  in  1882. 
In  the  spring  of  the  following  j-ear  he  located  in 
Sparta,  and  has  had  a  constantly  growing  practice. 
He  has  won  considerable  note  .as  a  surgeon  and  is 
now  local  surgeon  for  the  Mobile  &  Ohio  Railroad, 

In  1872  the  Doctor  wedded  Miss  Zoe  Whilaker, 
a  native  of  England,  who  crossed  the  Atlantic  with 
her  brother  on  the  Great  Eastern  in  1860,  and  lo- 
cated in  St.  Clair  Count}'.  They  now  have  one 
son,  Charles  0.  The  parents  are  both  members  of 
the  Presbyterian  Church,  and  are  people  of  promi- 
nence in  this  community,  holding  an  enviable  po- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


293 


sition  in  social  circles.  Dr.  Boy n  ton  is  a  self-made 
man.  He  has  been  very  successful  in  his  under- 
takings, and  in  his  profession  is  rapidly  growing 
in  popularit}'.  In  his  political  views  he  is  a  Re- 
publican. He  holds  membership  with  the  Masonic 
fraternity  and  also  with  the  Railroad  Surgical  As- 
sociation. 

• ^#P '    . 


eHRISTIAN  F.  GUEBERT  was  a  native  of 
Germany,  and  a  son  of  Christian  and  So. 
phia  Guebert,  who  were  also  born  in  the 
same  countr}'.  Emigrating  to  America,  their  last 
days  were  spent  in  Red  Bud,  111.  Their  family 
numbered  three  sons  and  a  daughter,  as  follows: 
Christian,  William,  Heniy  and  Sophia.  The  fam- 
ily are  all  members  of  the  Lutheran  Church,  and 
take  a  very  active  part  in  church  and  benevolent 
work.  The  Gueberts  are  all  representative  people 
and  are  numbered  among  the  leading  families  in 
the  community  in  which  they  have  so  long  re- 
sided. 

In  the  common  schools  Christian  Guebert  ac- 
quired a  good  education,  and  under  the  parental 
roof  he  was  reared  to  manhood.  At  length  he  de- 
termined to  seek  a  home  in  America,  and  crossed 
the  Atlantic  in  1854.  He  here  married  Miss  E. 
Kraemer,  and  unto  them  were  born  thirteen  chil- 
dren, twelve  of  whom  reached  adult  age. 

Mr.  Guebert  was  an  industrious  and  enterpris- 
ing man,  and  through  his  untiring  labors  and  per- 
severance he  accumulated  nearly  an  entire  section 
of  land  in  the  neighborhood  of  Red  Bud.  There 
he  made  his  home  until  his  death,  successfullj- 
carrying  on  agricultural  pursuits  and  placing  his 
land  under  a  very  higli  state  of  cultivation,  thus 
making  it  one  of  the  valuable  and  desirable  farms 
of  the  neigliborhood.  He  also  took  a  commend- 
able interest  in  public  affairs,  was  a  warm  friend 
of  the  common  schools  and  gave  all  of  his  chil- 
dren good  educational  privileges.  In  politics  he 
.was  a  stalwart  supporter  of  the  Democr.acy,  and 
in  religious  belief  was  a  Lutheran.  His  family 
all  belonged  to  the  same  church.  Mr.  Guebert  was 
called  to  his  final  rest  in  1892,  having  survived 
his  wife  about  ten  years.     Tiiey  were  both  active 


workers  in  the  church,  and  those  who  knew  them 
held  them  in  high  regard  for  their  many  excel- 
lencies of  character,  and  their  sterling  worth. 
Their  loss  to  the  community  was  widely  felt,  and 
it  is  with  pleasure  that  we  present  to  our  readers 
a  record  of  the  lives  of  people  who  were  so  well 
and  favorabl3'  known. 

Henry  W.  Guebert,  their  eldest  son,  was  born 
in  1856,  on  the  old  homestead,  which  has  always 
been  his  place  of  abode,  and  is  dear  to  him  from 
the  associations  of  his  childhood,  as  well  as  those 
of  his  niaturer  years.  He  now  owns  and  operates 
one  hundred  and  fifty  acres,  which  he  has  placed 
under  a  high  state  of  cultivation.  The  well  tilled 
fields  and  man3'  improvements  on  the  place,  to- 
gether with  its  neat  appearance,  indicate  the  thrift 
and  enterprise  which  is  so  characteristic  of  the 
family. 

In  1885  Henry  Guebert  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Berta,  daughtei  of  Chris  Rosenberg, 
of  Monroe  Count}'.  Their  union  has  been  blessed 
with  four  children:  Rosa,  Freda,  Louis  and  Ed- 
win. Mr.  Guebert  has  long  resided  in  this  lo- 
cality and  is  familiar  with  its  history  from  an 
early  day.  He  has  taken  a  deep  interest  in  the 
upbuilding  of  the  community,  and  has  ever  borne 
his  part  in  the  work  of  public  advancement. 


SAAC  MORRIS,  who  carries  on  agricultural 
pursuits  in  township  5,  range  6,  Randolph 
County,  has  spent  his  entire  life  upon  the  farm 
which  is  still  his  home,  and  which  was  liis  birth- 
place. He  was  born  April  5,  1822,  and  comes 
of  an  English  family,  his  grandparents,  Samuel 
and  Lucy  (Stephens)  Morris,  having  both  been 
natives  of  P^ngiand.  Emigrating  to  America,  the 
grandfather  followed  farming  in  South  Carolina, 
where  he  became  quite  well-to-do. 

William  Morris,  father  of  our  subject,  was  born 
in  Yorkshire,  England,  June  7,  1797,  and  there 
lived  until  1789,  when  he  crossed  the  Atlantic  and 
spent  the  remainder  of  his  boyhood  in  the  Abbey- 
ville  District  of  South  Carolina.  He  there  mar- 
ried, but  his  wife  died  not  long  afterward.  He 
removed   to   Preble    County,   Ohio,    and    thence 


294 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


came  to  Illinois  in  1816,  locating  upon  the  old 
Monis  homestead.  He  entered  from  the  Govern- 
ment a  farm  of  one  hundred  and  sixt}'  acres,  built 
a  log  cabin  and  began  life  in  true  pioneer  style. 
As  tiie  years  passed,  however,  he  became  well-to-do, 
and  had  five  hundred  acres  of  land,  which  he 
willed  to  his  sons.  In  the  War  of  1812,  Mr.  Mor- 
ris served  under  General  Harrison.  In  politics  he 
was  a  Republican,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Ma- 
sonic fraternity.  He  also  belonged  to  the  United 
Presbyterian  Church.  He  was  a  very  temperate 
man,  never  using  tobacco  or  intoxicants,  and  he 
left  to  his  family  the  iniceless  heritage  of  an  un- 
tarnished name.  His  death  occurred  in  1873.  The 
mother  of  our  subject  bore  the  maiden  name  of 
Elizabeth  Newton,  and  was  a  native  of  Ireland. 
The  marriage  was  celebrated  in  1810,  and  she  died 
in  Randolph  County  in  1831.  Ten  children  were 
born  of  tlieir  union:  James,  who  died  of  cholera 
in  1832;  Newton,  Ephraim  and  William,  all  de- 
ceased; Lucy,  widow  of  Joseph  McNuUy;  Eliza- 
beth, deceased;  Pauline,  Sarah  and  Alice. 

In  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads,  Isaac  Mor- 
ris spent  the  days  of  his  boyhood  and  youth,  and 
the  occupation  to  which  he  was  reared  he  has 
made  his  life  work.  In  1843  he  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Priscilla  Colbert,  a  native  of  Ran- 
dolph County,  who  died  in  February,  1848,  leav- 
ing two  children,  one  who  died  in  early  childhood, 
and  Elizabetli,  who  died  at  the  age  of  thirty  years. 
In  1851  IMr.  Morris  was  again  married,  his  second 
union  being  with  Mrs.  Mary  Campbell,  who  was 
born  in  this  county.  They  had  i-eveu  children: 
Marj'  Jane,  who  died  at  the  age  of  two  years;  Al- 
bert, now  of  Sparta;  James,  who  died  at  the  age 
of  four  months;  Priscilla  Ellen,  wife  of  William 
A.  Ennis,  b}'  whom  she  lias  four  children,  Mary  E., 
Ora  Ethel,  Lydia  Elizabeth  and  Hilda  Ellen;  Lydia 
Annetta,  at  home;  Sidney  Thomas,  who  died  at 
the  age  of  seventeen;  and  William  Henry,  who  mar- 
ried Nellie  Allen,  by  whom  he  has  one  child.  He  is 
now  in  a  wholesale  commission  house  in  Omaha, 
Neb. 

On  attaining  his  majority,  Mr.  Morris  started 
out  in  life  for  himself.  He  has  alwa3's  followed 
agricultural  pursuits,  and  is  regarded  as  one  of 
the  practical  and  progressive  agriculturists  of  the 


community.  He  is  a  man  of  good  business  ability, 
and  his  success  is  due  entirely  to  his  own  efforts. 
He  votes  witli  the  Republican  party.  Both  he  and 
his  wife  iiold  membership  with  the  United  Presby- 
terian Church,  and  are  people  of  sterling  worth, 
who  hold  an  enviable  position  in  social  circles. 


<y;.}..i..i.^..^^..i..i.»»»»^»»»'i"5"i-»»»»-8H';X> 

llj'^ ^    A.  DINGES,  M.  D.,  who  is  engaged  in  the 

jjf  )j^  practice  of  medicine  and  also  carries  on  a 
'Xy^  drug  store  in  Red  Bud,  has  the  honor  of 
(^  being  a  native  of  Illinois,  his  birth  having 
occurred  in  Waterloo.  His  parents,  George  and 
Eva  (Eckel)  Dinges,  were  both  natives  of  Ger- 
many, born  near  Frankfort-on-the-Main,  where 
they  grew  to  mature  years  and  were  married. 
About  1854  they  bade  adieu  to  their  native  land 
and  crossed  the  Atlantic  to  America.  Their  fam- 
ily numbered  six  children,  four  of  whom  are  still 
living.  The  father  jvas  a  blacksmith  by  trade 
and  one  of  his  sons  followed  the  same  pursuit. 
One  son,  George,  left  home  in  1861  to  enlist  among 
the  boys  in  blue  of  the  Union  armj-,  and  for  a 
time  served  under  General  Sigel.  He  continued 
with  his  company  until  after  the  siege  and  cap- 
ture of  Vicksburg,  and  then  died  in  Mississippi  of 
yellow  fever.  Another  brother,  Adam,  was  killed 
b}'  a  mule,  and  at  his  death  left  a  family  of  seven 
children.  Two  of  the  sisters  reside  in  St.  Louis, 
and  one  in  Monroe  County,  111. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  spent  his  boyhood  in 
the  place  of  his  nativity,  and  during  his  j'outh 
began  clerking  in  a  drug  store,  thus  earning  his 
own  livelihood.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  he  left 
home  and  went  to  Cape  Girardeau,  Mo.,  where  he 
spent  one  year,  on  the  expiration  of  which  period 
he  located  in  St.  Louis,  where  he  continued  in  the 
drug  business  for  five  years.  He  then  again  changed 
his  location,  coming  to  Red  Bud  in  October,  1878. 
In  the  autumn  of  1883  he  entered  the  Missouri 
Medical  College,  of  St.  Louis,  from  which  institu- 
tion he  was  graduated  after  pursuing  a  three  years' 
course,  in  1886.  He  at  once  returned  to  Red  Bud, 
and  again  took  charge  of  the  drug  store  which  he 
had  established  in  1878.     He  also  opened   an  of- 


John  Steele 


Mrs.Jane    Steele 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


299 


fice,  and  has  since  been  successfully  engaged  in 
the  practice  of  medicine. 

In  the  spring  of  1879  Dr.  Dinges  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Henry 
and  Margaret  (Lohbeck)  Schrage,  who  remained 
in  Red  Bud  with  her  little  ones  while  the  Doctor 
attended  college.  They  have  three  children,  viz.: 
Eugene  George,  Ellanro  Margaret  and  Henry  Al- 
phons.  The  famil>^  is  one  of  jjrominence  in  the 
community,  its  members  ranking  high  in  social 
circles. 

Since  1891  Dr.  Dinges  has  been  an  honored 
member  of  the  Southern  Illinois  Medical  Associa- 
tion. In  politics  he  is  a  Democrat,  and  is  now 
serving  his  second  term  as  County  Coroner.  He 
and  his  family  hold  membership  with  the  Catho- 
lic Church,  and  he  is  a  member  of  the  Catholic 
Knights  of  America,  which  society'  he  is  now  serving 
as  State  Vice-President.  His  skill  and  abilit3'  in 
his  profession  have  won  him  an  enviable  reputa- 
tion, and  he  is  now  doing  a  good  business,  both  as 
a  medical  practitioner  and  as  a  druggist. 


\l  I  OHN  STEELE,  who  was  for  many  jears  a 
successful  and  prominent  general  agricult- 
urist of  Washington  County,  and  a  public- 
spirited  citizen,  widel}'  and  liighly  esteemed, 
entered  into  rest  September  11,  1882,  mourned  by 
a  host  of  old-time  friends,  in  whose  hearts  his 
memory  will  long  be  green.  In  1865  he  removed 
to  Sparta,  where  he  led  a  retired  life  until  his  de- 
cease. 

James  Steele,  the  father  of  our  subject,  was  born 
in  Franklin  County,  Pa.,  where  he  was  reared  to 
mature  years.  In  1835  he  decided  to  better  his 
financial  condition  by  coming  to  Illinois,  and  lo- 
cated on  Elk  Horn  Prairie,  where  he  was  residing  at 
the  time  of  his  decease,  in  1860.  He  was  very  pros- 
perous in  his  calling  of  an  agriculturist,  and  there 
was  scarcely  a  man  in  his  vicinity  who  possessed  a 
better  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures  than  did  .James 
Steele.  He  was  an  Elder  of  the  Covenanter  Church 
and  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the  congregation 
at  Elk  Horn.     In  politics  he  was  a  stanch  Repub- 


lican, and  was  one  who  had  the  confidence  of  all, 
his  word  being  considered  as  good  as  his  bond. 

Mrs.  Isabel  (McClintock)  Steele,  the  mother  of 
our  subject,  was  likewise  a  native  of  the  Keystone 
State,  and  was  married  to  James  Steele  in  1802. 
The  eight  children  of  whom  they  became  the  par- 
ents were,  John,  James  (deceased),  Alexander, 
Ezekiel,  Cj'rus,  Robert,  Emily  and  Isabel.  Mrs. 
Steele  departed  this  life  in  1833. 

Our  subject  was  born  March  4,  1804,  in  Frank- 
lin Count}',  Pa.,  and  there  resided  with  his  parents 
until  1835,  when  they  removed  farther  west.  Two 
years  later  he  joined  them,  locating  in  Elk  Horn, 
where  he  purchased  three  hundred  and  eighty 
acres  of  land,  which  he  improved  and  resided 
upon  until  1865.  He  was  very  methodical  in  his 
work,  and  was  self-made  in  the  truest  sense  of  the 
word,  all  of  his  property  being  the  result  of  much 
hard  labor  on  his  part.  His  life  was  an  eminently 
useful  one  and  he  was  one  of  the  foremost  of  the 
venerable  citizens  of  his  township.  Few  residents 
of  the  countj'  were  more  widely  known  and  none 
more  favorably  than  he. 

In  1837,  in  Fayette  County,  Pa.,  .John  Steele 
married  Miss  Jane  Sitherwood,  a  native  of  the 
al)Ove  count}'.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Edward  and 
IMary  (Walker)  Sitherwood,  natives  respectively 
of  England  and  New  Jersey,  and  both  are  now 
deceased.  In  his  political  relations  our  subject  was 
a  member  of  the  Republican  party.  He  never  held 
nor  aspired  to  public  ofHce,  preferring  to  devote 
his  attention  exclusively  to  his  private  affairs. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  Covenanter  Church  and 
was  Elder  in  the  Elk  Horn  congregation. 


■jllOSEPH  KLINKHARDT  is  the  enterprising 
I  proprietor  of  the  Hecker  Creameiy,  located 
in  Hecker,  111.  He  is  one  of  the  native  sons 
_  of  Monroe  County,  his  birth  having  oc- 
curred here,  December  11,  1856.  His  father,  Theo- 
dore F.  Klinkhardt,  was  born  in  Germany  December 
11,  1816,  there  grew  to  manhood,  and  in  his  native 
land  married  Caroline  Kasten,  also  a  German  by 
birth.  In  1840  he  crossed  the  Atlantic  to  Amer- 
ica, and  iJi   1842  brought  his  family  to  the  New 


300 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


World.      Coming   west,   he   purchased    property 

south  of  Freedom,  .and  when  joined  by  his  family, 
located  upon  his  l.md,  which  was  a  tract  of  wild 
prairie.  He  at  once  began  its  cultivation  and  im- 
provement and  lived  in  true  pioneer  st3ie  during 
the  early  years.  He  was  enterprising  and  indus- 
trious and  success  crowned  his  efforts.  From  time 
to  time  he  made  other  purchases,  and  at  his  death 
owned  six  hundred  and  sevent3^-five  acres  of 
farm  land,  besides  other  real  estate  and  personal 
property.  In  politics  he  was  a  supporter  of  the 
Republican  party,  and  served  as  Postmaster  of 
Ilecker  for  about  twelve  years.  He  was  also  Jus- 
tice of  the  Peace  for  a  period  of  twenty-two 
years,  and  was  also  Notary  Public.  He  served  as 
Trustee  of  the  Catholic  Church  for  many  years. 
He  was  prominent  in  public  affairs  and  was  widely 
known  as  a  valued  and  highly  respected  citizen. 
His  death  occurred  December  30,  1880,  aud  his 
wife  passed  away  on  the  21st  of  June,  1884.  They 
were  the  parents  of  six  children,  of  whom  one 
died  in  infancy.  Five  grew  to  mature  }-ears  and 
four  are  3-et  living,  namely:  Mar}-,  wife  of  John 
Mann,  a  farmer  of  Perr^'  County;  Ellen,  wife  of 
Ernst  Waldraaun,  of  Washington  County,  111.; 
Tlieodore,  a  farmer  living  two  and  a-half  miles 
south  of  Freedom;  and  Joseph.  Augusta  grew  to 
womanhood  and  became  the  wife  of  Charles  Frick, 
but  is  now  deceased. 

Mr.  Klinkhardt  was  reared  on  the  old  home- 
stead until  fifteen  years  of  age,  when  he  went  with 
his  parents  to  Freedom.  He  was  educated  in  the 
public  sciiools  and  spent  one  term  in  St.  Patrick's 
College.  He  then  assisted  his  fatlier  in  the  store 
and  also  carried  on  farming  until  his  marriage. 
On  the  21st  of  September,  1875,  he  married  Miss 
Anna  Thum,  daughter  of  Jacob  Thum,a  native  of 
Switzerland.  The  lady  was  born  in  Belleville, 
111.,  and  was  reared  in  Monroe  Count}'.  They 
have  four  children,  Eliza,  Theodore,  Emma  and 
George. 

After  his  marriage,  Mr.  Klinkhai-dt  operated  his 
father's  farm  until  after  the  latter's  death,  when 
he  bought  out  the  entire  place.  For  ten  3'ears  he 
continued  its  cultivation  and  was  a  successful 
farmer.  On  tiie  1st  of  August,  1890,  he  estab- 
lished the  Hecker  Creamery,  which  he  has  since 


carried  on  in  connection  with  the  cultivation  of 
his  land.  He  owns  two  hundred  and  twent3'-five 
acres  of  land,  one  hundred  and  twenty  acres  of 
wliich  are  in  St.  Clair  County,  and  the  remainder  in 
Monroe  County.  It  is  all  under  a  high  state  of  cul- 
tivation and  is  well  improved.  He  keeps  on  hand 
a  large  number  of  cows  for  dair3'  purposes,  and  the 
product  of  his  creamery  is  so  fine  that  he  always 
receives  the  highest  market  prices  in  Belleville 
and  St.  Louis,  to  which  places  he  ships  his  butter. 
His  business  career  has  been  a  prosperous  one.  In 
politics  he  is  a  stalwart  Republican,  and  has  served 
as  District  Clerk  aud  School  Trustee.  He  and  his 
wife  hold  membership  with  the  Catholic  Church, 
aud  he  is  one  of  the  Trustees  of  tliat  organization. 


sig-^s-gis-sie-Ssg-sie^-sig^ie^s^M^^ 


^{  ACOB  B.  BEATTIE.  A  foremost  position 
among  the  agriculturists  of  Randolph  Coun- 
t3'  must  be  accorded  to  the  subject  of  this 
sketch,  who  owns  and  occupies  a  fine  farm 
of  two  hundred  aud  forty  acres  on  section  33, 
township  4,  range  5.  He  is  the  son  of  James  H. 
Beattie,  who  was  born  near  Newburgh,  N.  Y.,  in 
1788,  and  is  tlie  grandson  of  Francis  and  Jane 
(Hall)  Beattie,  also  natives  of  the  Empire  State. 
The  great-grandfather  of  our  subject,  Thomas 
Beattie,  was  born  and  married  in  the  North  of  Ire- 
land, and  after  coming  to  the  United  States  set- 
tled in  Newburgh  in  1740. 

The  maiden  name  of  our  subject's  mother  was 
Hannah  Burkhardt.  She  was  born  in  Allegheny 
County,  Pa.,  in  179.5,  and  was  the  daughter  of 
Jacob  Burkhardt,  who  was  born  in  German}-,  and 
after  coming  to  America  served  as  a  soldier  in  the 
French  and  Indian  War.  The  parents  of  our  sub- 
ject were  married  in  1816,  and  four  3'ears  later, 
the  father,  deciding  to  locate  further  west,  sailed 
down  the  Ohio  River  in  an  emigrant  boat,  being 
accompanied  on  the  journe3'  b3'  the  families  of 
AVilliam  Marshall  and  William  Temple.  Arriv- 
ing at  Shawneetown,  January  1,  1821,  they  came 
overland  to  Randolph  Count3-  and  located  upon  a 
farm  in  township  4,  where  the3-  were  among  the 
earliest  settlers.  Here  the  father  of  our  subject 
opened  up  a  farm,  and  at  the  time  of  his  decease 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


301 


had  accumulated  a  large  estate  of  six  hundred  and 
forty  acres.  His  wife,  of  whom  our  subject  is  the 
only  surviving  son,  died  in  1819,  and  afterward 
he  married  Miss  Margaret  Black.  Of  the  five 
children  born  to  them  onl\-  one  is  living,  Robert 
T.;  Francis  H.  died  in  1886,  leaving  a  family  of 
five  children:  Nettie,  John  B.,  William  S.,  Rob- 
ert and  Jefferson.  Mrs.  Margaret  Beatlie  died  in 
1840,  and  the  father  of  our  subject  departed  this 
life  in  1846.  The  latter  was  industrious,  prudent 
and  thrift}-,  and  had  many  warm  friends  through- 
out the  county. 

J.  B.  Beattie  is  a  native  of  Pennsylvania,  where 
his  birth  occurred  June  24,  1818,  in  Allegheny 
County.  He  was  two  years  of  age  when  his  father 
came  to  Illinois.  Here  he  received  his  education 
in  the  pioneer  schools  and  here  he  was  reared  to 
farm  pursuits.  He  has  been  a  resident  of  town- 
ship 4,  range  5,  for  the  past  seventy-three  j-ears, 
and  has  been  an  important  factor  in  advancing 
the  agricultural  interests  of  the  county.  At  the 
time  his  father  located  here  the  country  was  in  a 
wild  condition,  and  was  very  sparsel}'  inhabited. 
Deer,  wild  turkeys  and  other  kinds  of  game  were 
plentiful.  Our  subject's  means  were  ver}' limited, 
but  he  was  reared  to  habits  of  industry,  and  was 
energetic  and  ambitious,  so  that  by  j'ears  of  hard 
toil  he  has  accomplished  the  pioneer  task  of  de- 
veloping a  highly  productive  farm  from  the  wild- 
erness. 

In  February,  1854,  Mr.  Beattie  and  Miss  Eliza- 
beth, daughter  of  John  and  Elizabeth  (Mclnt3're) 
MclMillan,  were  united  in  marriage.  Mrs.  Beattie 
was  born  December  5,  1829,  in  Scotland,  where 
her  parents  were  also  born.  They  are  both  now 
deceased,  and  at  their  death  left  a  family  of  three 
children:  John,  Mrs.  Beattie  and  Alexander.  To 
our  subject  and  his  wife  have  been  born  six  chil- 
dren: ISIary  J.,  now  Mrs.  T.  B.  Stephenson,  whose 
sketch  will  be  found  elsewhere  in  this  Recokd; 
James  Hall,  who  married  Ada  "SVarner  and  resides 
in  Kansas  Cit}-,  Kan.;  John  Alexander,  who  mar- 
ried Miss  Patience  O.  Rusk,  and  also  resides  in  the 
above  place;  Jacob  L.,  who  makes  his  home  in 
Sparta,  this  county;  William  M.  and  Hannah  11, 
both  at  home. 

Our  subject  is  a  devoted  member  of  the  United 


Presbyterian  Church,  while  his  good  wife  holds 
membership  with  the  Christian  Church  near  her 
home.  In  his  political  relations  he  is  a  Prohibi- 
tionist and  has  aided  the  progress  of  that  party 
in  this  section  very  materially.  He  has  been 
a  School  Director  for  the  past  ten  years,  and 
as  the  incumbent  of  that  position  has  given  en- 
tire satisfaction.  His  fine  estate,  which  includes 
two  hundred  and  forty  acres,  is  all  cultivated  with 
the  exception  of  seventy-five  acres.  The  land  is 
supplied  with  substantial  improvements  that  make 
it  one  of  the  most  desirable  farms  in  the  county. 


^|[  OHN  C.  RITCHIE  is  one  of  those  progress- 
ive, wide-awake  farmers  who  find  both 
^,^1  ;  pleasure  and  profit  in  cultivating  the  soil, 
^^^  and  by  means  of  dignitj'  and  ability  tend 
to  raise  the  standard  of  their  chosen  occupation. 
Besides  agricultural  pursuits,  he  is  also  interested  in 
dairy  farming,  owning  at  the  present  time  twenty- 
nine  Jersey  cows.  His  estate,  which  comprises  two 
hundred  acres,  is  pleasantly  located  on  section  10, 
township  4,  range  6,  where  also  he  has  erected  his 
creameiy,  and  now  turns  out  each  week  two  hun- 
dred pounds  of  butter. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  Robert  J.  Ritchie, 
was  born  in  County  Derry,  Ireland,  in  1794,  and 
was  the  son  of  William  Ritchie,  who  married  a 
Miss  Hemphill.  Tlie  maiden  name  of  our  subject's 
mother  was  Jane  Marshall.  She  was  a  native  of 
South  Carolina,  and  the  daughter  of  James  Mar- 
shall, who  was  married  in  that  state.  On  coming 
to  Illinois  in  1837,  he  located  on  a  farm  three 
miles  south  of  Edin,  this  count}-,  and  three  years 
later  came  to  this  township.  Here  he  entered  land 
from  the  Governmeiit  and  made  his  permanent 
home,  d3-ing  in  1866.  His  good  wife  preceded 
him  to  the  better  land  by  many  years,  departing 
this  life  in  1844.  The}'  were  the  parents  of  six 
children,  of  whom  those  living  besides  our  subject 
are:  Mary,  the  wife  of  Moore  Smith,  who  re- 
sides on  section  11,  township  4;  and  Jane,  Mrs. 
Coulter,  who  lives  in  Arkansas. 

After  the  death  of  his  first  wife,  the  father  of 
our  subject  was  married  to  Miss  Margaret,  daugh- 


302 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


ter  of  Samuel  Little,  one  of  the  earliest  settlers  in 
this  section.  By  this  union  was  born  a  daughter, 
Martha,  who  is  now  the  wife  of  George  Marshall, 
and  who  lives  in  Arkansas.  The  parents  of  our  sub- 
ject were  members  of  the  Reformed  Presbyterian 
Church,  and  were  good  and  consistent  Christians. 

John  C.  Ritchie  was  born  January  31,  1835,  in 
Fairfield  District,  S.  C,  and  was  only  two  years  of 
age  when  his  parents  made  their  advent  into  this 
state,  and  five  years  old  when  they  located  on 
what  is  now  his  farm.  Here  he  grew  to  man's 
estate,  attending  the  district  school  and  supple- 
menting the  knowledge  gained  therein  by  a  terra 
of  six  months  in  tlie  Sparta  schools.  When  eigh- 
teen years  of  age  he  hired  out  by  the  month  to  work 
on  farms,  and  spent  five  years  thus  employed. 

In  1858  Mr.  Ritchie  and  Miss  Sarah,  daughter 
of  Charles  and  Mar}'  (Hunter)  McKelvey,  old  set- 
tlers in  this  county,  were  united  in  marriage.  Mrs. 
Ritchie  was  born  November  26,  1836,  on  the  old 
McKelvey  homestead,  in  this  township,  and  has 
spent  her  entire  life  in  Randolph  Count}-.  After 
the  decease  of  his  father,  our  subject  purchased  the 
interest  in  the  old  homestead  of  his  sisters,  and 
since  then  has  been  engaged  in  its  profitable  op- 
eration. As  before  stated,  it  comprises  two  hun- 
dred acres,  and  he  has  added  to  his  income  as  a 
farmer  by  erecting  a  creamery  on  the  farm,  which 
is  supplied  with  all  modern  machinery,  and  the 
churning  is  done  by  steam.  The  product  of  the 
dairy,  which  is  of  high  grade,  is  disposed  of  mostly 
at  Marissa.  Mr.  Ritchie  is  also  largely  interested 
in  stock-raising,  and  has  a  number  of  Chester- 
White  hogs  on  his  farm. 

Of  the  nine  children  borji  to  our  subject  and 
his  wife,  we  give  the  following:  Charles  M.  mar- 
ried Jane  Hemphill;  Mary  Ida  is  the  wife  of  Oli- 
ver Wiley;  AVilliam  S.  is  the  next  in  order  of 
birth;  Jane  Amelia  is  the  wife  of  Hugh  McClure; 
James  L.,  John  W.,  Sidney  Willis,  Sarah  Mabel 
and  Stella  are  at  home.  They  have  all  been  given 
good  educations,  and  the  eldest  son,  who  is  a  min- 
ister in  the  United  Presbyterian  Church,  has  a 
charge  at  Oakdale,  this  state.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ritchie 
are  members  of  the  Reformed  Presbyterian  Church, 
in  which  body  the  former  has  been  Trustee  for 
thirty  years.    He  has  also  filled  the  office  of  School 


Director,  and  in  politics  votes  the  Prohibition 
ticket.  William  8.,  the  second  son  of  our  subject, 
is  attending  school  in  the  Allegheny  Seminary,  in 
Alleghenj^  Pa.,  where  he  is  fitting  himself  to  be- 
come a  minister,  for  which  calling  James  and  John 
are  also  preparing  themselves.  James  is  attending 
school  at  Groves  City,  Pa.,  and  prior  to  going 
there  was  graduated  from  the  S|)arta  High  School, 
standing  one  hundred  in  every  study  for  three 
examinations. 

■ ^#P •    . 


W  GUIS  GREGSON  devotes  his  time  and  at- 
I  (©)  tcntion  to  agricultural  pursuits  on  section 
jl'— ^v\  21,  township  3,  range  8  west,  Monroe  Coun- 
ty, where  he  has  under  his  control  four  hun- 
dred and  forty  acres  of  good  land.  He  is  a  son  of 
James  Gregson,a  native  of  England,  who  when  a 
boy  came  to  this  countr}'  with  his  father,  John 
Gregson,  who  settled  on  Round  Prairie,  in  Mon- 
roe County.  Here  he  entered  land  from  the  Gov- 
ernment, and  upon  the  farm  which  he  there  de- 
veloped made  his  home  until  his  death. 

James  Gregson  was  reared  under  the  parental 
roof,  and  when  he  attained  to  man's  estate,  pur- 
chased a  farm  adjoining  the  old  place.  He  was 
married  in  1818  to  Philipena  Lower.  Her  fa- 
ther was  a  native  of  Germany,  and  upon  coming 
to  this  country,  settled  on  Round  Prairie  in  an 
early  day.  In  the  family  were  four  sons,  namely: 
Philip,  Henry,  Conrad  and  Peter.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Gregson  located  on  section  30,  township  3,  where  he 
owned  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres  of  laud,  besides 
his  eight}'  acres  on  Round  Prairie  and  forty  acres 
on  the  creek.  There  he  followed  farming  until  a 
short  time  before  his  death,  when  he  removed  to 
Red  Bud.  By  his  first  marriage  he  had  three  chil- 
dren, who  are  yet  living:  Louis,  of  this  sketch; 
John,  of  Red  Bud;  and  Peter,  who  is  living  on  the 
old  homestead.  After  the  death  of  his  first  wife, 
Mr.  Gregson  wedded  Mrs.  Mary  Lower,  and  they 
had  three  children:  James  M.,  a  conductor  on  a 
street  car  in  St.  Louis;  William  H.,  who  is  living  in 
Jackson  County,  111.;  and  Emily,  the  wife  of  Hugh 
Murphy,  County  Assessor  of  Monroe  County.  The 
father  of  this  family  was  an  honored  pioneer  of 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGiaAPHICAL  RECORD. 


303 


this  section,  and  was  a  man  highly  respected  for 
his  sterling  worth. 

On  the  home  farm,  November  5,  1840,  occurred 
the  birth  of  Louis  Gregson.  He  is  now  probably 
the  oldest  native  settler  of  the  township.  He  was 
reared  under  the  parental  roof  in  the  usual  man- 
ner of  farmer  lads,  and  after  arriving  at  years  of 
maturity  he  was  married,  in  February,  1866,  to  Miss 
Elizabeth  McQuillan, daughter  of  John  McQuillan, 
whose  sketch  appears  elsewhere  in  tliis  work.  She 
was  born  in  .St.  Louis,  but  her  girlhood  days  were 
spent  in  this  cQunty.  The  young  couple  began 
their  domestic  life  upon  the  farm  which  is  now 
their  home.  They  became  the  parents  of  6ve  chil- 
dren, and  the  family  circle  3'et  remains  unbroken 
by  the  hand  of  death.  Edward  L.,  the  eldest,  is 
now  a  farmer  of  this  community;  Albert  J.  aids  in 
the  operation  of  the  home  farm;  Louis  J.  is  teach- 
ing school  on  Round  Prairie;  Gu}'  Joseph  and 
Martha  Marj'  are  still  with  their  parents. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Giegson  own  four  hundred  and 
forty  acres  of  valuable  land,  and  he  devotes  his 
time  and  attention  to  general  farming  and  stock- 
raising.  He  makes  a  specialty  of  the  breeding  of 
fine  Norman  horses.  In  polities  he  is  a  supporter 
of  the  Democracy,  and  has  served  as  Highway 
Commissioner,  Supervisor  and  School  Director. 
In  these  various  positions  he  has  ever  discharged 
his  duties  with  a  promptness  and  fidelity  that  have 
won  him  high  commendation.  He  and  his  family 
are  all  members  of  the  Catholic  Church,  and  are 
prominent  people  of  this  community,  holding  an 
enviable  position  in  social  circles. 


LFRED  ADAMS.  There  is  in  the  devel- 
(@7LI||  opment  of  every  successful  life  a  lesson 
to  everyone;  for  if  a  man  is  industriously 
ambitious  and  honorable  in  his  ambition, 
he  will  undoubtedly  rise  to  a  position  of  promi- 
nence, whether  having  a  prestige  of  family  and 
wealth  or  the  obscurity  of  poverty.  We  are  led 
to  these  reflections  in  reviewing  the  life  of  Mr. 
Adams,  who  is  Sheriff  of  Randolph  County. 

A  native  of  this  county,  our    subject  was  born 
within    three    miles  of  Chester,  March   27,  1849, 


and  is  the  son  of  James  and  Filizabeth  E.  (Easton) 
Adams.  His  parents  were  natives  of  Scotland, 
whei'e  they  were  married,  and  about  1839  emi- 
grated to  the  United  States,  locating  the  follow- 
ing year  in  this  county.  They  were  farmers  by 
occupation  and  were  numbered  among  the  well- 
to-do  citizens  of  this  section  until  their  decease. 
The  father  died  in  March,  1883,  when  in  his 
seventy-third  year,  and  his  good  wife  departed 
this  life  in  April,  1873.  They  reared  a  family  of 
seven  children,  of  whom  our  subject  is  the  only 
one  now  living. 

Alfred  Adams,  of  this  sketch,  passed  his  boyhood 
days  on  his  father's  farm,  pursuing  the  advantages 
open  to  him  in  the  common  schools.  Having  no 
taste  for  agriculture,  he  determined  to  gain  a  good 
education  and  thus  fit  himself  to  occupy  almost 
any  position  in  life.  He  took  a  course  of  study 
in  McKendrce  College,  at  Lebanon,  this  state,  and 
after  completing  liis  studies  returned  to  the  home 
farm,  where  he  married  Miss  Clementina  Cowing, 
March  23,  1869.  Mrs.  Adams  was  a  native  of 
England,  and  was  born  in  Liverpool  December 
19,  1848.  She  was  a  daughter  of  Capt.  Ran- 
dolph K.  Cowing,  and  was  only  eleven  years  old 
when  she  came  to  the  United  States.  Her  father, 
who  was  a  sea  captain,  was  lost  on  one  of  his  trips 
while  crossing  the  Atlantic. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Adams  have  been  blessed  with  a 
family  of  three  children,  viz.:  Minnie  F.,  Natalie 
G.  and  Clementina  B.  In  October,  1870,  Mr. 
Adams  came  to  this  city,  where  he  embarked  in 
the  retail  grocerj'  business,  which  he  only  carried 
on,  however,  for  a  twelvemonth.  Later,  he  pur- 
chased a  sale  and  livery  stable  in  the  city,  of 
which  he  was  the  proprietor  for  eight  years,  dur- 
ing wliich  time  he  managed  his  affairs  in  a  most 
systematic  manner.  He  was  then  compelled  to 
dispose  of  his  barns  on  account  of  being  elected 
City  Treasurer  for  a  term  of  two  years.  For  the 
succeeding  three  }^ears  he  was  engaged  in  the  in- 
surance business. 

In  1886  Mr.  Adams  was  honored  by  his  fellow- 
townsmen  b}'  being  elected  County  Treasurer  for 
a  term  of  four  years  on  the  Democratic  ticket. 
He  filled  this  office  very  acceptably,  and  was  so 
popular  in  political  circles  that  on  the  expiration 


304 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


of  his  term  as  Treasurer  he  was  elected  Sheriff  of 
Randolph  County,  which  position  he  is  holding 
at  the  present  time.  He  is  discharging  the  duties 
thus  devolving  upon  him  with  sound  judgment, 
rare  discrimination,  tact  and  fairness,  and  the 
people  are  well  satisfied  with  his  manner  of  con- 
ducting tlie  affairs  of  his  office.  He  has  been  very 
prominent  in  the  upbuilding  of  the  county,  and 
was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the  Chester  Improve- 
ment Company.  Socially,  our  subject  is  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Knights  of  Pythias,  and  was  one  of 
the  charter  members  of  the  lodge  in  the  city  of 
Chester. 


'■^  OHN  B.  BRATNF.Y,  Postmaster  at  Preston, 
I  Randolph  Count}-,  is  also  acting  as  agent 
^^  I  for  the  sale  of  wagons,  buggies  and  sewing 
^^fJ  machines.  He  is  a  native  born  citizen  of 
this  count}',  a  son  of  one  of  its  honored  residents, 
and  owns  and  superintends  the  management  of  his 
farm  of  two  hundred  and  twenty-one  acres,  which 
is  located  one  mile  from  Preston. 

Our  subject  was  born  one  mile  from  where  he  is 
at  present  residing,  February  25,  1827,  and  is  the 
son  of  Joseph  and  Elenor  (Beatty)  Bratuey.  The 
father,  who  was  born  in  Tennessee,  came  to  this 
state  about  1818,  where  he  purchased  land  from 
the  Government  at  $1.25  per  acre.  Finally  making 
his  way  to  Randolph  County,  he  built  a  sawmill 
near  this  place,  which  be  operated  for  several 
years  with  indifferent  success.  Tlien  moving  up- 
on his  farm,  lie  cleared  and  improved  it,  and  was 
engaged  in  its  operation  for  some  time.  After- 
ward he  settled  in  Preston  (which  was  in  that 
early  day  known  as  Pollock),  and  engaged  in  the 
mercantile  business.  Later,  however,  he  opened  a 
tanning  establisiiment  in  Evansville,  and  was  en- 
gaged in  that  branch  of  business  at  the  time  of 
his  decease,  in  the  winter  of  1849.  He  was  a  very 
enterprising  citizen  and  never  lost  an  opportunity 
to  advance  the  welfare  of  his  township  materially 
or  socially. 

Our  subject  has  one  brother  living  of  a  family 
of  three  sons  and  one  daughter.     He  received  his 


education  in  a  primitive  log  schoolhouse,  which 
was  the  best  that  the  locality  afforded.  It  was 
situated  in  the  woods  and  bore  little  resemblance 
to  the  convenient  and  comfortable  school  build- 
ings of  to-day.  Our  subject  and  his  brother,  New- 
ton, were  taken  into  the  home  of  their  maternal 
uncle  in  childhood.  John  B.  remained  with  this 
relative  until  starting  out  in  life  for  himself.  A 
short  time  prior  to  attaining  his  majority,  he  went 
to  New  Orleans,  and  on  his  return  north  came 
again  to  this  count}',  which  has  since  been  his 
home.  During  the  Mexican  War  he  joined  a  vol- 
unteer company,  but  as  their  services  were  not 
needed  he  did  not  go  to  war. 

In  1850  Mr.  Bratney  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Mary  Jane  Crozier,  who  was  also  born 
in  this  county  and  reare^  on  a  farm,  one  mile 
from  the  birthplace  of  our  subject.  After  their 
marriage  the  young  people  moved  upon  the  farm 
which  had  been  left  to  Mr.  Bratney  by  his  father, 
and  on  which  lie  had  erected  a  comfortable  resi- 
dence. There  he  farmed  until  1858,  when  he  was 
appointed  Postmaster  at  Preston.  Moving  into 
the  village,  he  engaged  in  merchandising  in  con- 
nection with  his  oflScial  duties  and  there  lived  for 
twenty  years.  He  has,  however,  held  the  office  of 
Postmaster  since  his  first  appointment,  during 
Buchanan's  administration,  and  is  still  the  incum- 
bent of  that  position.  He  has  also  been  Justice 
of  the  Peace  for  two  terms,  was  Trustee  of  the 
School  Board,  in  which  body  he  is  now  Clerk,  and 
holds  a  similar  position  among  the  Road  Commis- 
sioners. He  cast  his  first  Presidential  vote  for 
Zachary  Taylor,  and  after  the  organization  of  the 
Republican  party  was  a  member  of  its  ranks  until 
1892,  when  he  joined  the  People's  party. 

Mrs.  Mary  J.  Bratney  died  eleven  months  after 
her  marriage,  and  Miss  Henrietta,  the  sister  of  our 
subject,  kept  house  for  him  until  her  marriage  with 
Alexander  Mann,  one  of  the  old  settlers  of  this 
county.  She  is  now  deceased.  The  lady  whom 
our  subject  married  in  1853  was  Miss  Margaret 
Thompson.  She  became  the  mother  of  a  son, 
Theodore  S.,  who  resides  in  St.  Louis.  His  mother 
died  in  Preston  in  October,  1864.  The  present 
wife  of  Mr.  Bratney,  with  whom  he  w.is  united  in 
1868,  was  Miss  Mary  W.  Pollock,  aud  to  them  has 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


305 


been  born   one  daughter,  Nettie  F.,  now  Mrs.  W. 
A.  Glore,  of  Steeleville. 

Robert,  the  grandfatlier  of  our  subject,  was  a 
soldier  in  the  War  of  the  Revolution,  and  the  fa- 
ther of  Mr.  Bratney  served  in  tlie  War  of  1812, 
under  General  Jackson.  The  former  with  his  wife 
is  buried  on  the  farm  now  owned  by  our  subject. 
Robert  Bratney,  the  brother  of  our  subject,  was 
shot  and  l\illed  by  his  tenant,  to  whom  he  had 
rented  his  farm  near  Preston.  He  was  a  man  of 
excellent  character,  and  at  the  time  of  this  sad  af- 
fair was  living  in  Sparta. 


> 


PA 


^(OHN  HAGP:D0RN,  Justice  of  the  Peace 
in  Evansville  Precinct,  is  also  a  prominent 
farmer,  whose  practical  sagacity  and  thrift 
have  brought  him  to  the  front  as  an  agri- 
culturist. To  this  interest  he  also  adds  that  of 
nurser3'man,and  is  lyell  liked  and  respected  bj'  all 
who  know  him.  Born  in  Prussia  May  31,  1832, 
he  is  the  son  of  Paules  and  Victoria  (Hase)  Hage- 
dorn,  also  natives  of  Prussia,  where  the  mother 
died  in  1861. 

The  fatlier  of  our  subject,  who  came  to  the 
United  States  in  the  year  1866,  died  that  same 
year  at  the  home  of  our  subject.  The  parental 
family  included  six  children,  of  whom  three  be- 
sides our  subject  are  living — a  brother  in  the 
Old  Country  and  two  sisters  in  America.  John, 
of  this  sketch,  was  educated  in  Germany,  and 
was  there  married  on  the  10th  of  February,  1857. 
On  the  28th  of  the  same  month  the  young  cou- 
ple started  for  their  new  home  in  America, 
and,  making  their  wa}'  directly  to  this  state,  lo- 
cated in  Belleville,  St.  Clair  County,  where  they 
made  their  home  during  the  summer.  Then,  com- 
ing to  Randolph  County,  Mr.  Hagedorn  located 
on  property  near  his  present  home,  clearing  land 
and  cultivating  and  embellisliing  it  with  substan- 
tial buildings.  On  this  present  farm  he  continued 
to  reside  while  improving  another  one  he  liad  pur- 
chased. He  is  now  tiie  proprietor  of  two  fine  es- 
tates, which  are  located  three  miles  east  of  Evans- 


ville, one  comprising  eight}'  acres,  and  the  other 
ninety-five  acres  of  land. 

Mr.  Hagedorn  branched  out  in  the  nursery  busi- 
ness in  1888,  and  now  supplies  the  people  in  this 
section  with  the  choicest  variety  of  trees  and 
shrubs.  He  also  raises  great  varieties  of  fruit,  for 
which  he  always  finds  a  good  market  in  the  city. 
Miss  Christina  Metz  and  our  subject  were  united 
in  marriage  in  1857.-  Mrs.  Hagedorn  was  born  in 
Prussia,  Germany,  and  by  her  marriage  has  be- 
come the  mother  of  six  children,  of  whom  those 
living  are:  Sophia,  Mrs.  Edward  Ludker;  Minnie, 
the  wife  of  James  H.  Mathews;  and  Theresa,  at 
home. 

Mr.  Hagedorn  is  a  genial  gentleman,  and  his 
social  qualities  make  him  a  general  favorite,  while 
his  ability  gives  him  a  prominent  part  in  the 
management  of  local  affairs.  In  politics  he  votes 
the  Republican  ticket,  and  has  been  Constable 
since  residing  here,  or  for  eight  years,  and  has 
served  a  like  period  as  Justice  of  the  Peace. 
That  he  is  popular  is  shown  by  the  fact  that,  al- 
though bis  precinct  is  strongly  Democratic,  he 
never  fails  to  be  elected  when  brought  before  the 
people.  He  served  as  Deputy  Sheriff  for  seven 
years,  and  cast  his  first  vote  for  Abraham  Lincoln. 
With  his  wife  and  family  he  is  a  member  of  the 
Catholic  Church. 

• "^^ • 


^  OHN  HEBERER  was  one  of  the  pioneers  of 
Monroe  Count}-,  111.  A  native  of  Darm- 
stadt, Germany,  he  was  born  in  1812,  and 
in  1832,  at  the  age  of  twenty  years,  crossed 
the  Atlantic  to  the  New  World.  He  took  up  his 
residence  in  Monroe  Count}',  111.,  locating  near  Red 
Bud,  where  he  entered  land  from  the  Government, 
making  a  settlement  farther  south  than  any  other 
resident  of  this  locality  up  to  this  time.  He  then 
turned  his  attention  to  the  development  of  the 
wild  land,  and  transformed  the  raw  tract  into 
rich  and  fertile  fields. 

Mr.  Heberer  was  twice  married.  He  first  wedded 
Miss  Frick,  whose  people  were  among  the  pioneer 
settlers  of  Illinois,  and  two  children  were  born 
unto  tliem.     John,  tlie  eldest,  is  now  a  resident  of 


306 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Perry  County,  where  he  is  extensively  engaged  in 
farming.  Kate  became  the  wife  of  Peter  Wicklein, 
and  died,  leaving  six  children.  After  the  death 
of  his  first  wife,  Mr.  Ileberer  wedded  Mar3'  Schara- 
ville  in  St.  Louis.  The  marriage  was  celebrated 
ou  the  day  following  their  first  meeting.  Thej' 
became  the  parents  of  six  children,  viz.:  Will- 
iam, a  farmer;  Henry,  who  died  at  the  age  of 
twenty-one;  Charlie,  a  farmer  of  Jackson  County; 
Alexander  T.  ]).;  Edward,  who  is  now  engaged 
in  the  real-estate  business  in  Red  Bud;  and  Adam, 
an  agriculturist  of  Jackson  County. 

The  family  resided  in  Monroe  County  until  about 
1880,  when  the  farm  in  that  locality  of  two  hun- 
dred and  eighty  acres  was  sold,  and  the}'  came  to 
Red  Bud.  Here  the  father  died  in  1884,  and  the 
mother  two  years  later.  They  were  prominent 
members  of  the  Lutheran  Church,  to  the  support 
of  which  they  contributed  liberally.  Mr.  Heberer 
was  one  of  its  most  active  workers,  doing  all  in 
his  power  for  its  advancement.  In  1860  he  joined 
the  ranks  of  the  Republican  party,  of  which  he 
became  a  stanch  advocate,  and  for  four  years  he 
acceptably  tilled  the  office  of  Justice  of  the  Peace. 
His  life  was  one  well  worthy  of  emulation,  and 
his  loss  throughout  the  community  was  deeply 
mourned. 

Alexander  Ileberer  was  born  in  Monroe  Coun- 
ty in  1857,  and  was  there  reared  and  educated. 
To  his  father  he  gave  the  benefit  of  his  services 
until  he  had  attained  to  man's  estate,  when  he 
began  selling  fruit  trees  for  the  Samuel  Bayles' 
Nursery  Companj'  of  St.  Louis.  He  was  thus  em- 
ployed for  three  years,  after  which  he  spent  one 
year  as  a  farmer.  In  the  meantime  he  was  united 
in  marriage  with  Miss  Maiy  Waldmann,  by  whom 
he  has  four  children. 

In  1883  Mr.  Heberer  went  to  Jackson  County, 
where  his  brothers  had  previously  located,  and 
purchased  one  hundred  acres  of  land,  to  the  im- 
provement of  which  he  devoted  his  energies  until 
his  return  to  Red  Bud,  in  March,  1893.  He  here 
purchased  the  Dunn  Brothers'  livery  stable,  and 
now  has  the  largest  livery  stock  in  the  city.  His 
vehicles  are  of  the  finest,  and  he  has  some  good 
horses.  From  the  public  he  receives  a  liberal  pat- 
ronage and  is  now  doing   a   good  business,  which 


he  well  merits.  Mr.  Heberer  is  a  member  of  the 
Treubund  of  Red  Bud.  Both  he  and  his  wife  were 
reared  in  the  Lutheran  Church  and  are  people  of 
worth,  who  have  many  friends  throughout  this 
community. 

<^  MLLIAM  E.  LOHRBERG  is  a  leading  and 
\/\///  successful  mercliant  of  Red  Bud,  his  na- 
W^  tive  town,  where  he  was  born  in  1854. 
His  parents,  Henrj'  and  Mary  (Wicklein)  Lohr- 
beig,  were  both  natives  of  Germany,  and  during 
childiiood  came  to  this  country,  locating  in  Ran- 
dolph Count}',  111.,  where  their  marriage  was  cele- 
brated. Eight  children  have  been  born  unto  them, 
of  whom  William  is  the  eldest.  Josephine  is  now 
the  wife  of  J.  H.  Parrott,  of  Kansas  City,  Kan. 
Elizabeth  is  the  wife  of  P.  Eisenbart,  of  Monroe 
County.  George  is  engaged  in  farming  in  Mon- 
roe County.  Rebecca,  widow  of  Henry  Ratz,is  the 
proprietress  of  the  Commercial  Hotel.  Maggie  is 
the  wife  of  Al  Ratz,  of  Red  Bud. 

In  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads  our  subject 
was  reared  to  manhood,  and  the  common  schools 
of  the  community  afforded  him  his  educational 
privileges.  He  followed  farming  in  Monroe  Coun- 
ty until  twenty-seven  years  of  age,  when  he  went 
to  Kansas  City,  Kan.,  there  spending  one  year. 
On  the  expiration  of  that  period  he  came  to  Red 
Bud  and  secured  a  position  as  salesman  in  the  store 
of  Mr.  Ratz.  In  connection  with  Henry  Ratz,  the 
son  of  his  old  employer,  he  purchased  his  present 
store,  and  since  1885  the  business  has  been  carried 
on  under  the  firm  name  of  Lohrberg  &  Ratz. 
They  carry  in  stock  everything  found  in  a  first- 
class  mercantile  establishment,  and  have  succeeded 
in  building  up  a  good  trade  as  the  result  of  their 
courteous  treatment,  fair  and  honest  dealing  and 
earnest  desire  to  please  their  customers. 

In  1884  Mr.  Lohrberg  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Mary  Diehl,  and  unto  them  have  been 
born  five  children,  as  follows:  Ralph,  Elenora, 
Henry,  Tolga  and  Edwin.  Socially,  Mr.  Lohrberg 
is  connected  with  the  Knights  of  Honor  and  is  a 
member  of  the  Odd  Fellows'  societj'.  In  politics 
he  is  a  supporter  of  Democratic  principles. 

In  connection  with  his  other  interests,  our  sub- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


309 


ject  is  agent  for  the  Heim  Brewing  Company,  and 
is  also  engaged  in  tlie  manufacture  of  soda  water. 
He  owns  an  interest  in  a  farm  of  one  hundred  and 
twenty  acres  in  Monroe  County,  and  is  the  sole 
owner  of  one  hundred  and  twentj'  acres  in  the 
same  county,  which  yields  him  a  good  income.  He 
is  recognized  as  one  of  the  best  business  men  of 
Red  Bud,  and  tliough  yet  a  young  man,  is  widely 
and  favorably  known.  He  is  also  public  spirited 
and  progressive  and  takes  an  active  interest  in  the 
advancement  and  growtii  of  the  community  in 
which  he  makes  his  home.  It  is  with  pleasure  that 
we  present  to  our  readers  the  record  of  his  life. 


^(  AJ.  CHARLES  J.  CIHLDS,  M.  D.  All 
loyal  Americans  will  agree  that  the  old 
soldiers  who  sacrificed  iiome  comforts,  en- 
dured hardships  and  braved  dangers  dur- 
ing the  da^s  of  the  Nation's  peril  are  deserving 
of  remembrance.  Tbe  historian  cannot  detail  the 
lives  spent  on  the  tented  field,  but  he  can  mention 
the  chief  events  by  whicli  the  gallant  soldier  se- 
cured victory,  too  often,  alas,  at  the  price  of  manly 
vigor  and  missing  limbs.  Were  there  no  other 
reasons  than  his  army  life,  we  should  be  glad  to 
present  to  our  readers  an  outline  of  the  history  of 
Major  C'hilds,  a  prominent  ph3'siciau  of  Randolph 
Count3',  who  is  residing  at  Coulterville. 

Our  subject  was  born  March  12,  1826,  fourteen 
miles  from  the  city  of  Baltimore,  Md.,  and  is  a  son 
of  Nathaniel  Childs,  who  was  born  in  Maryland  in 
1770.  The  family  traces  its  ancestry  back  to  three 
brotliers  who  came  to  America  from  Sweden,  one 
locating  in  New  England,  another  in  South  Caro- 
lina, and  the  third  in  Maryland.  Our  subject's 
great-grandfather  was  a  blacksmith  in  Erametsburg, 
Md.,  where  ho  lived  over  two  hundred  years  ago. 

Nathaniel  Childs,  the  father  of  our  subject,  was 
a  soldier  in  the  War  of  1812,  where  he  commanded 
a  mounted  company.  The  lady  whom  lie  married 
was  born  in  Baltimore  in  1785,  and  bore  the  name 
of  Mis5  Ann  Jcssup.  She  was  the  daughter  of 
William  Jessup,  a  native  of  England,  who  emi- 


grated to  America  during  the  Revolutionary  War. 
Our  subject's  parents  came  west  in  1839  and  made 
a  permanent  home  in  St.  Louis,  where  the  father 
was  engaged  in  running  a  sawmill.  He  took  an 
active  part  in  politics  in  that  city,  and  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Cit}'  Council  for  ten  years.  He  was  Pro- 
bate Judge  in  Baltimore  for  a  number  of  years,  and 
was  a  valuable  and  influential  man  in  his  commu- 
nity. He  depaited  this  life  in  1852,  and  his  good 
wife  died  in  1865. 

Our  subject  is  the  onlj'  survivor  in  the  parental 
family  of  sixteen  children,  fourteen  of  whom  grew 
to  mature  years.  He  was  a  lad  of  twelve  years 
when  his  parents  removed  to  St.  Louis,  where  his 
education  was  completed.  He  first  attended  the 
college  at  St.  Charles,  that  state,  and  later  the  St. 
Xavier  Catholic  College  at  St.  Louis.  Deciding  to 
become  a  physician,  Mr.  Childs  entered  the  Eclectic 
Medical  Institute  of  Cincinnati  with  the  Class  of 
'45,  and  two  years  later  became  a  student  in  the  St. 
Louis  Medical  College,  from  which  he  was  gradu- 
ated in  1848.  After  practicing  three  years  in  that 
city  he  went  to  Madison,  Ind.,  and  after  a  resi- 
dence there  of  three  years  returned  to  the  Mound 
City.  A  twelvemonth  later,  however,  he  came  to 
Chester,  this  county,  where  he  engaged  in  the 
practice  of  his  profession  until  1861,  when  he  took 
up  his  abode  in  Sparta,  this  countj'. 

In  September  of  the  above  year.  Dr.  Childs  en- 
tered the  Union  army,  being  commissioned  Eirst 
Lieutenant  of  Company  K,  Fifth  Illinois  Cavalry. 
He  was  sent  to  Pilot  Knob,  Mo.,  in  February,  1862, 
and  advanced  through  Arkansas  to  Helena,  in  the 
meantime  skirmishing  with  Generals  Price  and 
Van  Dorn.  July  1,  he  moved  with  his  company 
to  Jackson  Port,  Ark.,  and  in  the  skirmish  which 
followed  with  General  Hovey,  Major  Childs  led 
the  advance  in  person,  and  compelled  the  retreat 
of  the  enemy.  Later  they  went  to  Clarendon,  and 
on  crossing  the  White  River  to  Helena,  Ark.,  he 
encountered  the  guerrillas.  He  then  received  com- 
mand to  go  forward  with  one  hundred  men  as 
guards  along  the  river,  and  in  February,  1863, 
joined  Grant's  army. 

His  health  having  been  very  much  impaired.  Dr. 
Childs  returned  home,  intending  to  devote  his 
time  to  his  profession.     His  plans  were  frustrated, 


310 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


however,  in  May,  1864,  by  a  call  for  one  hundred- 
day  men,  when  he  raised  a  company  of  one  hun- 
dred and  thirty-iive  volunteers,  and  on  going  to 
Springfield  was  commissioned  Major  of  the  One 
Hundred  and  Fort3r-second  Regiment.  He  was 
then  ordered  to  Memphis,  Tenn.,  where  he  served 
under  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith.  At  the  time  Forrest  made 
his  last  raid  on  Memphis,  our  subject's  regiment 
was  ordered  to  hold  White  Star  Station,  which  he 
did  at  the  head  of  his  command.  On  his  return 
to  Memphis  he  was  ordered  to  Chicago,  where  they 
were  to  be  mustered  out.  General  Price  at  that 
time  was  making  a  raid  in  Missouri,  and  Major 
Childs'  regiment  was  called  upon  to  go  down  and 
aid  in  the  defense  of  St.  Louis.  They  went  for- 
ward, and  after  reaching  the  citj'  reported  to  Gen- 
eral Rosecrans,  who  ordered  them  to  Benton  Bar- 
ricks  and  afterward  to  guard  the  Missouri  Pacific 
Railroad.  After  ten  daj'S  thus  occupied  the}'  re- 
turned to  Chicago,  where  they  were  mustered  out 
November  1,  1864.  Major  Childs  was  very  popu- 
lar with  "the  boys"  and  was  on  many  occasions 
highl}'  complimented  for  his  brave  actions  by  his 
superior  officers. 

On  returning  home  from  the  war,  Dr.  Childs 
practiced  medicine  in  Sparta  until  April,  1874, 
when  he  came  to  Coulterville,  and  has  since  made 
his  home  at  this  place.  In  March,  1847,  he  mar- 
ried Miss  Elizaljeth  A.  Balridge,  who  was  born  in 
Ohio,  November  13,  1828.  She  is  the  daughter  of 
Alexander  H.  Balridge,  M.  D.,  who  was  Professor 
in  the  Eclectic  Medical  College  at  Cincinnati,  Ohio. 
Mrs.  Childs  is  a  lady  of  high  culture  and  fine  edu- 
cation, and  by  her  union  with  our  subject  has  be- 
come the  mother  of  eight  children,  of  whom  those 
living  are:  Emma  F.,  the  widow  of  S.  B.  Brown; 
Nathaniel,  a  student  in  the  theological  college  at 
Xenia,  Ohio;  Charles  A.,  a  farmer;  Elizabeth  May, 
the  wife  of  C.  R.  McKelve}',  and  Sally  J.,  the  wife 
of  R.  A.  Leiper.  The  Doctor  is  a  Presbyterian  re- 
ligiously, while  Mrs.  Childs  holds  membership  in 
the  United  Presbyterian  Church. 

In  politics  the  Doctor  always  takes  an  active 
part,  and  began  making  political  speeches  in  be- 
half of  the  AVhig  party  when  eighteen  years  old. 
He  is  an  influential  citizen,  and  was  President 
of    the    Board    of    Trustees    of    Coulterville    for 


twelve  years.  The  schools  of  this  vicinity  find 
in  him  an  earnest  advocate,  and  the  Sparta  High 
School  owes  its  existence  to  his  push  and  en- 
ergy. He  has  been  School  Director  for  the  past 
nine  years,  and  during  that  time  was  Secretary  of 
the  Board. 

Dr.  Childs  was  a  personal  friend  of  Gen.  John 
A.  Logan,  Governors  Yates,  Hamilton  and  Fifer» 
and  Senator  CuUom.  He  was  present  at  the  state 
convention  that  instructed  for  Grant,  during  which 
time  the  contest  between  Logan  and  Farewell 
for  the  United  States  Senate  took  place.  At  dif- 
ferent times  he  has  been  associated  on  committees 
with  Stephen  A.  Douglas,  Jr.,  and  Robert  Lincoln. 
He  has  been  delegate  to  five  state  conventions,  and 
presided  over  the  first  Republican  convention,  held 
in  Randolph  County  in  1856. 


•S^ 


^=!^,EORGE  HOMRIGHAUSEN  is  a  Notary 
i||  ,==,  Public  and  a  well  known  citizen  of  Red 
^^j)  Bud.  His  father,  Henry  Homrighausen, 
was  born  in  Prussia,  Germany,  in  1822,  and  came 
to  America  in  1841,  locating  in  St.  Louis,  where 
he  remained  some  months.  In  companj-  with  a 
friend  he  then  went  to  Kansas  Cit}',  but  finding 
no  employmeut  there,  returned  to  St.  Louis,  where 
be  worked  in  flouring  mills.  In  1847  he  was 
married  to  Sophia  Scharch,  and  in  March,  1854, 
came  with  his  family  to  Monroe  County,  111., 
where  he  purchased  eighty  acres  of  land.  The 
forty-acre  tract  on  which  he  settled  was  but  par- 
tially improved.  He  at  once  began  its  further 
development,  and  from  time  to  time  made  addi- 
tional purchases,  until  at  his  death  he  owned  five 
hundred  and  sixty  acres  of  valuable  and  highly 
improved  land.  He  came  to  this  country  a  poor 
man,  but  by  industry  and  economy  arose  to  a  posi- 
tion of  affluence. 

To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Homrighausen  were  born  ten 
children,  eight  of  whom  grew  to  mature  j^ears: 
George,  of  this  sketch;  Frank,  of  Monroe  County; 
John,  who  resides  on  the  old  homestead;  AVilliam 
and  August,  who  are  also  living  in  Monroe  Coun- 
ty; Catherine,  who  makes  her  home  with  the 
brothers  just  mentioned;    Elizabeth,  wife  of  Ernst 


POETEAIT  A^'D  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


311 


Heyl,  of  Monroe  County;  and  Annie,  wife  of 
George  Hepp,  Jr.,  of  Monroe  County.  The  father 
of  this  famih-  held  many  offices  of  public  trust. 
He  served  for  sixteen  yeai-s  as  Justice  of  the  Peace, 
was  seven  3'ears  Town  Tre.asurer,  and  was  filling 
that  position  at  the  time  of  his  death.  In  politics 
he  was  a  stanch  Republican,  and  was  a  member  of 
the  Evangelical  Church,  in  which  he  took  an  act- 
ive interest.  He  died  April  5,  1884,  and  his  wife 
passed  away  October  2,  1887.  They  were  consist- 
ent Christian  people  and  had  the  high  regard  of 
all  who  knew  them. 

George  Homrighausen  was  horn  in  St.  Louis  in 
1851,  and  was  only  three  3-ears  old  when  his  par- 
ents came  to  Illinois.  He  grew  to  manhood  on  his 
father's  farm,  aiding  in  the  labors  of  the  field  in 
the  summer  months  and  attending  the  common 
schools  through  the  winter.  He  thus  acquired  a 
knowledge  of  the  common  branches,  and  at  the 
age  of  sixteen  he  entered  the  seminary  of  Oakfield, 
Mo.  Later  he  attended  school  in  Waterloo,  and 
having  successfully  passed  an  examination  in  1869, 
he  taught  his  first  school  in  Prairie  du  Long  in  the 
following  winter,  after  which  he  taught  five  con- 
secutive terms  in  the  Union  school.  Afterward 
he  followed  his  profession  in  Monroe  Count\', 
having  charge  of  the  school  at  Freedom.  Through 
each  winter  season  until  1885  he  followed  the  vo- 
cation of  a  teacher  at  various  places.  In  1873  he 
attended  the  Normal  department  of  the  Southern 
Illinois  University,  of  Carbondale.  In  1885  he 
abandoned  teaching  and  devoted  his  time  to  farm- 
ing until  1891,  when  he  located  in  Red  Bud. 

In  1876  Mr.  Homrighausen  married  Miss  Eliza- 
beth, daughter  of  Philip  Sauer,  one  of  the  pioneers 
of  Monroe  County  and  a  native  of  German3'.  He 
came  to  America  in  183.3,  at  the  age  of  twenty- 
four,  locating  in  Pennsylvania,  and  remaining 
there  until  1838.  when  he  removed  to  Arkansas 
and  engaged  in  contract  work.  In  1839  he  re- 
moved to  Monroe  County,  where  he  purchased 
and  improved  two  hundred  and  eighty-eight  acres 
of  land,  making  his  home  thereon  until  his  death. 
His  wife  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Elizabeth  Sen- 
sel  and  was  a  resident  of  Round  Prairie.  Thej' 
became  the  parents  of  the  following  children: 
Nicholas  and  William,  who  are  millers,  of  Evans- 


ville;  Philip, a  farmer  of  Randolph  County;  Mary, 
deceased;  Catherine,  Mrs.  August  Slehfesl,  now 
deceased;  M.igdalena,  Mrs.  John  Bartlie,  Jr.;  Eliza- 
beth, wife  of  our  subject;  and  Sophia,  wife  of 
Frank  Homrighausen. 

Our  subject  owns  a  valuable  propertj^  in  Red 
Bud  and  a  well  improved  farm  of  one  hundred 
and  sixtv  acres  in  Monroe  Countj',  which  j'ields 
to  him  a  good  income.  He  devotes  his  time  to 
looking  after  his  interests  and  to  his  duties  as  No- 
tarv  Public.  He  held  the  office  of  Town  Treasurer 
in  Prairie  du  Long  for  eight  years  and  was  nom- 
inated on  the  Independent  ticket  for  County 
Clerk.  He  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the  Farm- 
ers' Mutual  Benefit  Association  of  Monroe  Coun- 
ty and  served  as  its  President  for  several  years. 
He  is  a  member  and  Trustee  of  the  Protestant 
Evangelical  Church,  and  has  lived  an  honorable, 
upright  life,  which  lias  gained  him  the  confidence 
and  good  will  of  all  witli  whom  he  has  been  brought 
in  contact.  He  is  numbered  among  the  pioneer 
settlers  of  this  locality'  and  is  well  known  in  Ran- 
dolph and  adjoining  counties. 


^^IMOTHY  LIDDY  was  born  in  County 
'rf^^  Limerick,  Ireland,  in  1809,  and  on  emigrat- 
^^^  ing  to  America  located  in  St.  Louis,  where 
he  was  engaged  in  contracting  and  in  grading 
streets.  In  the  winter  of  1843-44,  he  came  to 
Randolph  County,  bringing  with  him  his  wife  and 
one  child,  and  locating  upon  a  farm  of  one  hun- 
dred and  sixt}-  acres,  which  he  had  purchased  in 
1842.  In  1844  the  country  was  almost  flooded, 
the  water  reaching  the  highest  mark  ever  known 
in  this  community. 

In  1842,  Mr.  Liddy  was  joined  in  wedlock  with 
Margaret  McKenna,  a  native  of  Dublin,  Ireland, 
who  came  to  America  in  1834  with  her  mother 
and  brothers.  One  son,  James,  was  born  unto 
them  ere  the3'  left  St.  Louis,  and  on  their  farm 
upon  the  prairie  the  famil3'  circle  was  increased 
by  the  birth  of  five  children:  Lizzie,  who  died  at 
the  age  of  three  3'ears;   Margaret;  Katie,  wife  of 


312 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORt). 


John  "Wall,  of  Waterloo,  now  deceased;  John,  de- 
ceased, and  Daniel. 

At  the  time  of  his  death,  Mr.  Liddy  owned 
over  eight  hundred  acres  of  valuable  land,  the 
greater  part  of  wiiich  was  situated  in  one  body, 
and  all  of  which  had  been  accumulated  through 
his  own  efforts;  his  industry,  economy  and  good 
management  being  the  factors  that  won  him  his 
well  merited  success.  He  owned  besides  this  a 
third  interest  in  nine  hundred  acres  in  the  Missis- 
sippi Valley,  near  old  Ft.  Charter,  all  of  which 
is  now  owned  by  his  son,  Daniel.  In  1865,  Mr. 
Liddy  was  stricken  with  paralysis,  and  from  this 
affliction  died  in  1872.  He  retained  his  faculties 
up  to  the  very  last  and  transacted  his  own  business. 
His  wife  survived  him  about  four  years.  They 
were  worthy  people,  and  their  many  excellencies 
of  character  gained  them  high  regard. 

John  Liddy,  the  second  son,  resided  on  the  old 
homestead  with  his  brother,  Daniel,  and  they  were 
equal  partners  in  the  business  until  the  death  of 
the  former.  He  died  from  sunstroke  in  August, 
1888.  James,  the  eldest,  disposed  of  his  business 
interests  in  Randolph  County,  and  is  now  a  resi- 
dent of  Perryville,  Mo. 

Daniel  Liddy  was  born  in  Randolph  County  in 
1853,  and  received  a  common-school  and  academic 
education.  On  the  death  of  the  father,  the  two 
brothers  succeeded  to  the  business,  and  since  the 
death  of  John,  Daniel  has  carried  on  the  business 
alone.  He  has  sold  none  of  the  propert3',  but  has 
managed  it  all,  and  in  his  careful  supervision  has 
displayed  excellent  business  and  executive  abilit3^ 
His  sister  3'et  owns  an  interest  in  the  propertj'. 
In  the  nine  hundred  acres,  of  which  the  father 
owned  a  third  interest,  the  other  owners  were 
John  and  Daniel,  and  the  property  is  now  in  the 
possession  of  the  latter.  On  this  farm  stands  a 
small  village,  which  was  esuablished  by  Mr.  Liddj'. 
Altogether  he  and  his  sister  own  about  twelve 
hundred  acrres  of  fine  land,  which  he  manages  and 
superintends  personally.  They  reside  on  the  old 
homestead  in  the  house  erected  b^-  their  father  be- 
fore his  death. 

In  their  political  views  the  members  of  the 
familj'  are  Democrats,  but  before  the  war,  Mr. 
Lidd_v,  Sr.,  was  a  strong  opponent  of  slavery.     He 


and  his  wife  were  conscientious  Catholics,  and 
reared  their  children  in  that  faith.  The  name  of 
Lidd^'  is  inseparably  connected  with  the  agricult- 
ural interests  of  this  communit}',  and  in  Daniel 
Liddy  the  family  has  a  worthy'  representative. 


^  ESSE  BANNISTER,  a  well  known  citizen  of 
I  Randolph  County,  is  descended  from  good 
^^  '  old  Revolutionary  stock,  his  paternal  grand- 
^^f)  father,  Jesse  Bannister,  having  aided  in  the 
struggle  for  independence.  After  tlie  war  was 
over  he  received  a  pension  in  recognition  of  his 
services.  He  was  born  in  1754,  and  much  of  his 
life  was  passed  in  Vermont.  He  was  a  son  of 
Thomas  Bannister,  and  his  grandfather  was  Joseph 
Bannister,  one  of  three  brothers,  who  came  from 
England  to  America  in  1660  and  settled  in  Massa- 
chusetts. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  Oliver  Bannister,  was 
born  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  in  Julj-,  1794,  and  when 
a  young  man  of  twentj--one  went  to  New  York. 
There  he  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  cloth 
until  1829,  when  he  came  west  to  Illinois,  settling 
in  Randolph  County,  where  he  also  operated  a 
carding  machine  and  manufactured  cloth.  Later 
he  removed  to  Eden,  where  his  death  occurred. 
By  occupation  he  was  a  weaver  and  dj'er,  and 
after  coming  west  he  followed  farming  in  addition 
to  other  enterprises.  At  one  time  he  owned  four- 
teen hundred  acres  of  land,  but  lost  much  of  this 
in  an  unfortunate  investment.  He  was  a  man  of 
good  habits  and  lived  an  upright,  honorable  life. 
In  politics  he  was  first  a  Whig  and  afterward  a 
Republican.  He  belonged  to  the  Reformed  Pres- 
byterian Church,  and  served  as  one  of  its  Trustees. 
His  wife,  who  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Eliza  Paul- 
hemns,  was  a  native  of  New  Jerse}-,  and  her  father 
was  a  native  of  Holland.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bannister 
had  a  large  familj',  but  only  four  grew  to  mature 
years:  Charlotte,  who  is  deceased;  Lj'dia,  who  died 
leaving  one  son;  Lucretia,  wife  of  John  Baird;  and 
Jesse. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  born  in  the  Em- 
pire State,  and  when  two  years  of  age  was  brought 
by  his  parents  to   Illinois,  wliere,  amid    the  wild 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


313 


scenes  of  frontier  life,  be  was  reared  to  manhood. 
He  remained  under  tlie  parental  roof  until  twent}'- 
six  years  of  age,  when,  in  18o3.  he  was  married, 
the  lad}^  of  his  choice  being  Margaret,  daughter  of 
Joshua  and  Margaret  Smith.  Her  parents  -were 
natives  of  Ireland,  and  from  that  country  emi- 
grated to  Canada  and  thence  to  Missouri.  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Bannister  became  the  parents  of  eleven  chil- 
dren: Ormsby,  who  is  now  living  in  Eden;  Laura, 
wife  of  C.  Young,  of  this  township;  Olive,  at  home; 
Mar}',  the  wife  of  Alfred  Miller,  of  Kansas;  Eliza- 
beth and  William  T.,  both  of  Kansas;  Irene,  who 
died  at  the  age  of  ten;  Joshua  R.,  who  died  at  the 
age  of  twenty-two;  U.  S.  Grant,  at  home;  Charlotte, 
who  died  at  the  age  of  one  3"ear;  and  AValdo,  who 
completes  the  family. 

Mr.  Bannister  began  farming  in  his  own  interest 
upon  his  marriage,  purchasing  sixty  acres  of  land 
at  *10  per  acre.  From  time  to  time  he  has  extended 
the  boundaries  of  his  farm  until  it  now  comprises 
four  hundred  acres  of  good  land,  all  of  which  is 
under  a  high  state  of  cultivation  and  well  im- 
proved. The  place  is  neat  and  thrift^'  in  appear- 
ance and  gives  evidence  of  the  careful  supervi- 
sion of  the  owner.  His  time  is  largel}'  taken  up 
by  his  business,  but  he  devotes  some  attention  to 
public  interests.  For  twentj'  years  he  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  School  Board  and  did  eflfective  service 
for  the  cause  of  education.  He  is  now  serving  as 
Township  Trustee.  In  politics  he  is  a  Republican. 
His  wife  is  a  member  of  the  Reformed  Presbyterian 
Church. 

PREDERICK  GUKER  was  born  near  Stras- 
:  burg,  in  Alsace-Lorraine,  in  1808,  and  at 
the  age  of  nineteen  crossed  the  Atlantic  to 
America.  At  the  early  age  of  eight,  he  was  thrown 
upon  his  own  resources,  and  for  seven  j'ears  worked 
in  a  mill.  He  then  served  a  three  years'  appren- 
ticeship to  a  baker,  and  a  year  later  he  determined 
to  seek  a  home  and  fortune  beyond  the  Atlantic. 
On  the  4th  of  July,  1827,  he  landed  in  New  York, 
where  for  five  j-ears  he  worked  at  his  trade.  He 
then  went  to  New  Orleans,  and  for  three  jears  was 
employed  in  the  oldest  baker}'  in  the  city.  In 
January,   1836,  he  went  up  the  Mississippi  to  St. 


Louis,  and  a  month  later  entered  the  emploj'  of 
John  McGinnis,  of  Kaskaskia,  111.,  as  a  baker.  He 
served  one  year,  and  then  bought  out  his  em- 
plo3'er,  carr^'ing  on  the  business  in  his  own  inter- 
est, in  connection  with  which  he  also  established  a 
hotel  and  liveiy  business.  These  three  enterprises 
he  conducted  until  1858,  but  the  high  waters  of 
the  winters  of  1844,  1851  and  1858  completely 
swept  away  all  he  had  accumulated. 

Mr.  Guker  then  turned  his  attention  to  farming, 
but  in  December,  1859,  again  went  to  New  Or- 
leans. He  had  married  in  1835,  in  that  city,  the 
lad}'  of  his  choice  being  Margaret  Medart,  a  native 
of  Germany,  who  came  with  her  parents  to  this 
country  in  1832,  locating  in  the  Crescent  City. 
Twelve  children  were  born  to  our  subject  and  his 
wife,  eight  of  whom  grew  to  mature  years.  Chris- 
tina became  the  wife  of  Michael  Case,  and  died 
leaving  two  children,  Louisa  and  William;  Mrs. 
Caroline  Hendricks  died  leaving  one  son,  August, 
now  of  New  Orleans;  Louise  is  the  wife  of  George 
Hatters,  of  Algiers,  La.,  and  has  three  children, 
Georgiana,  Clara  and  Vivian;  Fred  D.  is  now  liv- 
ing in  Red  Bud;  Margaret  is  the  wife  of  John 
Rail,  of  Red  Bud  Precinct,  by  whom  she  has  nine 
children;  Sophia  is  the  wife  of  James  Ashton,  a 
conductor  on  the  Southern  Pacific  Railroad  in  Al- 
giers, La.,  and  they  have  four  children;  Mary  E. 
is  the  wife  of  William  H.  Toy,  of  Omaha,  Neb. 
Daniel  died  in  Red  Bud,  leaving  five  children, 
who  make  their  home  in  Randolph  County. 

In  September,  1865,  Frederick  Guker  came  to 
Red  Bud,  where  he  made  his  home  until  his  death, 
in  April,  1875.  In  politics  he  was  a  stalwart  sup- 
j)orter  of  the  Democratic  party.  Warm  hearted 
and  generous,  he  gave  libeially  of  his  means  to 
various  interests  and  enterprises,  and  no  needy 
one  ever  left  his  door  empty-handed.  He  had  the 
high  regard  of  all  who  knew  him,  and  his  death 
was  deeply  mourned. 

Fred  D.  Guker  was  born  in  Kaskaskia,  111.,  April 
15,  1840,  and  in  1846  was  taken  to  New  Orleans, 
where  he  lived  with  an  aunt,  Mrs.  Christine  Rivoil, 
until  1854,  when  he  returned  home  on  a  visit, 
spending  six  months  in  this  state.  In  1855,  he 
again  went  to  the  Crescent  City,  but  the  following 
year  returned  to  Kaskaskia,  and  continued  to  live 


314 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


with  his  parents  until  1859.  lu  that  j'ear  he  again 
went  south,  and  from  1861  until  April,  1862,  was 
in  the  Confederate  army.  He  was  taken  prisoner 
at  that  time,  and  on  being  paroled,  went  to  New 
Orleans.  lie  acquired  a  good  education  in  Algiers, 
La.,  and  after  coming  to  Red  Bud,  taught  school 
for  about  six  years. 

In  1873,  Mr.  Gukerwas  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Olive,  daughter  of  William  Briekey.  She 
died  in  January,  1876.  and  he  afterward  married 
Miss  Mary  Gross,  a  native  of  Missouri.  Ttiej'  had 
six  children,  five  of  whom  are  yet  living:  Reginald 
E.,  Fred  D.,  George  G.,  Irene  E.  and  Clarence  A. 
Edgar  F.  died  in  childhood. 

Mr.  Guker  has  been  honored  with  election  to 
office.  He  has  served  as  Town  and  City  Clerk 
since  May,  1874,  with  the  exception  of  one  term, 
and  has  held  the  office  of  Justice  of  the  Peace  for 
sixteen  consecutive  years.  He  was  Notary  Public 
for  fifteen  consecutive  years,  and  has  been  Town 
Treasurer  since  June,  1892.  In  all  these  offices  he 
has  ever  been  found  faithful  and  true,  and  the 
promptness  and  fidelity  with  which  he  has  dis- 
charged his  public  duties  have  won  him  high  com- 
mendation. He  votes  with  the  Democratic  part}'. 
Socially,  he  is  a  member  of  the  Masonic  fraternity, 
and  the  Odd  Fellows'  and  Knights  of  Honor  lodges, 
in  all  of  which  organizations  he  has  served  as  Sec- 
retary. A  man  of  sterling  worth,  he  has  many 
friends  throughout  the  couimunit}',  and  is  held  in 
high  esteem  b^'  all. 


THOMAS  II.  BURNS.  It  is  impossible  in  a 
brief  biographical  sketch  to  render  full  jus- 
tice to  prominent  men,  and  yet  there  are 
some  who  are  so  iutimatei^-  and  clearly  identified 
with  the  countj^'s  welfare,  and  whose  names  are  so 
familiar  to  all,  that  it  is  only  right  to  dwell  upon 
what  they  have  done  and  the  influence  of  their 
career  upon  others.  To  this  class  belongs  Thomas 
II.  Burns,  who  is  the  present  Trustee  of  township  5, 
range  10,  Randolph  County.  He  is  an  active, 
wide-awake  fanner,  who  has  won  success  in  pur- 
suing his  favorite  occupation. 

Our  subject's  birth  occurred  in  Monroe  County, 


this  state,  December  8,  1841.  lie  is  the  son  of 
James  and  Lucinda  (Brewer)  Burns,  the  former  of 
whom  was  born  in  Perry  County,  Mo.,  in  1808. 
He  was  of  Scotch-Irish  descent,  a  farmer  b\'  occu- 
pation, and  departed  this  life  in  1848  in  Monroe 
County,  this  state,  where  he  had  resided  for  a  few 
years.  The  mother  of  our  subject  is  still  living,  at 
the  advanced  age  of  eighty  j-ears,  and  makes  her 
home  in  this  county.  Our  subject  and  his  brother, 
Basil  K.,  are  the  onlj'  members  living  of  the 
parental  family  of  eight  children.  The  former  re- 
ceived a  limited  education  in  the  common  schools 
of  Randolph  County,  and  after  the  decease  of  his 
father,  remained  at  home  with  his  mother  until 
reaching  his  majority. 

On  the  outbreak  of  the  Civil  War,  Thomas  H. 
Burns  joined  the  Union  ranks,  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  Company  B,  Fort3'-ninth  Illinois  Infantry, 
which  was  commanded  b}'  his  brother,  James  P. 
At  the  battle  of  Ft.  Donelson,  in  which  our  sub- 
ject participated,  his  brother  was  killed.  Thomas 
H.  was  present  at  the  siege  of  Corinth,  and  at  the 
battle  of  Pleasant  Hill,  La.,  and  with  his  company 
was  detailed  on  the  raid  after  Price.  At  the  bat- 
tle of  Nashville,  which  followed,  he  was  color 
bearer,  and  in  1862,  when  at  Henderson,  Tenn., 
was  taken  prisoner  and  sent  to  Columbia,  that 
state,  whence  he  was  paroled  ten  days  later  and 
couve3'ed  to  Columbus,  Ohio,  where  he  was  ex- 
changed. During  the  last  three  ^years  of  his  serv- 
ice he  was  Corporal  of  his  company,  and  although 
in  the  war  from  the  beginning  to  the  close,  he  was 
never  wounded,  but  for  a  month  was  confined  in 
the  hospital  at  White  Station,  Tenn.,  where  he  had 
an  attack  of  bilious  fever. 

After  the  establishment  of  peace,  our  subject  re- 
turned home  to  Randolph  County,  where  he  worked 
out  b}'  the  month  for  a  year,  and  October  16,  1866, 
was  married  to  Miss  Mary  A.  Hull.  The  two  chil- 
dren who  have  come  to  bless  their  home  are 
Henry  E.  and  Sarah.  Mrs.  Burns  is  a  faithful 
member  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  while 
the  mother  of  our  subject  is  a  Catholic  in  religion. 

Mr.  Burns  has  made  this  township  his  home 
since  1876.  He  is  truly  a  self-made  man,  and  has 
met  with  both  friendship  and  financial  success  in 
his  journey  through  life.     He  owns  two  hundred 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


315 


and  forty-eight  acres  of  well  improved  laud,  and 
his  residence  is  located  one  and  a-quarter  miles 
northeast  of  Brewersville.  In  politics  he  votes 
with  the  Republican  party,  and  cast  his  first  bal- 
lot for  Abraham  Lincoln.  He  takes  an  active  in- 
terest in  public  affairs,  and  is  now  filling  the  office 
of  Township  Trustee.  As  might  be  expected,  he  is 
a  Grand  Army  man,  being  connected  with  >;ichol- 
son  Post  No.  457,  at  Red  Bud. 


i^^m^^^mm 


<«       felLLIAAJ 
V^     activeb 


<^  j^ILLIAM  P.  McLaughlin,  a  wide-awake 
man  of  Randolph  County,  is  now 
i^ely  connected  with  the  business  in- 
terests of  Sparta,  and  conducts  a  large  queensware 
and  grocery  store,  carrying  a  stock  valued  at 
13,500.  He  is  also  the  owner  of  a  valuable  estate 
of  three  hundred  acres,  the  greater  portion  of 
which  is  under  an  admirable  state  of  cultivation, 
and  which  brings  him  a  good  income  from  its 
rental. 

Mathew  McLaughlin,  the  father  of  our  subject, 
is  4  native  of  Ireland,  and  was  born  in  County 
Antrim  in  1817.  He  crossed  the  Atlantic  about 
1833,  and  landing  on  American  soil,  made  bis  way 
to  this  count3%  where  he  purchased  land  on  section 
36,  township  5,  range  6.  Here  he  conducted  farm- 
ing o|)erations,  and  was  more  than  ordinarily  suc- 
cessful in  his  chosen  calling.  He  was  classed  among 
the  wealthy  agriculturists  of  his  township.  He 
received  such  an  education  as  was  common  to  give 
the  youth  of  his  day  in  Ireland,  and  departed  this 
life  on  the  alx)ve  farm  in  1883.  He  was  ever  a 
consistent  Christian,  and  was  a  devoted  member  of 
the  Presbyterian  Church.  He  was  a  prominent  man 
in  politics  and  alwaj's  cast  his  ballot  for  Repub- 
lican candidates. 

Michael  and  Jennie  (Patton)  McLaughlin,  the 
paternal  grandparents  of  our  subject,  were  also 
natives  of  Ireland,  where  they  were  well-to-do 
farmers.  They  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in 
company  with  their  son  alx)ut  1833.  The  maiden 
name  of  our  subject's  mother  was  Martha  Kell. 
She  was  born  in  South  Carolina,  and  accompanied 
her  parents,  John  and  Nancy  Kell,  on  their  re- 
moval to  Randolph  County.     She  died  some  time 


in  the  '50s,  after  having  become  the  mother  of  four 
children,  those  beside  our  subject  being  John  (de- 
ceased), John,  the  second  of  that  name  (who  is 
also  deceased),  and  Margaret,  now  the  wife  of 
James  C.  Wilson,  of  this  count}'. 

A  native  of  Randolph  County,  William  P.  Mc- 
Laughlin was  born  Decembert'  12,  1846.  He  re- 
mained at  home  with  his  parents  until  reaching 
his  majority,  in  the  meantime  attending  the  dis- 
trict schools  during  the  winter  months,  and  work- 
ing out  on  farms  through  the  summer  seasons. 
When  ready  to  establish  a  home  of  his  own  he  was 
married,  in  1867,  to  Miss  Eliza  Jane  Ward,  and 
the  young  couple  immediately-  located  upon  rented 
property-,  which  he  continued  to  operate  for  the 
following  four  3-ears.  At  the  expiration  of  that 
time,  his  father  having  died,  our  subject  fell  heir 
to  the  old  homestead,  on  which  he  made  his  home 
until  1883,  the  date  of  his  removal  to  Sparta.  For 
the  succeeding  five  years,  however,  he  gave  his 
personal  attention  to  the  management  of  the 
home  farm,  but  in  1888  rented  the  propertj'  and 
launched  out  in  the  grocery  business.  ,  He  has  a 
well  equipped  establishment,  and  is  prompt  and 
courteous  in  his  dealings  with  customers,  and  as  a 
consequence  is  carrying  on  a  very  lucrative  trade. 

Mrs.  Eliza  J.  McLaughlin  was  a  native  of  this 
county,  and  was  the  daughter  of  Josiah  and  Jane 
(Caldwell)  Ward,  natives  of  South  Carolina.  She 
became  the  mother  of  three  children,  and  departed 
this  life  on  the  14th  of  April,  1875.  She  was 
one  of  the  leading  members  of  the  Presb^-terian 
Church,  and  in  all  things  maide  her  life  accord  with 
the  principles  taught  by  that  denomination.  By 
this  marriage  there  were  the  following  children: 
Martha  J..  Charles  A.  and  Eliza  J.  The  latter 
died  on  the  8th  of  September,  1875.  In  the  year 
1876  our  subject  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Margaret,  daughter  of  Alexander  and  Mar- 
garet (Anderson)  Russell,  natives  of  Ireland.  Mrs. 
McLaughlin  was  born  in  this  county,  and  b}-  her 
union  with  our  subject  has  become  the  mother  of 
the  following  four  children:  Margaret  E.,  William 
L.,  Martin  Henry  and  Ira  G.  Margaret  E.  de- 
parted this  life  July  8,  1879. 

Our  subject  is  an  official  member  of  the  United 
Presbvterian  Church,  with  which  denomination  his 


316 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


wife  is  also  connected.  He  is  a  stanch  Republican, 
and  as  one  of  Sparta's  most  enterprising  citizens, 
has  ahva^'s  been  identilied  witli  uiorements  bene- 
ficial to  the  communilN-. 

'jfjOIIN  R.  McQuillan  is  the  junior  member 
of  the  firm  of  Mudd  &  McQuillan,  dealers 
^-^  in  general  merchandise  at  Red  Bud.  He 
'f^f'  was  born  on  the  old  McQuillan  homestead 
in  Monroe  County,  January  21,  1851,  and  is  a  son 
of  John  McQuillan,  Sr.,  whose  sketch  ap[)ears  else- 
where in  tliis  work.  He  was  reared  upon  the  old 
farm  and  early  began  work  in  the  fields.  His 
primary  education  was  acquired  in  the  district 
schools  of  the  neighborhood,  and  was  completed 
by  study  in  the  Mound  City  Commercial  College 
of  St.  Louis. 

Having  arrived  at  3ears  of  niaturit}',  Mr.  Mc- 
Quillan was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  R.  J. 
Dinan,  daughter  of  Timothy  Dinan,  one  of  the 
early  settlers  of  Monroe  County.  The  lady  was 
born  and  reared  in  this  county,  and  the  marriage 
of  the  young  couple  was  celebrated  in  1879.  They 
began  their  domestic  life  upon  a  farm  and  there 
lived  for  a  number  of  years,  Mr.  McQuillan  devot- 
ing his  time  and  attention  to  the  cultivation  of 
his  land.  Three  children  came  to  bless  their 
union,  .John,  Walter  and  Gus. 

In  1888,  Mr.  Mcfjuillan  left  the  farm  and  came 
to  Red  Bud,  forming  a  partnership  with  W.  T. 
Mudd,  which  still  exists.  For  the  past  six  years 
they  have  carried  on  general  merchandising,  and 
now  have  a  fine  store  at  the  southwest  corner  of 
Main  and  Market  Streets.  They  began  operations 
on  a  small  scale,  but  their  trade  has  constantly  in- 
creased and  they  now  have  one  of  the  largest 
stores  in  the  place.  They  carry  a  fine  line  of 
goods,  and  by  fair  and  honest  dealing,  earnest  en- 
deavors to  please  their  customers  and  by  courteous 
treatment  they  have  secured  a  very  liberal  patron- 
age. The  members  of  the  firm  are  both  men  of 
good  business  ability,  enterprising  and  energetic, 
and  their  success  is  well  deserved. 

Besides  his  store  Mr.  McQuillan  owns  a  valuable 
farm  comprising  two  hundred  and  eighty  acres  of 


rich  land  in  Prairie  du  Long  Township,  Monroe 
County.  This  tract  is  under  a  high  state  of  culti- 
vation and  is  well  improved  with  all  the  acces- 
sories and  conveniences  which  go  to  make  up  a 
model  farm. 

In  his  political  affiliations,  Mr.  McQuillan  is  a 
Republican  and  is  a  stanch  advocate  of  party 
principles.  He  has  served  as  School  Director  of  his 
township,  but  has  never  been  an  office-seeker,  pre- 
ferring to  devote  his  entire  time  and  attention  to 
his  business  interests.  He  belongs  to  the  Catholic 
Knights  of  Illinois,  of  which  he  is  now  Treasurer. 
He  and  his  family  are  all  members  of  the  Roman' 
Catholic  Church.  Their  home  is  one  of  the  fine 
residences  of  Red  Bud,  and  is  the  abode  of  hospi- 
tality and  good  cheer. 


^^EORGE  SAXENMEYER,  manager  of  the 
Ij  I— :  Saxenmeyer  Lumber  Companj',  of  Red  Bud, 
^^J!  and  one  of  the  progressive  and  enterprising 
business  men  of  this  place,  has  here  spent  his  en- 
tire life.  It  is  his  native  town.  His  father,  George 
M.  Saxenmeyer,  was  born  in  Bavaria,  Germany, 
and  in  1846,  bidding  adieu  to  home  and  friends, 
sailed  for  the  New  World.  He  located  in  St. 
Louis  and  was  there  united  in  marriage  with  Miss 
Sophia  Friesenberg,  and  unto  them  was  born  a 
family  of  seven  children:  Theodore,  Annie, 
George,  Ferdinand,  Bertha,  Herman  and  Sophia. 
The  father  was  a  harness-maker  by  trade  and  fol- 
lowed that  business  throughout  his  entire  life.  He 
was  called  to  his  final  rest  in  1886. 

George  Saxenmeyer  was  born  in  1857,  and  in 
Randolph  County,  under  the  parental  roof,  grew 
to  manhood.  The  common  schools  of  the  neigh- 
borhood afforded  him  his  educational  privileges, 
and  on  starting  out  in  life  for  himself  he  learned 
the  harness-maker's  trade,  beginning  that  business 
in  1872.  He  devoted  his  time  and  energies  to  the 
work  for  nineteen  years  and  met  with  good  success 
in  his  undertakings. 

In  1883  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  Mr.  Sax- 
enmeyer and  Miss  WilhelminaC.  Deterding.  Their 
union  has  been  blessed  with  six  children,  five  of 
whom  are  still  living,  ihree  sons  and  two  daugh- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRArHICAL  RECORD. 


319 


ters:  F'rederick,  Minnie,  Theodore,  Ilenrj-  and 
Tlieresa.  Que  daughter,  Matilda,  died  in  early 
childhood. 

Our  subject  continued  to  engage  in  harness- 
making  until  1891,  when  he  disposed  of  his  inter- 
est in  that  business  in  order  to  embark  in  another 
enterprise.  He  became  one  of  the  organizers  of 
what  is  now  known  as  tlie  Saxenmeyer  Lumber 
Company,  and  was  made  its  manager,  and  was  also 
chosen  .Secretary  and  Treasurer.  Jn  the  two  years 
which  have  elapsed  since  its  formation,  he  has  suc- 
ceeded in  establishing  an  extensive  trade  and  has 
gained  a  high  reputation  for  the  excellent  qualit}' 
of  lumber  in  which  he  deals.  This  is  one  of  the 
largest  lumber  concerns  in  southwestern  Illinois, 
and  the  success  of  the  companj'  is  now  an  assured 
fact,  owing  to  the  untiring  labors  and  well  di- 
rected efforts  of  the  manager.  In  his  political 
views  Mr.  Saxenmeyer  is  a  Republican.  He  keeps 
well  informed  on  the  issues  of  tiie  day,  but  has 
never  been  a  politician  in  the  sense  of  office-seek- 
ing, preferring  to  devote  his  entire  time  to  his  bus- 
iness. He  may  truly  be  called  a  self-made  man, 
and  he  is  a  citizen  whom  Red  Bud  could  ill  afford 
to  lose. 

' ^^P 


mEDEKICK  PARROTT,oneof  the  wealthy 
land-owners  of  Monroe  Count}-,  now  liv- 
ing on  section  1,  township  4,i'ange  9  west, 
claims  France  as  the  land  of  his  birth,  which  oc- 
curred on  the  7th  of  November,  1816.  He  is  a 
son  of  George  and  Ann  (Eagle)  Parrott,  lioth  of 
whom  were  born  and  reared  in  France.  The  father 
worked  in  a  cotton  factory  in  that  country  for 
some  time.  In  1828,  he  determined  to  seek  a 
home  and  fortune  in  the  United  States,  and  with 
his  family  came  to  this  country.  He  first  settled 
in  Stark  County,  Ohio,  where  he  worked  on  a  canal 
and  made  his  home  until  1840.  From  that  time 
until  his  death  he  resided  upon  the  farm  which  is 
now  the  home  of  our  subject.  Mr.  and  INIrs.  Par- 
rott had  a  family  of  nine  children,  of  whom  four 
are  still  living,  namely:  Frederick,  George,  Peter, 
and  Louis,  a  resident  of  St.  Louis. 

Our  subject  was  only  twelve  years  of  age  when 
he  accompanied   his   father  on  the  emigration   to 
7 


America.  During  his  boyhood  he  lived  in  Stark 
County  and  worked  on  a  canal.  When  about 
seventeen  years  of  age  he  left  home  and  began 
working  on  steam  boats  on  the  Ohio  and  Missis- 
sippi Rivers.  In  that  wa}'  the  five  succeeding 
years  of  his  life  were  passed,  and  when  that  period 
had  expired  he  came  to  Illinois  with  the  deter- 
mination of  making  his  home  in  the  west.  About 
1833  he  entered  a  tract  of  eighty-nine  acres  in 
Randolph  County,  upon  which  he  settled.  It  was 
still  in  its  primitive  condition,  not  a  furrow  hav- 
ing been  turned  or  an  improvement  made  thereon. 
He  devoted  some  time  to  its  cultivation, butafter- 
ward  returned  to  stearaboating,  and  the  property 
was  not  further  develojied  until  his  father  settled 
thereon  in  1840. 

In  Canton, Ohio, on  the  23d  of  September,  1847, 
Mr.  Parrott  married  Maria  Vallat,  daughter  of 
Francis  Vallat,  a  native  of  France.  The  lady  was 
born  iu  that  country  November  3,  1822,  and  came 
to  the  United  States  three  years  before  her  marriage. 
The  young  couple  began  their  domestic  life  in  Ran- 
dolph County,  hut  after  a  short  time  Mr.  Parrott 
sold  his  property  there  and  came  to  Monroe 
Count}',  locating  upon  the  farm  which  is  still  his 
home.  He  has  now  resided  in  this  community 
longer  than  any  other  of  its  citizens,  and  is  very 
familiar  with  the  history  of  the  county's  develop- 
ment and  upbuilding.  Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Parrott 
were  born  nine  children,  of  whom  two  sous  and 
three  daughters  are  j'ct  living:  Virginia,  who  en- 
tered St.  Joseph's  Convent  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and 
is  now  known  as  Sister  M.;  Elizabeth,  who  is  Sis- 
ter Superior  in  St.  Joseph's  Convent  in  Tucson, 
Ariz.;  J.  H.,  who  is  engaged  in  the  real-estate  bus- 
iness in  Kansas  City,  Kan.;  Frank,  who  aids  iu  the 
operation  of  the  home  farm,  Mary  C,  wife  of  Nel- 
son Ziebold,  who  is  engaged  in  the  milling  busi- 
ness in  Red  Bud;  and  Emma  Louisa,  at  home. 

Mr.  Parrott  owns  about  fifteen  hundred  acres  of 
land  and  is  one  of  the  largest  tax  payers  in  tlie 
county.  His  success  in  life  has  all  been  achieved 
through  bis  own  efforts,  and  is  therefore  well 
merited.-  From  a  humble  position  in  life  he  has 
worked  his  way  upward  to  one  of  affluence.  In 
politics  he  is  a  stalwart  Republican.  His  first 
Presidential    vote    was   cast   for  William    Henry 


320 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Harrison,  and  his  last  for  Benjamin  Harrison, 
the  illustrious  grandson  of  the  Tippecanoe  hero, 
lie  and  his  family  are  all  members  of  the  Catho- 
lic Church.  Their  home  is  one  of  tlie  finest  coun- 
try residences  in  Monroe  County, and  is  the  abode 
of  hospitality  and  good  cheer.  The  members  of 
tiie  liousehold  are  prominent  people  and  rank  high 
in  social  circles. 


'^- 


=-f 


ROF.  J.  H.  GANS,  of  Red  liud,  who  for 
many  years  has  been  devoted  to  the  work 
of  instruction,  and  is  well  known  as  an 
educator,  was  born  in  Fayette  County, 
Pa.,  in  the  year  1831,  and  is  a  son  of  John  and 
Jaue  (Holmes)  Gans,  who  were  also  natives  of  the 
Keystone  Slate,  the  fatlier's  birth  having  occurred 
in  Fayette  County,  while  the  mother  was  born  in 
Carlisle.  Their  family  numbered  seven  children: 
George,  who  was  a  prominent  law3'er  and  served 
as  Judge  of  the  Court  at  Eaton,  Ohio,  for  nine 
3'ears;  Amanda,  who  died  in  childhood;  Joseph,  a 
practicing  attorney  of  Richmond,  Ind.;  J.  II.,  of  this 
sketch;  Harriet,  who  is  the  wife  of  Dr.  Tuttle,  of 
Eaton,  Ohio;  David,  wlio  joined  the  boys  in  blue 
of  the  Thirty-fifth  Ohio  Infantry,  was  made  cap- 
tain of  his  companj',  and  died  in  the  service;  and 
Esther,  wife  of  Capt.  John  R.  Cook,  a  prominent 
resident  of  Irontown,  Ohio.  The  Judge  was  a 
man  of  more  than  ordinary  ability',  who  won  a 
prominent  place  in  his  profession.  He  wedded 
Miss  Maria  Morris,  a  highly  educated  lady  of  Fay- 
ette County,  Pa. 

In  his  youth  Professor  Gans  attended  the  com- 
mon and  academical  schools  of  his  native  coun- 
ty, and  in  1854  entered  Washington  College,  of 
Washington  County,  Pa.  Previously,  however, 
he  had  engaged  in  teaching  school  in  both  Penn- 
sylvania and  Virginia.  He  was  graduated  from 
Wasiiington  College  in  1858,  and  then  resumed 
teaching,  and  also  took  up  the  study  of  law  at 
Sullivan,  Ind.,  where  he  was  afterward  admitted 
to  the  Bar.  Locating  in  Eaton,  Ohio,  he  there 
continued  his  law  studies  with  his  brother.  Judge 
Gans,  and  was  admitted  to  practice  before  the  Su- 


preme Court  of  Columbus.  Continuing  his  resi- 
dence in  Eaton,  he  in  1863  became  chief  clerk  un- 
der Captain  Denny,  in  tlie  Quartermaster's  depart- 
ment, in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  when  the 
war  closed  he  located  in  Logansport,  Ind.,  where 
he  engaged  in  practicing  law  for  about  four  years. 

In  October,  1865,  Professor  Gans  married  Mrs. 
S.  A.  C.  O'Brien,  nee  Colbiirn,  a  native  of  Boston, 
Mass.,  and  a  daughter  of  Marcus  and  Catherine 
(Hubbard)  Colburn.  Her  father  was  a  native  of 
Rindge,  N.  II.,  and  was  a  son  of  Josiah  Colburn, 
wlio  traced  his  ancestors  back  to  the  earl \-  Puritans. 
Members  of  the  family  fought  in  the  Revolution- 
ary War.  The  grandparents  located  in  Boston, 
where  their  son  received  a  fine  education.  He  be- 
came a  teacher  of  music,  and  was  a  leading  mem- 
ber of  the  Handel  and  Hayden  Musical  Society. 
His  family  were  also  fine  musicians.  He  located 
in  New  York,  where  for  tliirty-two  years  he  taught 
music  in  the  city  schools.  He  had  a  son,  John, 
who  was  a  finely  educated  man,  and  one  of  tlie 
first  to  leave  New  York  for  the  gold  fields  of 
California.  The  vessel  on  which  he  sailed  was 
wrecked,  and  he  was  picked  up  by  an  English  ves- 
sel and  taken  to  Australia.  He  became  connected 
with  a  large  commercial  compan\%  and  located  on 
the  Sandwich  Islands.  He  there  married,  and  at 
his  death,  which  occurred  at  the  early  age  of  thirty- 
three,  left  a  family  of  two  sons  and  a  daughter. 
Mrs.  Gans  was  the  second  of  the  Colburn  famil3-. 
Marcus  died  in  childhood,  and  one  died  in  in- 
fancy. By  a  former  husband,  Mrs.  Colburn  had 
one  son,  George  C.  Rexford,  who  succeede(j  Mr. 
Colburn  as  a  teacher  of  music  in  the  schools  of 
New  York  Citj-.  He  held  that  position  twenty- 
six  years.  He  is  a  very  fine  singer,  and  an  accom- 
plished man.  In  his  social  relations,  Mr.  Rexford 
is  a  Knight  Templar.  He  has  one  son,  George  H., 
who  is  a  fine  actor,  and  by  his  second  wife  he  has 
a  daughter.  The  Colbiu'n  family  were  all  origin- 
all}'  Congregationalists.  They  were  energetic, 
liigh  minded  and  noble  people,  who  won  positions 
of  prominence,  and  in  the  musical  world  especially 
they  were  leaders. 

Like  the  other  members  of  her  family,  Mrs.  Gans 
was  highly  educated  in  music  in  Boston  and  New 
York,  and  under  Madame  E.  Seguin,  she  studied 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


321 


Italian  opera.  She  has  taught  music  in  the  Po- 
tapsco  Female  College,  near  Baltimore,  Md.,  where 
she  had  formerly  been  a  pupil  two  years,  was  Prin- 
cipal of  the  musical  department  of  the  Ontario 
Female  College  of  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  was  Super- 
intendent of  the  musical  department  of  the  Ohio 
Female  College  at  College  Hill,  Ohio,  and  after- 
ward was  emploj'ed  as  music  teacher  in  the  Pres- 
byterian College,  in  which  both  male  and  female 
students  were  received.  It  was  there  she  met  and 
married  Professor  Gans.  She  afterward  accepted 
a  position  in  the  Methodist  Female  College  of 
Springfield,  Ohio,  and  later  engaged  in  teaching 
with  her  husband  in  St.  Louis. 

By  a  former  marriage,  jMrs.  Gans  had  two  sons. 
The  elder,  Oswin  J.  O'Brien,  is  connected  with  the 
Riverside  Printing  Company  of  St.  Louis,  as  fore- 
man. He  is  married  and  has  five  children:  Blanche, 
Oswin,  Mabel,  Julia  and  Sybil.  The  other  son, 
Ignatius,  died  at  the  age  of  fourteen  j-ears. 

On  leaving  Logansport,  Professor  Gans  went  to 
St.  Louis,  and  for  eight  years  was  Principal  of  one 
of  the  public  schools  of  that  city.  He  afterward 
served  as  Superintendent  and  Principal  of  the 
schools  of  Columbia,  Jlonroe  County,  for  five  years, 
and  then  came  to  Red  Bud  in  1883,  where,  with 
the  exception  of  one  j'ear,  he  has  been  engaged  in 
teaching  continuously  since.  After  leaving  St. 
Louis,  he  was  employed  as  a  teacher  in  the  Salem 
Academy,  at  Salem,  Ark.,  for  about  eighteen 
months,  and  at  Frederick,  Mo.,  for  one  year. 
While  in  California,  in  the  winter  of  1891-92,  he 
taught  at  Los  Gatos,  Santa  Clara  County.  In  Feb- 
ruar\',  1892,  his  wife  went  to  Honolulu,  and  the 
Queen  of  the  Sandwich  Islands  favored  her  with 
a  reception.  While  there  she  made  a  special  studj' 
of  the  natives  of  that  country,  their  customs  and 
habits,  and  since  her  return  has  delivered  a  num- 
ber of  lectures  concerning  them. 

In  his  political  views,  the  Professor  has  been  a 
Republican  since  the  organization  of  the  party. 
While  in  Arkansas,  he  was  appointed  County  Su- 
perintendent of  Schools.  In  the  fall  of  1890,  he 
was  the  candidate  for  that  office  on  the  Republican 
ticket  in  Randolph  County.  Socially,  he  is  con- 
nected with  the  Masonic  fraternity  and  with  the 
Ancient  Order  of  United  Workmen.     Both  he  and 


his  wife  are  members  of  the  Presbyterian  Church. 
Culture,  education  and  more  than  ordinary  abil- 
ity have  made  them  prominent  people  in  literary 
and  social  circles,  and  Professor  Gans  and  his  wife 
are  among  the  leading  spirits  in  the  circles  of  so- 
ciety in  Randolph  County. 


■i--- 


^-f 


^^\  HARLES  II.  BOEDEKER,  a  lumber  iner- 
(l(  ^  chant  and  dealer  in  agricultural  imple- 
^^/  ments  in  Red  Bud,  came  to  this  place  in 
1875  from  Monroe  County,  111.,  where  his  birth 
occurred.  He  was  born  in  1854,  and  was  the  third 
in  order  of  birth  in  a  family  of  five  children,  who 
grew  to  mature  years.  The  parents  were  Fred  and 
Christine  Boedeker. 

Our  subject  spent  the  days  of  boyhood  and 
youth  upon  his  father's  farm,  attending  the  com- 
mon schools  through  the  winter  season,  while  in 
the  summer  months  he  aided  in  the  labors  of  the 
field.  When  he  had  arrived  at  man's  estate  he 
bade  adieu  to  home  and  friends  and  came  to  Red 
Bud,  where  he  at  once  embarked  in  the  lumber 
business  in  partnership  with  his  brother  Henry. 
Together  they  carried  on  operations  for  about 
eight  years,  when  in  the  year  1883  Charles  H. 
Boedeker  purchased  his  brother's  interest  and 
has  since  carried  on  the  trade  under  his  own 
name.  He  devotes  his  entire  time  and  attention 
to  the  business  and  is  therefore  a  successful  dealer. 
He  carries  a  good  assortment  of  all  kinds  of  lum- 
ber, and  by  straightforward  dealing  and  courteous 
treatment  of  his  customers  he  has  secured  a  liberal 
patronage.  Since  becoming  sole  proprietor  of  the 
business  he  has  also  dealt  in  farm  implements, 
handling  threshers,  engines,  binders,  mowers,  etc. 

In  1875  Mr.  Boedeker  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Christiana  Dann,a  representative  of  one 
of  the  early  pioneer  families  of  Monroe  County, 
111.,  and  a  cultured  lady,  who  wins  friends  where- 
ever  she  goes.  Five  children  have  been  born  of 
their  union,  but  two  are  now  deceased.  Those 
yet  living  are  Tillie,  Ardine  and  Elsie.  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Boedeker  are  widely  known  throughout  this 
community,  where   they  have  now  resided  for  al- 


322 


PORTRAIT  A]S'D  BlOGRArmCAL   RECORD. 


most  twenty  yeare,  and  in  social  circles  they  hold 
an  enviable  position. 

In  politics  Mr.  Boedeker  is  inde|)endent, casting 
his  vote  for  the  man  whom  he  thinks  best  quali- 
fied for  the  office,  regardless  of  party  affiliations. 
In  religious  belief  he  and  his  wife  are  Lutherans. 
Mr.  Boedeker  is  recognized  as  a  man  of  good  busi- 
ness abilitv,  wide-awake  and  enterprising,  and  his 
diligence,  sagacit}'  and  well  directed  efforts  have 
brought  him  a  deserved  success.  Tiie  community 
recognizes  in  him  a  valued  citizen,  for  he  ever 
takes  an  active  part  in  all  that  pertains  to  the 
welfare  of  the  community  and  the  promotion  of 
its  best  interests. 


3****^^  ♦*•{••!•= 


^AVID  A.  FOSTER,  who  is  now  living  a 
retired  life,  and  is  one  of  the  pioneers  of 
Randolph  County-,  was  in  early  3'ears  a 
progressive  farmer  of  township  4,  range  5, 
and  rose  to  a  prominent  position  in  agricultural 
affairs.  His  fine  estate,  located  on  section  31,  he 
has  divided  among  his  children,  and  is  now  living 
retired  from  active  work. 

Robert  Foster,  the  father  of  our  subject,  was  a 
native  of  Abigail  District,  S.  C.,  where  his  birth 
occurred  Februarj-  13,  1785.  Grandfather  Samuel 
Foster  came  from  Ireland,  and  when  a  3'Oiing  man 
located  in  the  above  place,  where  ho  remained 
until  death.  The  mother  of  our  subject,  whose 
maiden  name  was  Susan  McClinton,  was  also  a 
native  of  South  Carolina,  her  birth  occurring  in 
1793.  Sh§  came  to  Illinois  in  compan3'  with  her 
father,  John  McClinton.  The  latter  was  a  native 
of  South  Carolina,  and  after  coming  to  Randolph 
County,  made  his  home  in  the  old  Irish  settlement 
near  Preston. 

The  father  of  our  subject  rcnioved  to  this  state 
in  1807,  and  the  following  year  married,  and  lo- 
cated on  what  is  now  known  as  the  John  .Shuline 
])lace.  When  he  took  possession  of  the  property 
it  was  one  unbroken  stretcli  of  brush  and  timber, 
but  by  means  of  inexhaustible  energj'  and  good 
business  judgment  he  cleared  the  land  and  resided 
upon  it  until  his  decease,  February  12,  1821.  His 
good  wife,  who  became  the  mother  of  nine  chil- 


dren, died  in  1829.  Of  that  large  family  only  two 
are  now  living:  William,  who  makes  his  home  in 
Sparta  Precinct,  this  county;  and  our  subject. 
The  deceased  are  Samuel,  John,  James  A.,  Parme- 
lia,  Elizabeth  Jane,  Nanc^',  and  one  who  died  in 
infancy.  After  the  death  of  his  lirst  wife,  the  fa- 
ther of  our  subject  married  Sarah  Kell. 

()\ir  subject  was  born  January  13,  1822,  on  the 
old  homestead  in  this  county-,  where  he  attended 
the  pioneer  subscription  schools  and  was  reared  to 
manhood.  Having  been  doubly  orphaned  when 
nine  years  of  age,  he  made  his  home  with  his  eld- 
est brother  until  reaching  his  fourteen tii  your,  when 
he  began  life  on  his  own  account.  His  lirst  work 
was  in  Sparta,  where  he  was  emploj'cd  in  a  butcher 
shop,  receiving  for  his  services  ^1  per  day. 

!n  1844,  David  A.  Foster  married  Miss  Rebecca 
M.,  daughter  of  Hugh  C.  and  Nanc^"  M.  (Askins) 
Gault,  natives  respectively  of  North  Carolina  and 
Virginia.  The}'  were  living  in  Tennessee  at  the 
time  of  their  marriage,  and  removed  to  Illinois  in 
1831,  locating  on  section  18,  townsliip  4,  range  5, 
Randolph  County.  After  residing  there  for  many 
years  they  removed  to  Eden,  where  their  dece.ose 
occurred.  Mrs.  Foster  was  born  January  17,  1823, 
in  Lincoln  County,  Tenn.,  and  after  her  union  with 
our  subject,  moved  into  the  little  log  house  on 
section  18,  in  which  thej'  continued  to  live  until 
1850.  In  that  year  Mr.  Foster  removed  to  section 
31,  where  his  wife's  death  occurred  Februarj-  23, 
1884.  Had  she  lived  three  d.\ys  longer  she  would 
have  completed  the  fortieth  year  of  her  wedded 
life. 

To  our  subject  and  his  wife  were  born  nine  chil- 
dren, seven  of  whom  are  living.  The  first  death 
in  the  faniil3'  occurred -in  1880,  when  Miss  Min- 
erva, ayoung  lad}'  of  nineteen  years,  departed  this 
life.  Nancy,  the  wife  of  Hugh  Clark,  is  also  de- 
ceased. Those  living  are,  Robert,  William  S., 
John  C,  Samuel  McClinton,  Mary  E.,  Susan  E. 
and  Ilaltie  F.  Our  suliject's  fine  estate,  which 
comprised  one  hundred  and  twenty  acres,  has  been 
divided  among  his  children,  with  whom  he  makes 
his  home.  He  is  a  devoted  member  of  the  United 
Presbj'terian  Church.  He  is  President  of  the 
Sparta  Precinct  Dei)artment  of  the  Old  Settlers' 
Association,  and  has  been  a  member  of  the  Good 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPinCAL  RECORD. 


323 


Templars'  order  for  many  years.  lie  takes  an  in- 
terest in  political  affairs,  and  has  always  voted  the 
straight  Republican  ticket.  He  lias  frequently 
been  a  delegate  to  conventions,  and  May  4,  1863, 
was  one  of  three  sent  to  represent  Randolph  Coun- 
t3'  in  the  State  Union  League  held  at  Springfield. 


^^1  NDREW  DOUGLAS.  The  name  of  Doug- 
w£M    las  belongs    to    one  of   the    most    ancient 

///  ii  and  powerful  noble  families  of  Scotland. 
^1  According  to  one    tradition  the  family  is 

descended  from  one  Theobald,  to  whom  Arnold, 
Abbot  of  Kelso,  made  a  grant  of  land  on  the 
Douglas,  or  Black  AVater,  in  Lanarkshire,  about 
the  middle  of  the  twelfth  centur\-.  Another  story 
relates  that  their  progeiiitf>r  was  an  unknown 
chief,  who  received  as  a  reward  for  success  in 
battle,  land  in  tlie  same  locality  about  770  A.  D. 
The  best  historians,  however,  trace  the  recor(J 
back  no  farther  than  to  William  D.  Douglas,  1175 
to  1213.  From  him  in  direct  descent  come  the 
men  who  have  made  the  name  of  Douglas  il- 
lustrious. "The  good  Sir  .Tames"  fought  with 
Bruce  at  Bannockburn,  and  commanded  a  part  of 
the  Scottish  army.  After  tlie  death  of  Bruce,  he 
was  intrusted  with  the  King's  heart,  which  was  to 
be  taken  to  the  IIol}^  Land,  but  on  the  way  thither 
he  was  killed  by  the  Saracens.  The  Douglases  be- 
came a  powerful  family,  and  in  the  fifteenth  cen- 
tury there  was  a  proverb  extant,  "No  man  may 
touch  a  Douglas  nor  a  Douglas'  man,  for  if  he  do  he 
is  sure  to  come  b3-  the  waur."  The  Angus  branch 
of  the  Douglas  family  became  especially  famous, 
and  to  its  members  was  granted  the  right  to  cast 
the  first  vote  in  Parliament,  to  lead  the  vanguard 
in  battle  and  to  bear  the  crown  in  public  solemni- 
ties. This  last  right  was  held  by  the  family  up  to 
the  present  century.  On  the  field  of  battle  and 
in  public  service  the  Douglas  family  has.  been 
prominent,  until  the  name  is  found  on  almost 
every  page  of  Scottish  history.  They  became  di- 
vided into  two  branches,  the  Black  and  the  Red 
Douglases. 

Andrew  Douglas,  of  this  sketch,  was  descended 
from  the  latter,  who  followed  peaceful  avocations 


more  than  the  warrior's  life.  Springing  up  at  a 
wild  and  romantic  period  in  early  Scottish  his- 
tory, the  line  is  descended  through  a  succession  of 
powerful  and  warlike  chiefs,  who  were  connected 
with  every  hard-fought  battle  of  their  countr}-. 
The  vitality-  of  the  family  has  been  maintained  in 
a  wonderful  degree.  In  later  years  its  members 
have  become  prominent  in  science,  law  and  states- 
manship, and  man}'  of  its  worthy  representatives 
are  numbered  among  American  people. 

Mr.  Douglas  whose  name  heads  this  record  was 
born  in  Roxburglishire,  Scotland,  only  five  miles 
from  the  English  border.  There  occurred  the 
battle  of  Chevy  Chase,  between  Earl  Douglas  and 
Lord  Percy.  This  is  celebrated  in  an  old  English 
ballad.  The  date  of  our  subject's  birth  was  July 
Ifi,  1818,  and  his  parents  were  James  and  Janet 
(Lowrie)  Douglas.  He  obtained  his  earl}-  educa- 
tion in  the  schools  of  the  neighborhood,  which  he 
attended  until  twelve  years  of  age.  The  family 
numbered  three  sons  and  three  daughters.  The 
father  was  a  farmer  and  miller.  Andrew  remained 
at  home  until  twenty-five  years  of  age,  when  he 
determined  to  seek  a  home  in  America.  He  was 
then  joined  b}'  other  members  of  the  family,  and 
in  1843  they  landed  in  New  York  City.  At  once 
they  came  to  Randolph  Count}',  III.,  where  an 
uncle.  Lot  liouglas,  had  settled  twelve  years  be- 
fore.    The  family  rented  land  for  a  time. 

In  January,  1848,  Andrew  Douglas  wedded  Eliza, 
daughter  of  .lohii  Craig,  one  of  the  early  settlers 
of  this  county.  She  was  born  in  Paisley,  Scot- 
land, May  13,  180'.),  and  came  to  America  in  1840. 
The  young  couple  began  their  domestic  life  upon  a 
farm  which  M^-.  Douglas  had  previously  purchased. 
They  became  the  parents  of  two  sons  and  three 
daughters:  John,  who  married  Eliza  Towsley  and 
lives  in  this  county;  Eliza,  wife  of  John  Chaplin; 
Andrew,  who  operates  the  old  homestead;  Sarah 
J.,  who  became  the  wife  of  Charles  Livsey,  who 
died  February  5,  1888,  since  which  time  she  has 
lived  with  her  mother;  and  Beulah  M.,  who  mar- 
ried Frank  Labriere  and  lives  near  Chester. 

In  1846  Mr.  Douglas  bought  one  hundred  and 
twenty  acres  of  land  and  entered  other  tracts, 
transforming  the  raw  prairie  into  rich  and  fertile 
fields.     In  the  home  farm  were  three  hundred  and 


324 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD 


sixty  acres,  and  in  all  he  owned  eight  hundred 
acres  of  valuable  land  in  Randolph  Connt3".  He 
was  a  man  of  good  business  abilit.v,  and  industry 
and  enterprise  were  numbered  among  his  chief 
characteristics.  lie  inherited  also  some  of  the  best 
qualilios  for  wliicli  the  Douglas  family  was  noted, 
and  throughout  this  communit}'  he  was  regarded 
as  a  man  of  sterling  worth  and  strict  integrity. 
He  passed  away  March  19,  1879. 


\1L^  ENKY  BOLLIXGER,  of  Steeleville,  is  rec- 
lj)|i  ognized  as  one  of  tlie  leading  business 
i^y^^  men  of  tliat  place,  a  man  prominent  in  pub- 
(^)  lie  affairs  and  in  all  that  pertains  to  the 
best  interests  of  the  community.  Tiie  record  of 
his  life  is  as  follows:  He  was  born  in  Switzerland 
September  1,  1833,  and  is  a  sou  of  Henrj'  and  An- 
nie (Walter)  Bollinger,  wiio  were  also  natives  of 
that  country,  and  who  there  spent  their  entire 
lives.  Henry  engaged  in  the  grocery  business  and 
was  a  successful  merchant  and  business  man. 

Our  subject  attended  the  public  schools  of  Switz- 
erland until  he  had  attjiined  the  age  of  fourteen, 
when  he  left  the  school  room  to  serve  an  appren- 
ticeship in  a  watch  case  manufactory.  He  there 
continued  for  a  term  of  four  j-ears,  during  which 
time  he  thoroughly  mastered  the  business.  At 
length  he  determined  to  seek  a  home  bc3-ond  the 
Atlantic,  hoping  thereby  to  benefit  his  financial 
condition.  It  was  in  1853  that  he  crossed  the 
brinj'  deep,  landing  at  New  Orleans,  whence 
he  made  his  way  northward  to  Chester,  111.  As 
his  health  was  somewhat  impaired  and  he  did  not 
wish  to  engage  in  indoor  labor,  he  worked  at  any 
emploj-ment  which  he  could  find  for  six  months, 
and  then  went  to  Evansvilie,Ill.,  where  he  learned 
the  cooper's  trade,  following  the  same  until  1858. 
In  that  year,  Mr.  Bollinger  returned  on  a  visit 
to  his  native  land,  and  spent  some  time  among  the 
friends  of  his  childhood  and  the  scenes  of  his  3'outii. 
On  his  return  he  resumed  work  at  the  cooper's  trade 
in  Evansville,  where  he  continued  until  tlie  break- 
ing out  of  the  late  war,  wlien,  {)rompted  by  patriotic 
impulses,  he  responded  to  the  country's  call  for 
troops,  enlisting  in  Company   B,  Twentj'-fourth 


Illinois  Infantry.  He  was  mustered  in  at  Alton, 
and  was  in  active  service  for  three  j'ears.  At  the 
battle  of  Chickamauga  he  received  a  gunshot 
wound  through  the  left  leg  and  was  confined  to 
the  hospital  for  three  months,  after  which  he  re- 
joined his  regiment.  His  old  wound,  however, 
still  troubles  him.  He  was  ever  found  at  his  post 
of  duty,  faithful  to  the  Old  Flag  and  the  cause  it 
represented,  and  when  the  war  w.as  over  he  was 
honorably  discharged,  being  mustered  out  at  Chi- 
cago. 

Mr.  Bollinger  was  married  December  27.  1865, 
to  Amelia  Giesemau,  daughter  of  Heury  and  Sophia 
Gieseman,  who  emigrated  from  Germany  to  Amer- 
ica in  an  earlj'  daj*.  To  our  subject  and  his  wife 
have  been  born  sis  children,  and  the  family  yet  re- 
mains unbroken.  They  are,  Herman,  Annie,  Albert 
(a  prominent  attorney  of  Waterloo,  III.),  Heniy, 
Edward  and  Oscar. 

Mr.  Bollinger  is  a  member  of  Chester  Lodge  No. 
57,  I.  O.  O.  F.,  and  of  the  Grand  Army  post  of 
Steeleville.  His  wife  belongs  to  the  Lutheran 
Church.  In  politics  he  has  been  a  Republican 
since  attaining  his  majorit}'.  On  his  return  from 
tlie  war  he  resumed  the  coopering  business  in 
Evansville, 111.,  where  he  continued  until  Januaiy 
1,  1865,  when  he  came  to  Steeleville,  and  here  he 
has  since  made  his  home.  During  the  first  year  and 
a-half  he  can  led  on  coopering  and  then  embarked 
in  the  sale  of  malt  liquors  and  in  the  hotel  business. 
He  is  still  engaged  in  the  former  business,  and  is 
recognized  as  one  of  the  leading  citizens  and  bus- 
iness men  of  this  place. 

'jf'OSEPH  M.  ARNIN  is  a  dealer  in  general 
■  merchandise  at  the  southwest  corner  of 
^^  Main  and  Church  Streets,  Columbia.  He 
^^!f/  has  been  part  owner  in  this  store  since 
1887,  and  has  been  sole  proprietor  for  more  than 
three  j'ears.  He  carries  a  fine  line  of  goods,  and 
b}'  fair  and  honest  dealing  and  courteous  treat- 
ment of  his  patrons  has  secured  a  large  trade.  He 
is  ranked  among  the  leading  business  men  of  the 
city,  and  as  such  we  present  him  to  our  readers. 
Mr.  Arnin  was  bom  March   19,   1860.     His  fa- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


325 


ther,  Johii  Arnin,  was  a  native  of  Baden,  Germany, 
and  in  1855  he  crossed  the  Atlantic  to  the  New 
World.  He  located  lirst  in  St.  Louis,  but  after  a 
short  time  came  to  Columbia,  where  he  was  em- 
ployed as  a  farm  hand.  A  year  later  he  secured  a 
situation  as  engineer  in  a  mill,  and  filled  that  po- 
sition for  the  long  period  of  a  quarter  of  a  cen- 
turj',  or  until  his  retirement  from  active  business 
life  in  1890.  He  was  married  in  Columbia  to  Miss 
Annie  Harm.aceii,  daughter  of  George  Ilarmacek, 
who  was  born  in  Bohemia,  Prussia,  and  on  coming 
to  this  countr}',  in  1847,  settled  in  Cairo,  111.,  whence 
he  came  to  this  place.  He  was  a  stone  mason. 
Unto  Mr.  and  Mre.  Arnin  were  born  four  children, 
of  whom  two  are  living,  Joseph  M.  and  Louisa. 

Our  subject  spent  the  d.a3-s  of  his  bo^'hood  and 
youth  in  his  parents'  home,  and  in  the  public  schools 
acquired  his  education.  When  that  was  completed 
he  spent  three  years  in  clerking  for  J.  P.  Ebel. 
On  the  expiration  of  that  period  he  went  to  St. 
Louis,  where  he  was  empld_ved  as  a  salesman  by 
Otto  Kerner,  a  dr^'-goods  merchant  on  Broad- 
way. He  afterward  clerked  for  William  Neuen, 
and  then  returned  to  Columbia.  For  ten  j'ears 
he  was  a  salesman  in  the  employ  of  Reid  & 
Scheuler.  When  the  junior  partner  died,  Mr. 
Arnin  purchased  an  interest  in  the  business,  which 
was  conducted  under  the  firm  name  of  Reid  vfe  Ar- 
nin for  three  years,  when  our  subject  bought  out 
his  partner  and  has  since  been  sole  proprietor. 

In  1882,  Mr.  Arnin  was  joined  in  wedlock  with 
Miss  Lizzie,  daughter  of  Philip  Cupferschmidt.  a 
baker  of  Columbia.  The  lad^'  is  a  native  of  St. 
Louis.  Bj'  their  union  they  have  live  children: 
John,'  Bertha,  Arthur,  Harry  and  Olivia.  The 
family-  is  one  well  known  in  this  community,  and 
its  members  hold  an  enviable  position  in  social 
circles.  Mr.  Arnin  votes  with  the  Republican 
party,  and  is  now  serving  as  one  of  the  Trustees 
of  Columbia.  For  the  past  eight  years  he  has 
been  an  efficient  member  of  the  Board  of  Educa- 
tion. Sociall}',  he  is  connected  with  the  Ancient 
Order  of  United  Workmen,  of  which  be  is  Treas- 
urer, and  is  Senior  Warden  of  the  Masonic  lodge 
of  this  place.  In  1892,  Mr.  Arnin  erected  the 
large  two-story  building  in  which  he  now  does 
business.     His   store   room  is  28x90  feet,  and  he 


also  has  a  large  wareroom.  He  was  also  one  of 
the  originators  of  the  electric  light  company. 
An  enterprising  and  progressive  man,  he  has  aided 
materially  in  the  upbuilding  of  the  city  and  the 
promotion  of  its  best  interests.  He  is  numbered 
among  its  leading  business  men,  a  place  which  is 
well  deserved,  for  he  has  worked  his  way  upward 
by  merit,  and  his  success  is  but  the  just  reward  of 
his  efforts. 

■  • — ^Di^P — • 


ULIUS  WELGE,  a  prosperous  general  agri- 
culturist and  successful  stock-raiser,  is  resid- 
ing upon  one  of  the  best  farms  in  town- 
^_^  ship  7,  range  6,  Randolph  Count}-.  Like 
manj^  of  the  best  residents  .of  his  section,  he  is  a 
native  of  Germany,  and  was  born  July  15,  1830. 
He  is  the  son  of  Hartwig  and  Christina  (Meyer) 
Welge,  also  natives  of  the  Fatherland,  where  they 
were  farmers  b}'  occupation. 

Julius,  of  this  sketch,  attended  school  in  his 
native  land  until  reaching  his  fourteenth  year, and 
after  leaving  the  school  room  he  worked  at  various 
trades,  and  finally  decided  to  become  a  carpenter. 
When  reaching  his  majorit}',  however,  his  plans 
were  frustrated,  as  he  entered  the  German  army  and 
served  his  country  for  three  years  as  a  soldier.  At 
the  expiration  of  that  time  he  made  his  way 
to  America,  and  finally  coming  to  Chester,  he 
worked  for  nine  years  for  the  H.  C.  Cole  Milling 
Company.  Later  he  was  emplo3'ed  for  two  years 
by  Thomas  Holmes,  who  was  also  engaged  in  the 
milling  business,  and  in  wliatever  position  he  was 
called  upon  to  occupy  he  always  gave  the  utmost 
satisfaction.  Mr.  Wclge  has  been  a  verj^  hard 
working  man,  and  a  few  j'ears  ago  he  purchased  the 
farm  on  section  16,  where  he  is  now  living,  and  is 
engaged  as  a  general  agriculturist. 

In  1857  our  subject  and  Miss  Vena,  daughter  of 
Burnhard  and  Dora  (Segteg)  Olendorf,  were 
united  in  marriage.  The  parents  of  Mrs.  Welge 
came  to  Randolph  County  in  an  earlj-  day,  and 
were  ranked  among  the  best  citizens  in  township 
7,  range  6.  To-  our  subject  and  his  wife  were  born 
nine  children,  one  of  whom  died  in  infancy. 
Those  living  are,  Ida,  wife  of  William  Vieregge; 
Augusta,  who  married  Adolph  Welge;   Otto,  who 


326 


POETRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPIHCAL   RECORD. 


married  Mary  Heitkamp;  Lucetto,  tlie  wife  of 
Cliarles  Hartenberger;  Julhis,  Dena,  Signuin  and 
Charles,  at  home.  Mr.  Welge  and  famil3'  are  ac- 
tive members  of  the  Lutheran  Church.  In  poli- 
tics he  is  a  Democrat,  and  in  every  enterprise  to 
which  lie  gives  his  support  lie  maintains  a  deep 
and  unwavering  interest.  Ihe  patient  industry- 
and  tireless  perseverance  of  our  subject  have  been 
the  marked  characteristics  of  his  life,  and  combined 
with  his  natural  ability  have  given  him  an  impetus 
upward,  which  will  result  in  his  assured  financial 
success. 

[(S)^  ^Mih  .(Sj 


(®^" 


ejf(^^^ 


^^EORGE  B.  COREY.  Through  the  good 
jll  (=^  management  of  his  farming  affairs  in  gen- 
^:^l  eral,  the  subject  of  this  sketch  has  demon- 
strated the  fact  that  skdl  and  labor  combined  pro- 
duce the  best  results.  He  is  the  owner  of  about 
four  hundred  acres  in  Jackson  County,  and  makes 
his  home  on  section  13,  Somerset  Township,  where 
lie  has  resided  for  many  years.  As  an  agriculturist 
and  business  man,  he  stands  liigli  in  the  confidence 
of  the  people,  whose  regard  he  has  won  by  lionor- 
able  dealings  and  genial  courtes}-. 

The  parents  of  our  subject,  Levi  and  Sarah 
(Gross)  Corey,  were  natives  of  Massachusetts,  and 
the  latter,  tradition  saj-s,  was  a  descendant  of 
French  ancestors.  Grandfather  Gross  assisted  in 
the  construction  of  the  American  ship  known  as 
"Ironsides."  For  several  generations  the  Corey 
family  resided  in  Massachusetts,  where  they  be- 
came well  and  favorably  known  as  patriotic  and 
loj'al  citizens.  Two  of  that  name  fought  in  the 
Revolutionary  War,  one  being  killed  at  Bunker 
Hill,  where  the  other  gallantly  led  his  troops  as 
Captain.  Another  uncle  of  our  subject,  Asel  Corey, 
participated  in  the  War  of  1812. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  born  in  Worces- 
ter County,  Mass.,  August  10,  1831,  and  was  reared 
to  manhood  in  the  place  of  his  birth.  At  the  age 
of  sixteen  he  comn.euced  to  learn  the  drug  busi- 
ness, which  he  followed  for  several  years.  Edu- 
cated in  the  common  .and  liisjfh  schools,  he  hassup- 


plemented  the  knowledge  there  obtained  by  ex- 
tensive reading,  and  is  now  a  well  informed  man, 
posted  upon  all  general  topics  of  interest.  In 
1857  he  came  to  Illinois,  locating  in  .lackson  Coun- 
ty, and  two  jears  later  purchased  his  present  farm, 
then  situated  in  the  midst  of  a  dense  forest.  Fort}- 
acres  had  been  partially  cleared,  and  to  the  clear- 
ing and  cultivation  of  the  remainder  of  the  tract 
lie  gave  his  time  for  mauj-  years.  His  first  home 
was  a  frame  house  containing  two  rooms,  to  which 
he  has  since  added  until  he  now  occupies  a  pleas- 
ant and  commodious  residence. 

August  1,  1862,  the  name  of  George  B.  Corey 
w.as  enrolled  as  a  member  of  Company  K,  Seventy- 
third  Illinois  Infantry,  which  became  a  pait  of  tht 
Army  of  the  Cumberland.  With  his  regiment  he 
fought  in  numerous  engagements,  including  those 
of  Perry ville  and  Stone  River.  At  the  latter  place 
he  was  severely-  injured,  and  is  now  in  receipt  of  a 
pension  of  *12  per  montli.  At  the  close  of  the 
war  he  was  honorably  disclmiged,  June  30,  186.5, 
and  returning  to  Illinois,  took  np  the  pursuits  of 
peace.  His  career  as  a  soldier  was  one  of  which  he 
ma}^  well  be  proud.  Enlisting  as  a  private,  he  af- 
terward served  as  Fourth  Sergeant  of  his  company, 
and  for  a  time  filled  the  position  of  Hospital  Stew- 
ard'at  Jsashville,  Tenn.  He  was  instrumental  in 
the  organization  of  Worthen  Post  No.  128,  G.  A. 
R..  of  which  he  was  Commander  for  three  years. 

The  lad\-  who,  Februaiy  28,  1801,  became  the 
wife  of  George  B.  Corej'  bore  the  maiden  name  of 
Rebecca  Friedlinc,  and  was  born  in  Somerset  Coun- 
ty, Pa.,  April  22,  1842.  Her  parents,  Daniel  and 
Rachel  Friedline,  natives  of  Penns^ivania,  are  now 
deceased.  To  our  subject  and  his  wife  there  have 
been  born  three  children:  Addie  V.,  who  is  the 
wife  of  G.  II.  Will,  a  resident  of  De  Soto  Town- 
ship; Kate  D.,  the  wife  of  Frank  G.  Procunier,  of 
Chicago;  and  Sarah  L.  G.  Mrs.  Corey  is  identified 
with  the  Lutheran  Cluirch,  and  is  a  devoted  Chris- 
tian lady. 

In  politics  a  stanch  advocate  of  Republican  prin- 
ciples, Mr.  Corey  has  been  elected  on  the  ticket  of 
that  part}-  to  numerous  positions  of  influence  and 
honor.  He  served  as  Highway  Commissioner  and 
Clerk  of  Somerset  Township,  and  in  1890  filled 
the  position  of  United  States  Census  Commissioner 


RESIDENCE    or    HARVEY     N  EVI  LIE  ,  CH  ESTER  ,    ILL.N015 


^i^V  Tt^  rT'-.  .      ^ 


"='"^'^3   ' 


1 

J.. 


^^'-l 


iN 


\ 


rtAJ^-^i'^f^^^ 


'^-.ttj»e»;.»^ii-t>.ii^ 


RESIDENCE  OF   GEORGE    B.  GO  R  EY,  5EC'  12  &15  .,50MER  5  ET  TP,JACK50N   CO.,  I  LL. 


PpRTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


329 


of  this  township.  As  a  citizen  he  gives  his  sup- 
port to  all  measures  for  the  benefit  of  the  commu- 
nit}',  and  is  a  inan  who  occupies  a  high  place  in 
tlie  regard  of  all  who  know  him. 


-.^.{.^.j..^.^.^.^- 


and  prominent    business   man   of    Chester, 

^J  where  he  is  residing  at  the  present  time.  He 
was  born  in  Washington  County,  this  state,  .July  13, 
1834, and  is  a  son  of  Harvey  and  Aly  (Haryman) 
Neville,  natives  respectivelj'  of  Kentucky  and 
Tennessee.  The  mother  was  twelve  xeai'S  of  age 
when  her  parents  removed  to  Washington  County, 
where  she  met  and  married  Ilarvej'  Neville.  Her 
death  occurred  in  1874.  A  man  of  patriotic  spirit 
and  great  courage,  the  elder  Mr.  Neville  served  as 
a  soldier  in  the  Black  Hawk  War.  He  iield  the  rank 
of  First  Lieutenant  in  the  Mexican  War,  enlisting 
in  1848.  During  the  Civil  War,  though  advanced 
in  J'ears,  he  went  to  the  front  with  the  bo^'s  in 
blue  and  rendered  valiant  service  to  the  cause  of 
the  Union  as  Captain  of  Company  H,  Twenty-sec- 
ond Illinois  Regiment.  Returning  to  Kandolph 
Count}',  he  remained  here  until  his  death,  wliich 
occurred  in  1878,  at  the  age  of  sevent3--four  3-eai-s. 

On  the  paternal  side  our  subject  is  of  French 
descent,  while  his  inotlier's  famil}-  is  of  German 
origin.  He  is  one  of  six  survivors  of  a  large  fam- 
ily of  children.  He  attended  the  common  schools 
of  liis  native  county,  and  in  1851,  after  coming  to 
Chester,  continued  his  studies  in  this  city.  Later 
he  entered  JIcKendree  College,  and  after  a  two 
3-ears' course  in  that  institution  began  life  on  his 
own  account  by  engaging  in  mechanical  engin- 
eering. 

The  lad}'  whom  our  subject  married  August  7. 
1857,  was  Miss  Mary  E.,  daughter  of  Robert  Mann, 
of  this  city.  When  establishing  a  home  of  his 
own  he  made  Chester  his  permanent  abiding  place, 
and  became  owner  of  the  steamer  "Belle  of  Ches- 
ter," a  ferr}'  boat  plying  between  this  place  and 
Clary  ville.  He  owns  the  steamer  "Nick  Sauer,"  a 
packet  running  from  Chester  up  the  Kaskaskia 
River. 

Of  the  seven  children  born  to  our  subject  and  his 
wife,  five  are  now  living,  namel}":    May  Phonetta, 


the  wife  of  John  D.  Gerlach,  whose  sketch  appears 
on  another  page  of  this  record;  .Joseph  T.,  Cap- 
tain of  the  steamer  "Nick  Sauer;"  Edith  E.,  wife  of 
Benjamin  L.  Simpson,  of  Columbus,  Ohio;  .Jennie 
A.  and  William  AV.,at  home.  The  wife  and  mother 
died  in  1890,  at  the  age  of  fifty-nine  3'ears.  In  his 
l)olitica!  relations  Mr.  Neville  is  a  strong  Rei)ub- 
lican  and  always  casts  his  vote  for  the  candidates  of 
that  part}-.  He  is  a  member  of  Chester  Lodge  No. 
72,  A.  F.  &  A.  M.,  and  is  also  identified  with  H. 
G.  Reynolds  Chapter  No.  84,  R.  A.  M.  In  1892 
he  erected  a  beautiful  residence  in  Chester,  where 
he  and  his  two  youngest  children  entertain  their 
hosts  of  friouds. 


^■M-+*+4-5"H 


\|,  OHN  BERNARD  LONERGAN,  an  influen- 
tial farmer  of  Ruma  Precinct,  Randolph 
County,  was  born  on  a  steamer  on  the  Missis- 
sippi River,  May  29,  1835,  when  his  parents, 
Michael  and  Bridget  (O'Rciley)  Lonergan,  were 
going  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  to  St.  Louis.  His 
father  was  born  in  County  Tipperary,  Ireland, 
and  crossed  the  Atlantic  when  a  boy.  After  spend- 
ing some  time  in  Canada,  he  came  to  the  States 
and  made  his  home  in  Potlsvillc,  Pa.,  and  later  in 
Philadelphia.  Subsequently  he  went  to  New  Or- 
leans, thence  to  St.  Louis,  and  in  1836  came  to 
Randoli)h  Couuty  on  a  prospecting  tour  and  pur- 
chased land,  on  wliich  it  was  his  intention  to  lo- 
cate the  following  spring.  His  death  during  that 
winter,  however,  prevented  the  fruition  of  his 
plans.  Later,  his  widow,  with  the  family,  settled 
on  a  farm  in  this  county,  and  there  resided  until 
her  decease,  in  1853.  Three  brothers  of  our  sub- 
ject's father  accompanied  him  on  his  trip  to  Hli- 
nois,and  also  located  in  this  county,  where  one  is  a 
cooi)er,  another  a  shoemaker,  and  the  third  a  gun- 
smith and  engineer.  William  Lonergan,  an  uncle 
of  our  subject,  w.as  very  wealthy,  and  died  in  St. 
Louis  when  seventy-four  years  of  age. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  one  of  three  chil- 
dren born  to  his  parents,  of  whom  his  brother 
William  resides  in  Cairo,  in  this  state,  and  Michael 
is  deceased.  He  was  reared  in  this  county,  where 
he  received  a  limited  education.  At  nineteen 
years  of  age  he  went  to  Louisiana,  Mo.,  and  while 


330 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


there  married  Miss  Jane  Williams,  the  date  of  their 
union  being  October  21,  1860.  The  following 
year  Mr.  Lonergan  returned  to  this  county,  where 
his  wife  died  in  1881.  The  five  children  of  which 
she  became  the  mother  were  named,  Bridget  L., 
Maggie,  Sarah  E.,  Cliristena  and  Laura  E. 

The  lady  whom  our  subject  chose  as  his  second 
wife  was  Miss  Eliza  Blaiz.  Slie  is  tlie  daughter  of 
Expedient  and  Margaret  A.  Blaiz,  and  was  born 
August  15,  1847.  Five  cliildren  were  born  of 
this  union,  one  of  whom,  Henrj',  is  deceased. 
Those  living  are  Julian,  Aggie,  Josephine  and 
Charles.  An  industrious  man  and  a  reliable  citi- 
zen, ]Mr.  Lonergan  is  respected  as  he  deserves  by 
his  fellow-citizens.  He  has  held  many  positions  of 
trust,  has  done  efficient  service  as  a  member 
of  the  School  Board  for  nine  years,  and  has  also 
been  Road  Supervisor  for  four  terms.  He  held  the 
office  of  Justice  of  the  Peace,  and  was  Constable 
for  four  years.  In  ])olitics  he  alwa3's  votes  with 
the  Democratic  part}-,  casting  his  first  ballot  for 
Stephen  A.  Douglas.  He  is  linown  and  respected 
for  the  honest3^  and  sincerity  of  his  character,  and 
has  been  administrator  for  several  valuable  estates 
in  the  countj-.  He  owns  a  farm  of  one  hundred 
and  sixty  acres  in  Monroe  County,  this  state. 
This  property  is  occupied  by  tenants,  and  has  been 
improved  by  neat  buildings  and  good  fencing. 


l/OHN  M.  SCIIROEDER.  Perhaps  no  very 
thrilling  event  has  happened  in  the  life  of 
tliis  steady-going  and  reliable  citizen,  but 
_  he  is  one  of  those  who  have  assisted  in  es- 
tablishing the  financial  prosperity  of  Jackson 
County  and  upholding  the  standard  of  morality. 
His  life  occupation  has  been  that  of  a  farmer,  in 
whicli  he  has  been  very  successful,  accumulating  a 
valuable  properly  and  fortifying  himself  against 
the  days  when  he  may  wish  to  retire  from  active 
labor.  His  homestead  lies  in  the  southern  portion 
of  .Somerset  Township,  and  with  its  well  tilled 
fields,  substantial  buildings  and  general  air  of 
comfort,  forjns  an  attractive  picture  in  the  land- 
scape of  that  region. 

A  native  of  Prussia,  the  subject  of  this  sketch 


was  born  February  2,  1833,  and  is  a  son  of  Henry 
and  Elizabeth  Schroeder,  natives  of  Germany.  At 
the  age  of  eight  j'ears  he  was  orphaned  by  his 
mother's  death,  and  three  years  afterward,  in  com- 
[jany  witii  his  father  and  the  other  members  of  the 
family,  iie  emigrated  to  America,  taking  passage  on 
a  sailing-vessel  and  arriving  in  New  Orleans  after  a 
tedious  v03'age  of  about  forty  days.  From  that 
city  the  family  went  north  to  St.  Louis,  and  after 
a  short  sojourn  there,  removed  to  St.  Clair  Count}^ 
111.,  in  1844,  settling  near  Belleville,  when  that 
now  nourishing  cit}'  was  a  small  village.  Soon 
after  locating  there  the  father  died.  He  is  sur- 
vived by  tlie  following  children:  Elizabeth,  wife 
of  Michael  Seifert,a  residentof  Pen-}'  County,  III.; 
John  M.,  of  this  sketch;  Michael  J.,  living  in  Du- 
(juoin.  III.,  and  Adam,  whose  home  is  in  .St.  Clair 
County,  this  state. 

Owing  to  the  death  of  his  father,  our  subject  was 
in  3'outh  thrown  upon  his  own  resources  and  was 
obliged  to  be  self-supporting.  His  educational  ad- 
vantages were  therefore  limited.  For  a  time  he  at- 
tended a  subscription  school  in  St.  Clair  C'ount3'. 
Tlie  schoolhouse  was  built  of  logs;  slabs  and  planks 
were  utilized  for  seats,  upon  which  the  3'outhful 
seekers  after  knowledge  passed  the  tedious  hours. 
When  necessar3'  to  heat  the  room,  a  fire  was  built 
in  the  large  firepl.ace,  and  the  smoke  was  coaxed 
to  ascend  outward  b3'  means  of  a  stick  and  mud 
chimney,  all  not  escaping  in  that  way  finding 
ready  access  to  the  outer  air  throirgh  the  numerous 
cracks  in  the  walls. 

Although  his  school  facilities  were  so  meagre, 
3-et  Mr.  Schroeder  there  laid  the  foundation  of 
the  love  of  learning  that  remains  with  him  to  the 
present  time,  and  b3'  abundant  and  judiciousl3' 
selected  reading  he  has  supplied  the  lack  of  a  bet- 
tereducation  in  liis  3'Outh.  In  1853  he  went  to 
California  via  New  Orleans  and  the  Isthmus  of 
Panama,  and  for  two  and  one-half  years  engaged 
in  working  in  the  gold  mines  of  that  state,  meet- 
ing with  fair  success.  He  returned  home  b3'  prac- 
tically the  same  route  as  he  went,  and  resumed 
farming  operations  in  St.  Clair  Count3',  where  he 
remained  until  1887.  That  3ear  witnessed  his  ar- 
rival in  Jackson  County  and  his  location  in  Som- 
erset Township.     In    1891    he  came   to   the  farm 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


331 


where  he  now  resides.  He  is  the  owner  of  eighty 
acres  of  valuable  land,  and  his  wife  also  owns  an 
eighty-acre  tract. 

The  first  marriage  of  Mr.  Schroeder  united  him 
with  Looma  Wildernian,  who  became  the  mother 
of  four  children:  Lulu,  wife  of  M.  Bollion;  Maggie, 
a  teacher  in  the  public  schools  of  St.  Clair  Coun- 
ty; .Joseph,  living  in  Murphysboro,  111.;  and  Eliza- 
beth, wife  of  H.  Bost.  The  present  wife  of 
Mr.  Schroeder  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Alice 
n.  Wilderman,  and  their  union  has  resulted  in 
the  birth  of  one  child,  John.  Since  coming  to 
Jackson  County,  our  subject  has  been  active!}' 
identified  with  Somerset  Grange  No.  370,  and  for 
several  years  has  served  as  Master  of  the  lodge. 
While  residing  in  St.  Clair  County  he  served  as 
Master[lof  St.  Clair  Lodge  No.  24,  A.  F.  &r  A.  M., 
at  Belleville,  and  is  now  identififed  with  the  lodge 
at  Murphysboro.  At  the  time  of  the  laying  of  the 
corner  stone  of  the  present  state  capitol  at  Spring- 
field he  was  present,  having  been  a  delegate  from 
the  Masonic  order  of  St.  Clair  Count}'.  In  pol- 
itics he  is  a  stanch  adherent  of  the  Democratic 
party.  Having  learned  the  trade  of  chair-m(jking 
in  that  city,  for  several  years  he  manufactured 
chairs  there,  and  at  one  time  employed  as  high  as 
thirty  laborers  and  mechanics  in  the  business. 

<XI'5"H"i"i"»-i"i'»-i"i"S'^-t"»'{"i"i"i"3"i'»*'H'!?C> 

,OBERT  II.  MANN.  One  of  tlie  most  hon- 
ored citizens  of  Chester  is  the  gentleman 
whose  personal  history  is  outlined  in  these 
)^)  columns,  and  who  for  many  years  has 
been  intimately  associated  with  the  progress  of 
Randolph  County.  He  presents  a  marked  type  of 
the  energetic,  patriotic  and  sturdy  sons  of  the 
great  west — suaviter  in  modo,  fortiter  in  re — with 
whom  the  high  sense  of  duty  stands  first  in  every 
relation  of  life.  Progressive  in  thought,  and  en- 
dowed by  nature  with  a  strong  character  and  de- 
cision of  purpose,  he  has  achieved  a  success  of 
which  he  is  worthy,  and  which  is  the  deserved  re- 
ward of  his  energetic  efforts. 

Born  in  Randolph  County,  HI.,  August  26,  1833, 
our  subject  is  the  son  of  Robert  and  Salina  M. 
(Balch)  Mann,  natives  respectively  of  South  Caro- 


lina and  Tennessee.  His  father  came  to  this  coun- 
ty in  1817,  and  settled  near  Preston,  where  he  en- 
ergetically entered  upon  the  task  of  clearing  and 
improving  a  farm,  meeting  with  considerable  suc- 
cess in  his  labors  as  a  tiller  of  the  soil.  In  1851 
he  settled  in  Chester,  where  he  continued  to  live 
in  retirement  until  his  death  in  1878. 

In  his  youth,  tlie  subject  of  this  sketch  was  a 
student  in  the  private  schools  of  Randolph  County, 
after  which  he  conducted  his  studies  in  a  Ger- 
man school  in  this  place.  Entering  upon  his  ac- 
tive business  career,  he  became  a  clerk  in  the  em- 
ploy of  H.  C.  Cole  <fe  Co.,  with  whom  he  remained 
for  six  years.  In  1857  he  embarked  in  the  real- 
estate  business,  which  he  conducted  successfully 
until  the  outbreak  of  the  Civil  War.  At  the  open; 
ing  of  that  conflict,  he  enlisted  as  a  member  of 
Company  I,  Tenth  iHinois  Infantry,  Col.  James  D. 
Morgan  commanding.  In  March,  1862,  his  regi- 
ment was  incorporated  with  the  Army  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi, under  General  Pope. 

Among  the  important  engagements  in  which 
Mr.  Mann  participated  were  those  of  New  Madrid 
and  Island  No.  10,  after  which  he  was  ordered  to 
Arkansas,  and  from  there  proceeded  to  Pittsburg 
Landing  and  Corinth,  taking  part  in  those  mem- 
orable battles.  He  afterward  marched  through 
various  parts  of  Mississippi,  and  going  into  camp 
at  Big  Springs,  remained  there  until  July  20,  1862. 
He  was  ordered  thence  to  Tuscumbia,  Ala.,  to  guard 
the  line  of  the  Memphis  ife  Charlestown  Railroad, 
where  he  remained  until  the  latter  part  of  Septem- 
ber, 1862.  Next  he  accompanied  his  regiment  in- 
to Tennessee,  and  in  July,  1863,  was  ordered  to 
New  Fosterville,  on  the  N.ashville  ik  Chattanooga 
Railroad,  where  he  remained  for  one  month  after 
the  battle  of  Mission  Ridge  and  the  East  Tennessee 
campaign. 

In  JanuaiT,  1864,  the  regiment  re-enlisted,  and 
then  was  given  a  thirty  days'  furlough,  atQuincy, 
III.  Proceeding  to  the  front,  Mr.  ]\Iann  took  part 
in  the  Atlanta  campaign  and  in  the  inarch  to  the 
sea,  and  afterward  was  taken  sick  at  Savannah.  For 
meritorious  conduct  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank 
of  First  Lieutenant.  He  was  on  staff  duty  the 
greater  part  of  his  service,  in  which  capacity  he 
was  serving  at  the  time  of  his  discharge.     His  rec- 


332 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


ord  as  a  soldier  is  cliaracteiized  b_v  tiie  loftiest  pa- 
triotism and  most  unwavering  courage,  and  is  one 
of  which  his  friends  may  well  be  proud. 

Returning  to  the  pursuits  of  civi<!life,Mr.  JIann 
resumed  his  real-estate  business,  in  which  he  has 
since  engaged.  lie  has  considerable  valuable  prop- 
erty in  Chester  and  vicinity  for  sale,  and  is  also 
tlic  agent  for  land  owned  b^'  eastern  parties.  In 
politics,  he  supports  the  Republican  party.  So- 
cially, he  is  identified  with  Chester  Lodge  No.  57, 
I.  O.  O.  F.,  of  whicli  he  is  the  oldest  member,  liav- 
ing  united  witli  the  lodge  May  10,  1855.  lie  is 
also  connected  witli  Randolph  Encampment  No. 
55.  As  would  be  supposed,  he  is  prominent  in  tlie 
Grand  Army  of  the  Republic,  and  holds  mem- 
bership in  Swaiiwick  Post  No.  212,  of  which  he 
has  been  Commander  for  some  time.  A  man  of 
sound  judgment,  moved  bj'  honest  purpose  and 
love  for  the  general  welfare  of  the  people,  he  is 
always  found  identified  with  the  right,  and  as 
migiit  be  expected,  is  popular  with  liis  fellow-citi- 
zens. 


^^(^ 


IZEKIEL15ARBER.  Randolph  County  fur- 
nished its  full  (juota  of  noble  men  to  the 
I' — ^  rank  and  file  of  the  Union  armj-,  among 
whom  our  subject  occui)ied  an  honorable  place. 
He  is  now  one  of  the  prominent  business  men  of 
Sparta,  where  he  is  engaged  in  the  real-estate  busi- 
ness, and  has  been  administrator  for  many  valu- 
able estates.  Mis  father.  Ezekiel  Barber,  was  born 
November  22,  1802,  in  Marietta,  Ohio,  and  was 
onl}'  two  and  a-half  years  old  when  he  w.as  brought 
by  his  parents  to  this  county,  they  settling  in  Ellis 
Grove. 

The  father  was  a  farmer  by  occupation,  and  bj' 
tr.ade  a  millwright.  He  received  an  education  such 
as  it  was  possible  to  procure  in  that  earlj-  day.  His 
death  occurred  four  months  prior  to  the  birth  of 
our  subject.  He  was  the  son  of  Alexander  and 
Nancy  (Dennis)  I'arber,  natives  respectively'  of 
Connecticut  and  Pennsylvania.  The  grandparents 
were  married  in  Ohio,  and  after  coming  to  Illi- 
nois, located  in  Randolph  County.  The^y  had 
started  for  Missouri,  which  was  the  home  of  Daniel 
Boone,  but  being   taken  sick   while  en  route,  re- 


turned to  Kaskaskia,  111.,  where  he  died.     He  was 

a  Whig  in  politics,  and  served  as  Justice  of  the 
Peace  for  over  h.alf  a  ceiiturv,  being  appointed 
by  Governor  Edwards  in  1809,  and  filled  the 
oHice  until  18G0. 

The  great-grandparents  of  our  subject,  Ezekiel 
and  Sour!inc3'  Barber,  were  also  natives  of  Connec- 
ticut, whence  tho\-  later  removed  to  Ohio,  and 
from  there  to  Illinois,  making  their  home  at  Eilis 
Grove,  this  countj',  until  their  death.  The  great- 
grandfather was  a  stone-cutter  b}-  trade,  and  a 
farmer  by  occupation,  and  served  as  a  soldier  in 
the  Revolutionary  War,  being  present  at  the  bat- 
tle of  Trenton.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Presby- 
terian Church.  The  Barber  family,  which  is  of 
Scotch  descent,  was  first  represented  in  America 
about  1700. 

Mrs.  Jennie  (Murphy)  Barber,  the  mother  of  our 
subject,  was  born  in  North  Carolina  in  1797.    She 
w.as   a  j-oung  lad}-  of    eighteen    years   when  she 
came  to  tliis  county,  and  w.as  a  daughter  of  John 
Murphy,  a   native  of  Ireland,  and   a  brick-layer 
b}'  trade,  who,  while  a  patriot  in   the   Revolution- 
ary War,  participated  in  the  battle  of  Kings  Jloun- 
!    tain.     He  and  his  wife  defiarted  this  life   in  Perry 
I    Countj-,  111.     The  mother  of  our  subject  died   in 
j   June,  1877,  while  a  resident  of   Carroll   County, 
this  state. 

The  parents  of  our  subject  were  married  in 
1823,  and  reared  a  famil^^  of  two  children.  Alex- 
ander, formerly  a  resident  of  Grafton,  this  stale, 
died  in  1888.  He  married  Miss  Con wa}-,, and  they 
became  the  parents  of  eight  children,  four  of  whom 
are  living:  Francis,  Ida  J.,  Horace  G.  and  John. 
Ezekiel,  the  second  son,  w.as  born  December  15, 
1827,  near  Ellis  Grove,  this  county.  A  year  later 
his  mother  went  to  live  with  Grandfather  Barber, 
with  whom  tliey  continued  to  reside  until  August, 
1831.  Our  subject  was  educated  in  the  old  log 
schoolhouse  of  pioneer  days,  and  when  old  enougli 
worked  in  a  grist  and  sawmill  for  his  grandfather 
m  this  county.  In  1844  he  went  to  Galena,  and 
after  working  in  the  lead  mines  of  that  place  for 
one  and  a-half  3'ears,  he  removed  to  Wisconsin. 
After  two  years  spent  in  that  state,  he  returned 
to  the  home  of  his  grandfather,  and  worked  for 
his  uncle,  James  Barber,  in  the  saw  mill  for  two 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL    RECORD. 


333 


years.  In  1850,  having  been  seized  with  the  gold 
fever,  he  crossed  the  plains  to  California,  where 
he  prospected  for  gold  for  two  years,  meeting  with 
fair  success.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time  he  re- 
turned home,  and  for  a  Iwelverooutli  again  worked 
for  his  uncle  in  the  mill. 

In  1853  p;zekiel  Baibcr  niairitd  IMisss  Mary  .1. 
Frazer,  who  was  born  in  1831  in  Indiana.  .She  was 
the  daughter  of  John  and  Elizabeth  (Smith)  Frazer, 
natives  of  Pennsylvania  and  Bowling  Green,  Ky., 
respectively.  The  father  of  Mrs.  Barber  was  a 
cabinet-maker  b^-  trade,  in  politics  was  a  Whig,  and 
socially  was  a  prominent  Odd  Fellow.  He  died  at 
Rockwood,  111.,  January  1,  1845.  Mrs.  Frazer  de- 
parted this  life  in  New  Albany,  Ind.,  in  Septem- 
ber, 1847.  To  our  subject  and  his  wife  were  born 
six  children,  of  wlioni  Bell,  Charlie,  Cora  and  Wil- 
lie are  deceased.  Those  livinj;  are  Nellie  and  Min- 
nie, both  highl}'  educated  young  ladies  and  school 
teachers. 

The  jear  of  his  marriage  Mr.  Berber  eiig.agcd  in 
the  mercantile  business  at  Rockwood,  and  after 
disposing  of  his  interests  in  that  line,  he  became 
keeper  of  a  wood  yard  in  the  same  place.  He  was 
filling  that  position  when,  in  1864,  he  enlisted, 
and  was  assigned  to  the  Fiftieth  Illinois  Infantry. 
This  regiment  then  being  with  Sherman  on  the 
march  to  the  sea,  he  was  temporarily  with  others 
organized  in  the  Fourth  Battalion,  in  which  he 
participated  in  the  battle  of  Nashville  on  the  15th 
and  16tli  of  December,  following  Hood's  retreating 
army  into  Alabama.  Returning  to  Nashville,  he 
was  senttoNewbern,  N.  C,  where  he  again  was  tem- 
porarily assigned  to  the  One  Hundred  and  Twen- 
ty-second New  York  Infantry,  and  participated  in 
the  battle  of  Kingston,  N.  C,  March  8,  9,  10  and 
1 1,  18G5.  He  joined  the  Fiftieth  Illinois  Infantry, 
March  25,  1865,  and  was  discharged  at  Louisville, 
Ky.,  July  13  of  that  year. 

Returning  from  the  army,  our  subject  went  to 
Rockwood,  and  from  theie  to  Missouri,  it  being 
his  intention  to  prospect  in  the  lead  mines  in 
Granb^^  Soon,  however,  he  returned  to  Rock- 
wood, and  until  1888  was  engaged  in  shipping 
fruit,  grain  and  cattle  to  St.  Louis.  At  present  he 
is  the  proprietor  of  a  fine  farm  located  in  town- 
ship 8,  range  6,  besides  having  valuable  town  prop- 


erty. He  is  also  engaged  in  loaning  money,  and 
is  administrator  for  an  estate  worth  $50,000.  In 
his  political  relations  he  is  a  strong  Republican, 
and  is  an  influential  member  of  Post  No.  181, 
G.  A.  R.,  at  Sparta.  Although  not  a  member  of 
an  J'  denomination,  he  gives  liberallj-  of  his  means 
to  the  support  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church, 
with  which  his  wife  is  connected. 


Alexander   lochhead  derives  both 

@/lJI  pleasure  and  profit  from  the  management 
li  of  his  estate,  which  is  located  on  section 
18,  township  7,  range  6,  Randolph  Coun- 
ty. It  bears  a  full  line  of  improvements,  and  in 
addition  to  the  business  of  a  general  farmer,  Mr. 
Lochhead  in  1891  began  in  the  dairy  business,  and 
he  now  has  a  paying  route  iu  the  cit^'  of  Chester. 
He  is  a  native  of  Glasgow,  Scotland,  the  date  of 
his  birth  being  November  27.  1839. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  who  also  bears  tiie 
name  of  Alexander,  was  reared  to  manhood  in  his 
native  laud,  Scotland,  where  he  was  an  engineer. 
The  lady  to  whom  he  was  married,  and  who  be- 
came the  mother  of  our  subject,  was  Miss  Christina 
Flemming,  also  born  in  Glasgow,  Scotland.  In 
the  3'ear  1840  the  parents  set  sail  for  America, 
when  our  subject  was  only  a  few  months  old,  and 
on  arriving  in  the  New  World,  the^'  made  their 
wa}'  directlj'  to  this  county-  and  located  on  a  farm 
five  miles  from  Chester. 

For  a  number  of  years  after  coming  here  the 
father  of  our  subject  lived  on  rented  laud,  and 
continued  to  follow  the  occupation  of  a  farmer 
until  1846,  when  his  decease  occurred.  The 
mother  of  our  subject  was  later  married,  her  hus- 
band being  Amos  Taggert,  and  she  departed  this 
life  iu  1875.  Alexander  of  this  sketch  is  a  man 
of  limited  education,  but  sound  common  sense 
and  accurate  judgment,  and  in  the  pursuit  of  his 
occupation  of  farming  has  become  the  owner  of 
valuable  property.  AVhen  ft  lad  of  fifteen  years 
he  went  to  Chester  and  tiegan  clerking  in  the 
grocery  store  of  George  Rust,  with  whom  he  re- 
mained for  four  years,  and  then  returning  to  farm 
life,  has  since  devoted  his  time  to  cultivating  the 


334 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


soil.  He  is  engaged  in  general  agriculture  and 
reaps  annually  an  abundant  harvest  frona  his 
place,  wliich  thus  makes  excellent  returns  for  the 
time  and  labor  which  he  has  invested. 

October  5,  1858,  Alexander  Lochliead  was  mar- 
ried to  Eliza  E.,  daughter  of  Isaac  and  Annis 
(Cochrane)  Rust,  natives  of  Maine.  Their  mar- 
riage was  blessed  by  the  birth  of  nine  children, 
three  of  whom  died  in  infanc3^  Those  living  are, 
Melvin,  who  married  Carolina  Heitkanip,  and  is  a 
prosperous  farmer  near  Chester;  Albert  R.,  who 
married  Elizabeth  Conn,  and  is  also  engaged  in 
farming  pursuits  in  this  county;  James;  Christina, 
Gilbert  and  Grace,  who  are  at  home.  Our  subject 
and  his  wife  are  devoted  members  of  the  Method- 
ist Church,  and  arc  classed  among  the  substantial 
citizens  of  their  township.  Mr.  Lochhead  has  al- 
ways voted  with  the  Republican  party,  has  been 
Road  Commissioner  and  School  Director  of  his 
town,  and  with  excellent  judgment  and  keen  per- 
ception has  materially'  aided  in  the  upward  prog- 
ress of  the  public  schools. 


/^)  IIRI^TOPHER  HACK,  who  is  engaged  in 
[l(^l,  farming  in  Vergennes,  claims  Mississippi 
^^^'  as  the  state  of  his  nativity.  He  was  born 
in  Claiborne  County,  April  15,  1840,  and  is  the 
son  of  Christopher  Hack,  a  native  of  Germany, 
who  when  a  small  boy  came  with  his  parents  to 
America.  He  had  one  brother,  who  lived  in  New 
Orleans.  The  mother  of  our  subject  died  when 
her  son  was  very  young.  He  left  liome  when 
about  ten  years  of  age  and  began  working  on  a 
steamboat  on  the  Mississippi  River,  being  thus 
employed  until  the  beginning  of  the  war,  when  he 
came  north  to  Cairo,  making  his  home  in  that 
place  and  in  Mound  Cit}'  until  1862. 

Mr.  Hack  th^n  enlisted  in  the  Union  navy,  and 
was  on  board  the  "Monarch"  during  the  greater 
part  of  his  service.  He  was  also  detailed  for  car- 
penter work  on  the  "Lancaster  Ram,"  "Diana" 
and  "Queen  of  the  AVest."  He  participated  in 
many  naval  engagements — the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 
the  expedition  to  assist  Siierman,  went  up  the 
Arkansas  River  to  Arkansas  Post,  and  landed  with 


the  troops  as  volunteers  at  Greenville.  In  the 
spring  of  1864  he  was  discharged,  but  continued 
to  remain  in  Vicksburg  until  the  following  July, 
when  he  returned  to  Jackson  County. 

Mr.  Hack  first  located  in  De  Soto,  and  then 
came  to  Vergennes.  He  was  married  in  Vicks- 
burg, in  1860,  to  Miss  Mary  Westfall,  who  died 
in  the  following  year.  On  the  31st  of  May,  18C4, 
in  Vicksburg,  he  wedded  Miss  Nancy  Westfall,  a 
sister  of  his  first  wife,  and  a  daughter  of  David 
and  Elizabeth  (Lyons)  Westfall.  Her  parents  were 
both  born  and  reared  in  Ohio,  removing  thence  to 
Mississippi.  Her  father  enlisted  in  the  I'nion  army 
and  died  in  the  service.  They  had  the  following 
children:  Leander,  Adam,  Melvina,  Mary  M., Fran- 
ces and  Nanc}".     All  are  deceased  except  Fiances. 

To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hack  were  born  five  children. 
William  and  Minerva,  twins,  born  Ma}'  30,  1866, 
died  in  infancy;  Alice,  born  July  15,  1869,  is  the 
wife  of  William  Mann;  Henry  C,  born  November 
6,  1871,  is  the  next  younger;  and  Mary  A.,  born 
September  13,  1874,  is  now  deceased.  The  mother 
of  this  family  passed  awaj'  January  31,  1876.  and 
on  the  12th  of  December  following  Mr.  Hack  mar- 
ried Mahala  Law.  The}'  have  one  child,  ililton 
A.,  born  September  22,  1885.  Mrs.  Hack  died  May 
21,  1889,  and  on  the  10th  of  April,  1890,  our  sub- 
ject wedded  Dollie  Graer,  widow  of  Benjamin 
Graer.  The}'  have  two  children:  Fannie,  born 
January  18,  189-1;  and  Charles  B.,  July  22,  1893. 

Mr.  Hack  has  followed  farming  tliroughout  the 
greater  part  of  his  life,  and  for  seven  years  has 
carried  on  general  merchandising  in  Vergennes.  He 
now  owns  two  hundred  and  eighty  acres  of  valuable 
land,  besides  considerable  property  in  the  village, 
and  by  well  directed  efforts,  enterprise  and  in- 
dustry has  acquired  a  handsome  competence.  He 
is  a  member  of  the  United  Brethren  Church,  in 
which  he  serves  as  Trustee,  and  is  also  a  member 
of  the  building  committee,  which  is  now  engaged 
in  the  erection  of  a  new  house  of  worship.  In 
politics  he  is  a  Democrat,  and  has  held  the  office 
of  Highway  Commissioner  and  Township  Treas- 
urer. He  has  taken  an  active  part  in  politics,  but 
has  never  been  a  narrow  partisan.  Socially,  he  is 
connected  with  the  Masonic  fraternitj-  and  the 
Odd  Fellows'  society,  and   is  now   Trustee  of  the 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


335 


latter  lodge.  He  possesses  excellent  business  and 
executive  ability,  and  the  prosperity  which  has 
crowned  liis  efforts  is  but  the  just  reward  of  his 
labors. 

^^P • 

eHRISTIAN  BKARE,  whose  sketch  now  in- 
vites attention,  is  one  of  the  oldest  resi- 
dents in  the  state  of  Illinois.  In  the  course 
of  his  long  life  he  has  witnessed  many  clianges 
and  an  immense  amount  of  progress  in  tlie  state, 
and  lias  also  accumulated  a  considerable  fortune. 
Longevit}'  for  some  reasons  and  in  some  cases  is 
not  a  desirable  thing,  but  it  certainly  gives  a  man 
a  vastamount  of  valuable  experience, and  gains  him 
a  larger  number  of  successes  than  can  be  accom- 
plished in  a  shorter  span  of  years.  Mr.  Beare  is 
one  of  the  progressive  farmers  of  township  6, 
range  7,  Randolph  County,  where  he  owns  an  ex- 
cellent estate  of  four  hundred  and  fifty  acres. 

Our  subject's  birth  occurred  near  Berne,  Switz- 
erland, March  28,  1817,  he  being  the  third  in  or- 
der of  birth  in  a  family  of  five  children  born  to 
Joseph  and  Gretta  (Meyer)  Beare.  He  emigrated 
to  America  when  nine  years  of  age  with  his  par- 
ents, who  first  settled  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  and  later 
went  to  Canton,  the  same  state.  Some  time  later 
the  family  located  on  a  farm  near  East  St.  Louis, 
but  remaining  there  only  a  year,  came  to  Randolph 
County  and  located  on  the  farm  which  is  now  the 
home  of  our  subject.  He  obtained  very  little 
schooling  in  his  youth,  but  was  naturally  of  a 
studious  turn  of  mind,  and  through  his  desire  for 
learning  and  eagerness  to  seize  upon  everything 
to  increase  his  store  of  knowledge,  he  acquired  a 
good  idea  of  business.  During  his  ^-ounger  days 
he  aided  his  father  in  the  care  of  the  farm,  and 
energeticall3'  shared  the  toils  of  seed-time  and  har- 
vest. He  gained  a  thoroughly  practical  knowledge 
of  the  pursuit  of  agriculture,  and  was  well  fitted 
at  an  early  age  to  self  reliantly  begin  the  battle  of 
life.  In  1843,  when  he  was  twenty-six  years  old, 
our  subject  sold  the  first  crop  of  wheat  for  himself, 
and  has  continuously  worked  at  his  chosen  pursuit 
until  he  has  won  a  goodly  amount  of  this  world's 
goods.  His  productive  farm  lies  one-half  mile 
west  of  Ellis  Grove,  where  he  does  all  his  trading. 


His  father  bad  a  family  of  five  children,  and  came 
to  this  country  expecting  to  make  a  good  home 
for  them.  His  efforts  were  not  in  vain,  for  they 
are  all  comfortably  situated  in  life,  and  the  family 
is  one  of  the  wealthiest  in  Hie  county. 

Mr.  Beare  was  married  Eebruary  9,  1843,  to 
Martha  Lenherr,  a  daughter  of  Christian  and  Eliza- 
beth (Kloepeustien)  Lenherr.  The  parents  cele- 
brated their  golden  wedding  February  9,  1893, 
and  were  surrounded' b3'  seven  children  and  eigh- 
teen grandchildren.  They  are  enjoying  their 
remaining  days  in  peace  and  comfort.  To  our 
subject  and  his  estimable  wife  has  been  born  a 
family  of  eight  children,  one  of  whom  died  in  in- 
fancy. John  and  Christian,  are  twins,  and  the 
former  married  Lizzie  Heckraan,  who  died  in  the 
year  1883;  the  latter  married  Sophia  Heckman. 
Joseph  married  Sarah  Hargis,  and  is  a  merchant 
in  Ellis  Grove;  Lizzie  is  the  wife  of  Louis  Wehr- 
heim,  and  they  are  residents  of  Ellis  Grove; 
Henry  married  Emma  Hargis,'  and  is  also  a  mer- 
chant in  Ellis  Grove;  Isaac,  who  is  the  present 
County  Clerk  of  Randolph  County,  makes  his  liome 
in  Chester;  and  Mary  is  the  wife  of  Joseph  Heob, 
who  is  a  merchant  in  Ellis  Grove.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Beare  are  consistent  members  of  the  Methodist 
Church,  and  are  highly  esteemed  by  their  many 
friends  and  acquaintances.  Mr.  Beare  is  now  in 
his  seventy-seventh  year,  and  is  hale  and  hearty. 
In  his  political  affiliations  he  is  a  Democrat,  casting 
his  first  vote  for  Van  Buren.  All  of  the  children 
are  also  advocates  of  Democracy,  and  rank  high  in 
the  esteem  of  their  fellow-citizens. 


I^OBERT  HOUSTON,  foreman  of  the  Ran- 
IWj  dolph  Mines,  of  Percy,  and  a  highly  re- 
'4i\\\  spected  citizen  of  the  coniraunit}-,  claims 
^^  Scotland  as  the  land  of  his  nativity.  He 
was  born  in  June,  1841,  and  is  the  second  child  of 
Robert  and  Agnes  (Gray)  Houston.  His  father 
was  a  miner  in  Scotland,  and  lived  in  that  coun- 
try until  1853,  when  with  his  family  he  emigrated 
to  America,  locating  near  Caseyville,  Ky.,  where 
he  began  working  in  the  mines.  In  1859,  he  came 
to  DuQuoin,  where  he  spent  most  of  his  time  en- 


336 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL    RECORD. 


gaged  in  miiiiiig  until  his  death,  which  occurred 
in  July,  1888.  Ilu  won  the  high  regard  of  all  with 
whom  lie  was  brought  in  contact,  and  his  loss  was 
deeply  mourned.  His  widow  is  yet  living  near 
])u(  Juoin. 

Mr.  Houston  attended  school  in  .Scotland  dur- 
ing his  early  years,  but  his  educational  privileges 
were  limited,  for  at  the  age  of  nine  years  he  went 
into  the  mines  with  his  father,  and  was  thus  ein- 
pIo\ed  until  coming  to  America  in  18o4,  when  a 
youth  of  thirteen.  Here  he  at  once  resumed  min- 
ing, and  has  since  followed  that  pursuit  with  the 
exception  of  one  3'ear,  wlicn  he  entered  the  employ 
of  a  farmer,  thinking  that  he  might  improve  his 
education  thereby.  He  worked  in  the  fields,  and 
for  one  term  attended  the  district  school,  after 
which  he  returned  to  the  mines.  At  the  age  of 
nineteen,  he  began  working  for  himself,  and  was 
employed  as  a  miner  until  lie  had  attained  his  ma- 
jority. 

At  that  time,  prompted  by  patriotic  impulses, 
Mr.  Houston  entered  the  service  of  his  countiy, 
enlisting  at  DuQuoin  as  Fife  Major  in  tlie  Highty- 
(irst  Illinois  Infantry  for  three  years.  He  was 
with  the  regiment  in  all  of  its  many  engagements, 
and  when  the  war  was  over,  he  was  mustered  out 
in  Vicksburg,  August  5,  1865,  and  received  his 
discharge  in  Chicago. 

When  the  countr3-  no  longer  needed  his  services, 
Mr.  Houston  returned  to  DuQuoin  to  visit  his 
peopl,  and  then  went  to  Mobile,  Ala.,  where  he 
spent  the  two  succeeding  years  of  his  life.  In 
1868,  he  returned  to  Sparta,  and  engaged  in  coal 
mining  until  1880,  when  he  took  charge  of  the 
Rosborough  Coal  mines,  being  Superintendent  of 
the  same  for  seven  years.  He  then  went  to  In- 
diana, where  he  was  emploj'cd  for  a  few  months, 
but  after  a  short  time  he  returned  to  Illinois  and 
located  in  Percy,  where  he  now  serves  as  manager 
of  the  Randolph  mines.  These  mines  turn  out  about 
three  hundred  tons  i)er  day  in  the  working  season. 

In  1875,  Mr.  Houston  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Agnes  Brown,  daughter  of  James  B.  aud 
Margaret  (Grant)  Brown,  who  were  of  Scotch  de- 
scent. By  this  union  five  children  were  born,  as 
follows:  Maggie,  widow  of  Andrew  Moffat,  who 
resides  with  her  father;  Robert,  Myrtle,   and  Eva 


and  James  A.,  twins.  All  are  now  under  the  pa- 
rental roof.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Houston  are  members 
of  the  Presbj'terian  Church,  and  he  is  a  member  of 
some  civic  societies,  belonging  to  Mope  Lodge  No. 
162,  A.  F.  &  A.  M.,  of  Sparta,  the  Royal  Arch 
Cliai)ter  of  Madisonville,  Hopkins  Countj',  Ky.; 
aud  Sparta  Post  No.  181,  G.  A.  R.  In  politics,  he 
is  a  supporter  of  Republican  principles.  He  has 
lived  an  honorable,  upright  life,  devoted  largely 
to  legitimate  business  interests,  and  is  highly  re- 
spected \>y  all  who  know  him. 


\T|01IX  a.  IIAIIN  occupies  an  important  place 
in  the  farming  community  of  township  7, 
range  6,  Randolph  County,  aud  resides 
upon  the  old  homestead  where  he  was  borni 
near  Chester.  His  father.  Christian  Halm,  was 
born  in  "West  Baden,  Germany,  where  he  was 
reared  to  mature  years  on  his  father's  farm,  and 
emigrated  to  America  when  a  young  man.  He 
was  a  tailor  by  trade,  and  after  coming  to  Amer- 
ica made  his  first  location  in  Kaskaskia,  this  state, 
where  he  began  working  at  his  trade.  He  was 
the  first  German  to  make  settlement  in  that  place, 
but  only  remained  there  two  jears,  when  he  came 
to  Chester  and  established  himself  in  the  tailoring 
business,  in  which  he  was  fairly  successful  for 
four  years.  Christian  Hahn  then  purchased  land 
near  Chester  and  gave  himself  up  to  the  work  of 
its  cultivation,  residing  there  until  his  death, 
which  occurred  in  18C3. 

Soon  after  coming  to  Illinois,  and  while  mak- 
ing, his  home  in  Kaskaskia,  the  father  of  our  sub- 
ject was  married  to  Miss  Elizabeth  Fortman,  of 
German  parents,  and  their  union  was  blessed  by  a 
familv  of  ten  children.  John  A.,  of  this  sketch, 
who  was  the  youngest  in  the  famil}',  was  born 
February  20,  1852.  He  enjoyed  only  limited  op- 
portunities for  obtaining  an  education,  aiding 
his  father  in  the  care  of  his  farm,  thus  gaining 
a  thoroughly  practical  knowledge  of  the  pursuit 
of  agriculture.  After  his  father's  death,  John  re- 
mained at  home  with  his  mother  and  carried  on 
the  home  place,  which  has  since  come  into  his  pos- 
session.    His  mother  now  makes  her  home  with 


-   d:  ^^ 


-h- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


339 


him,  and  although  having  attained  the  advanced 

age  of  eighty-seven  years,  isenjo^'ing  good  health, 
and  even-  pleasant  Sunday  she  may  be  seen  walk- 
ing to  church. 

May  12.  1874,  .John  A.  Hahn  and  Miss  Mary  C, 
daughter  of  Mathew  and  Adelia  (Riker)  Muerer, 
were  united  in  marriage.  Mrs.  Halin's  parents 
were  natives  of  German}',  but  at  the  time  of  her 
marriage  were  residing  in  Missouri.  A  family  of 
three  children  has  come  to  bless  the  home  of  our 
subject  and  his  wife,  Clara,  Anna  and  .Joseph. 
The}'  are  all  being  given  good  educations  and  are 
students  in  the  high  school  at  Chester.  In  his  re- 
ligious belief,  Mr.  Hahn  and  his  entire  family  are 
devout  Catholics.  He  is  a  strong  Democrat  in 
politics,  but  has  never  held  or  aspired  to  political 
office,  preferring  to  devote  his  attention  exclu- 
sivel}'  to  his  private  affairs. 


ON.  J.  F.  TAYLOR,  an  attorney-at-law,  who 
111  is  successfully  engaged  in  legal  practice  in 
Carbondale,  is  one  of  the  prominent  citi- 
zens of  southern  Illinois.  His  father,  .James 
Taylor,  was  born  in  Columbus,  Ind.,  in  1826, 
and  is  a  son  of  Aaron  Ta^'lor,  who  was  born  in 
Marietta,  Ohio,  in  1800,  and  came  of  an  old  Vir- 
ginian family.  The  motlier  of  our  subject  bore 
the  maiden  name  of  Catherine  Formwalt.  She 
was  born  in  Fayetteville,  Tenn.,  in  1829,  and  was 
a  daughter  of  .Jacob  Formwalt,  who  was  born  in 
the  same  state  and  was  of  German  descent. 

The  paternal  grandfather  emigrated  to  Illinois 
in  1832,  and  settled  in  Golconcia,  Pope  County, 
where  he  followed  farming.  There  James  was 
reared  and  educated,  and  for  some  time  he  en- 
gaged in  teaching.  The  country  found  him  among 
its  defenders  during  the  late  war.  He  was' a  Ser- 
geant of  Compan}'  K,  One  Hundred  and  Thirty- 
sixth  Illinois  Infantry.  When  the  regiment  re- 
turned, he  was  left  in  the  south  and  was  reported 
dead,  but  six  weeks  later  he  reached  home  a  physi- 
cal wreck.  His  brother,  Caleb  M.  Taylor,  was 
Colonel  of  a  Louisiana  regiment  in  the  Confeder- 
ate army. 

The  Formwalt  famil}'  came  to  Illinois  in  1835 
8 


and  settled  in  Pope  County,  where  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Taylor  were  married.  They  now  reside  nearHarts- 
ville.  111.  They  hold  memliership  with  the  Baptist 
Church,  in  which  the  father  served  as  Deacon  for 
forty  years.  In  the  family  were  nine  children,  six 
of  whom  are  yet  living,  namely:  J.  F.,  Spencer  B., 
Caleb  M.,  Richard  F.,  AVilliam  F.  S.  and  Priscilla  L 

Our  subject,  who  was  born  January  4,  1849,  in 
Pope  County,  was  reared  on  the  home  farm,  and  for 
four  terms  was  a  student  in  the  State  Normal  School 
at  Bloomington.  He  then  served  as  Principal  of  the 
public  schools  of  Elizabethtown  for  two  years,  and 
for  two  \-ears  was  Principal  in  Rosiclare,  then  a 
prosperous  mining  town.  Later  he  attended  the 
law  school  in  Bloomington,  Ind.,  and  w.as  admitted 
to  the  Bar  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  Illinois  in 
June,  1876.  In  1877  he  was  elected  Judge  of  the 
Count}'  Court  of  Hardin  County,  and  served  for 
five  years,  never  having  but  one  opinion  reversed. 
In  1886  he  was  elected  to  the  State  Legislature,  and 
served  as  a  member  of  the  judiciary  and  other  im- 
portant committees.  Five  years  ago  he  came  to 
Carbondale,  where  he  has  since  been  successfully 
engaged  in  law  practice. 

In  1874  Mr.  Taylor  married  Elizabeth  Hemphill, 
a  native  of  Polk  County  and  a  daughter  of  Squire 
Davidson  Hemphill,  of  North  Carolina.  His  fa- 
ther removed  from  that  state  to  Polk  County,  111., 
in  1830.  To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Taylor  were  born  four 
sons:  Oscar  T.,  Otho  Breeze,  Clifton  L.  and  Charles 
Harold,  all  of  whom  are  students  in  the  Normal 
Institute  of  Carbondale.  The  parents  are  members 
of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  and  take  an 
active  part  in  its  work.  Mr.  Taylor  is  a  Mason, 
and  is  now  serving  as  Worshipful  Master  of  She- 
kinah  Lodge  No.  241,  A.  F.  <t  A.  M.,  and  as  High 
Priest  of  Reynolds  Chapter  No.  75,  R.  A.  M. 

As  a  stanch  Democrat  Mr.  Taylor  has  always 
taken  a  warm  interest  in  political  affairs,  and  has 
served  as  Chairman  of  the  Congressional  Campaign 
Committee  of  the  Twenty-second  District.  He  is 
the  author  of  the  only  bill  which  became  a  law  in 
this  state,  appropriating  money  for  the  aid  of 
L'nion  soldiers  who  were  disabled  in  the  service. 
By  this  act,  ^2,000  were  appropriated  for  the  relief 
of  John  B.  Tucker,  of  Hardin  County,  a  gallant 
Union  soldier,  who  enlisted  at  the  call  of  Governor 


340 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


Yates  in  1861,  and  while  in  the  service  of  his  coun- 
try lost  both  arms  by  tlie  accidental  discharge  of 
a  cannon.  At  tiie  time  of  entering  the  service  he 
was  a  citizen  of  Illinois  and  crossed  the  river  into 
Kentucky  to  enlist.     The  bill  read  as  follows: 

See.  1.  Be  it  en.icted  by  the  people  of  the  state  of 
Illinois  represented  in  Ceneral  Assembly,  that  the 
sum  of  $10,000  be  and  the  same  is  hereby  appropri- 
ated out  of  the  State  Treasury  to  John  B.  Tucker, 
of  Hardin  County,  late  a  private  soldier  in  the 
Fifteenth  Regiment  of  Kentucky  Cavahj'  in  the 
late  w.ir,  and  afterward  by  re-enlistment  in  Com- 
pany B,  First  Green  River  Batter}-  of  Kentucky 
\'olunloers,  in  the  service  of  the  United  States  while 
in  line  of  duty  in  obedience  to  orders  of  his  supe- 
rior otlicers,  who  had  both  arms  shot  off  by  the  ac- 
cidental firing  of  a  cannon. 

Sec.  2.  The  Auditor  of  Public  Accounts  shall 
draw  his  warrant  on  the  treasury  of  the  state  of 
Illinois  for  *  10,000,  hereby  appropriated  in  favor 
of  said  John  B.  Tucker.  The  Treasurer  shall  pay 
said  sum  of  mone}'  on  presentation  of  said 
warrant. 

The  bill  was  afterward  changed  to  read  ^2,000, 
and  was  passed  as  amended.  It  was  first  referred 
to  a  committee  which  reported  unfavorably,  but 
Mr.  Taylor  prevailed  upon  the  committee  to  give 
him  a  rehearing  and  they  then  reported  favorably. 
The  enemies  of  the  bill  had  it  referred  to  the  Com- 
mittee on  Appropriations,  which  reported  favorably. 
The  Chairman  of  the  Judiciary  Committee  moved 
to  strike  out  the  enacting  clause  ic  the  House  of 
Representatives,  and  it  was  then  debated  between 
that  gentleman  and  Mr.  Taylor,  who  won.  He 
followed  the  bill  into  the  Senate,  went  before  the 
different  committees  there,  and  advocated  it  until 
it  was  enacted  into  law.  He  is  a  lawyer  of  acknowl- 
edged ability,  a  power  in  the  court  room,  and  his 
career,  both  public  and  private,  has  won  him  the 
high  regard  of  his  associates. 


(^  WILLIAM  A.  WOOD  has  been  prospered 
\/\/li  *'"'^®  ^^  came  to  this  countrj',  over  forty 
^^  years  ago,  and  has  been  a  resident  of  Ran- 
dolph County  during  that  entire  period,  with  the 
exception  of  two  3'ears.  While  assisting  in  the 
development  of  township  4,  range  6,  he  has  ac- 
quired a  comfortable  property  and  is  still  actively 


engaged  in  farming,  owning  two  hundred  and 
sixty  acres  of  laud  on  section  35,  and  as  a  stock 
breeder  has  on  his  place  thirty  head  of  fine  Jersey 
cattle. 

The  father  of  our  worthy  subject,  James  Wood, 
was  a  native  of  Ayrshire,  Scotland,  where  his 
mother,  who  prior  to  her  marriage  was  Miss  Jane 
Ilumphrej',  was  also  born.  They  both  died  many 
years  ago  in  their  native  land.  The  father  was 
a  d3-er  and  shoemaker  b^'  trade,  and  besides 
rearing  a  farail}-  of  thirteen  children,  he  and  his 
good  wife  performed  the  part  of  parents  to  three 
other  children,  one  of  whom  is  Hugh  Wilson,  Sr., 
(whose  sketch  will  be  found  elsewhere  in  this  Rec- 
ord). The  parents  were  both  members  of  the  Es- 
tablished Churcli  of  Scotland. 

William  Wood,  of  this  sketch,  who  is  also  of 
Scotch  birth,  was  born  in  Ajrshire,  Sei)tember  13, 
1833,  and  received  a  good  education  in  the  com- 
mon schools  of  his  native  land.  He  came  to 
America  in  the  year  18.52,  and  passed  two  years  in 
Maryland  and  Kentucky.  Then  coming  to  Illi- 
nois, he  located  on  his  present  fine  estate,  which 
was  at  that  time  in  a  wild  condition,  and  at  once 
commenced  the  improvement  of  his  farm,  which  is 
now  in  all  respects  one  of  the  most  desirable  in 
the  neighborhood.  It  is  supplied  with  ample  builil- 
ings  for  every  purpose,  including  a  comfortable 
dwelling,  good  barn,  etc.,  and  the  machinery  for 
operating  the  farm  is  of  the  most  modern  style. 
Mr.  Wood  is  engaged  in  mixed  farming,  and  is 
particularly  successful  as  a  stock-grower,  owning 
thirt}-  head  of  Jersey  cattle,  beside  having  eight 
milch  cows. 

The  marriage  of  our  subject  with  Miss  Susan, 
daughter  of  John  Rusk,  was  celebrated  in  18r)3. 
Mrs.  Wood  is  a  native  of  Scotland,  where  her  birth 
occurred  June  13,  1830.  Thej'  are  the  parents  of 
two  children,  William  A.,  Jr.,  and  Mary.  They 
have  also  taken  into  their  hearts  and  home  four- 
teen other  children,  among  whom  were  Mary, 
David,  Lizzie  and  Belle  Rusk,  John  Beard,  Eliza 
Rusk,  Perry  C.  Fillis,  James  and  William  McGuf- 
fey,  James  Wood,  a'nd  an  infant  who  died.  He  and 
his  wife  possess  in  an  eminent  degree  those  genial 
social  qualities  that  attracted  friends,  of  whom 
they  have  many,  and   their  charming  home  is  the 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


341 


center  of  '..hat  true  hospitality  that  knows  so  well 
how  to  welcome  and  speed  the  parting  guest.l 

When  first  locating  here,  Mr.  Wood  owned 
eighty  acres  of  land,  but,  being  industrious  and 
possessed  of  marked  foresight  and  sound  judg- 
ment, before  long  had  accumulated  two  hun- 
dred and  &ixty  acres,  placing  the  entire  amount 
under  imi)rovement.  His  farm  was  found  to  con- 
tain a  fine  coal  vein,  which  he  opened  up  and 
mined  very  successfully  for  about  twenty  years. 
He  has,  however,  given  up  this  line  of  work  and 
deTotes  himself  entirclj-  to  farming. 

Our  subject  is  a  member  of  the  United  Presby- 
terian Church,  and  though  called  upon  many 
times  to  accept  office,  has  always  refused  to  do  so. 
He  is  a  particularly  healthy  and  robust  man,  and 
in  the  past  forty  3'ears  has  never  "had  occasion  to 
seek  the  advice  of  a  phj'sician.  He  is  a  stanch 
Re[)ublican  in  politics.  Mr.  Wood  has  given  his 
children  a  good  education.  His  son  is  a  graduate  of 
Monmouth  (111.)  College,  and  he  also  took  a  course 
of  study  in  the  University  of  Michigan.  In  1878 
he  went  to  Colorado,  at  the  same  time  visiting  Cali- 
fornia, Washington,  Arizona  and  Canada.  When 
a  little  over  fourteen  years  of  age  the  son  entered 
the  Union  army,  serving  through  the  entire  war, 
and  was  with  General  Sherman  on  his  march  to 
the  sea. 


JT|  AMES  M.  PILLERS,  one  of  the  native  sons 
l{  of  Randolph  County,  has  since  1886  en- 
I!  gaged  in  dealing  in  live  stock  in  Steele- 
s;^J^  ville,  where  he  at  present  makes  his  home. 
He  is  a  man  of  good  business  abilit}-,  energetic 
and  enterprising,  and  his  well  directed  efforts  have 
won  him  a  fair  degree  of  success.  The  record  of 
his  life  is  as  follows: 

Mr.  PiUers  was  born  March  2,  1854.  and  is  the 
eldest  child  of  P.  W.  and  .Jane  M.  (Wilson)  Pillers, 
both  of  whom  were  also  natives  of  Randolph  Coun- 
ty, being  representatives  of  pioneer  families  of  this 
community.  Both  the  Pillers  and  Wilson  families 
originated  in  Ireland.  The  father  of  our  subject 
was  a  prosperous  farmer  of  Randolph  C'ount\-,  and 
followed  agricultural  pursuits  until  his  death, 
which  occurred   on  the    7th  of   April,    1886,     His 


widow  still  survives  him,  and  is  yet  living  on  the 
old  homestead.  They  were  both  worthj'  and 
highly  respected  citizens  of  this  community,  and 
bore  a  prominent  part  in  the  work  of  u|ibuilrting 
and  development. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  attended  the  district 
schools  of  the  neighborhood  until  twelve  years  of 
age,  after  which  his  mother  taught  him  at  home 
for  a  time.  Later  he  spent  the  winter  seasons  in 
the  school  room  until  eighteen  years  of  age,  while 
through  the  summer  months  he  aided  in  the  labors 
of  the  farm.  At  that  time  he  entered  the  Sparta 
High  School,  which  he  attended  for  eight  and  a- 
half  months,  when  he  was  quarantined  for  forty 
days  on  account  of  small-pox  near  his  home.  He 
then  returned  to  the  farm,  where  he  worked  for 
some  time,  operating  the  old  homestead  in  his  own 
interest.  He  successful!^-  carried  on  agricultural 
pursuits  until  1878,  in  which  year  he  removed  to 
Blair,  111.,  where  he  engaged  in  dealing  in  live 
stock  for  eight  years,  when,  in  1886,  he  came  to 
Steeleville,  and  has  since  engaged  in  the  same  line 
of  business.  Inl893  he  purchased  a  hotel  here, 
and  is  now  the  genial  and  jjopular  landlord  of  the 
Pillers  House. 

On  the  14th  of  June,  1875,  Mr.  Pillers  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Emma  M.  Garven,  a 
daughter  of  George  and  Eliza  M.  (Gordon)  Gar- 
ven. Her  father's  family  was  of  Scotch  lineage, 
and  her  mother's  of  Irish  origin.  Mrs.  Pillers  is  a 
native  of  Randolph  County,  and  is  a  member  of 
the  Presbyterian  Church.  By  their  union  were 
born  three  children,  George  W.,  James  M.  and 
Rose  Gertrude,  and  the  family  circle  yet  remains 
unbroken.     The  two  sons  are  attending  school. 

Mr.  Pillers  is  a  member  of  Alma  Lodge  No.  497, 
A.  F.  &  A.  M.,  of  Steeleville,  and  three  months  af- 
ter his  initiation  into  the  same  he  was  elected  to 
office,  and  has  since  continued  to  serve  in  some 
official  position.  He  has  held  ever}-  office  except 
that  of  Master,  which  he  resolutely  refused  to  ac- 
cept. In  politics  he  is  a  stalwart  Republican,  has 
served  as  Village  Trustee,  and  is  now  Police 
Magistrate  and  a  member  of  the  School  Board. 
He  is  ever  prompt  and  faithful  in  the  discharge  of 
his  public  duties,  thus  proving  a  capable  officer. 
He  lives  a  quiet  unassuming   life,  but  is  admired 


342 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


and  respected  by  all  who  know  him  for  his  many 
excellencies  of  character  and  his  sterling  worth, 
lie  is  indeed  a  wortliy  representative  of  one  of  the 
honored  pioneer  families  of  his  native  county. 
The  grandfather,  .John  Pillers, served  in  the  Black 
Hawk  War  as  Major. 


JOHN  BOURCHIER  carries  on  agricultural 
pursuits  on  section  34,  Carbondale  Town- 
ship, Jackson  County,  where  he  has  a  good 
,;j^  farm  of  two  hundred  and  seventy-five  acres 
of  rich  land.  Of  this,  one  hundred  acres  are  under 
a  high  state  of  cultivation,  and  3ield  to  him  a 
golden  tribute  in  return  for  the  care  and  labor  he 
bestows  upon  them.  He  also  raises  a  good  grade  of 
stock.  The  neat  and  thrift}-  appearance  of  the 
place  indicates  the  owner  to  be  a  practical  and 
progressive  farmer. 

Mr.  Bourchier  was  born  in  County  Limerick, 
Ireland,  July  27,  1846,  and  is  a  son  of  Thomas 
and  Maria  (Hincs)  Bourchier,  both  of  whom  were 
natives  of  the  Emerald  Isle,  the  former  born  in 
1819,  and  the  latter  in  1820.  The  year  1849  wit- 
nessed their  emigration  to  America.  Tiiey  landed 
at  New  Orleans  and  spent  a  3'ear  and  a-half  in 
that  city,  after  which  they  came  to  Jackson  Coun- 
ty. In  his  native  land  Mr.  Bourchier  had  en- 
gaged in  the  grocery  and  bakery  business,  and 
after  coming  to  America  was  eraplo3'ed  as  a  sales- 
man in  a  dry-goods  store  for  a  time.  He  knew 
nothing  about  farming,  but  secured  a  tract  of  land 
on  which  was  a  log  cabin.  His  nearest  neiglibor 
was  four  miles  distant,  and  it  was  eleven  miles  to 
the  nearest  postoffiee.  Practical  experience  made 
him  a  good  agriculturist,  and  in  course  of  time 
he  developed  a  fine  farm,  on  which  he  made  his 
home  until  his  death.  He  served  as  School  Di- 
rector for  the  last  twent}'  j'ears  of  his  life,  and 
was  a  prominent  citizen.  He  and  his  wife  were 
members  of  the  Catholic  Church.  His  death  oc- 
curred September  15,  1881,  and  she  passed  aw.ay 
on  the  30th  of  November  following. 

Our  subject  was  onlj'  three  years  old  when 
brought  bj'  his  parents  to  the  New  AVorld.  He 
was  reared  amid  the  wild    scenes   of  frontier  life, 


and  aided  in  the  arduous  task  of  developing  a 
new  farm.  He  took  charge  of  the  old  homestead 
on  the  death  of  his  parents,  and  it  has  since  been 
his  property. 

In  1872  Mr.  Bourchier  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Mary,  daughter  of  George  and  Amanda 
(McCulloni)  Simmons,  both  of  whom  were  natives 
of  Keutuckj',  the  former  born  in  1823,  and  tlie 
latter  in  1826.  They  were  married  in  that  state, 
and  thence  emigrated  to  Illinois.  Tlie  father  was 
a  soldier  in  the  Mexican  War.  ilrs.  Bourcliier 
was  born  in  Randolph  Couutj',  111.,  on  the  2d  of 
June,  1851,  and  acquired  her  education  in  the 
schools  of  Chester  and  the  Southern  Illinois  State 
Normal  Universitj'.  She  is  a  lady  of  culture  and 
refinement,  and  presides  with  grace  over  her  hos- 
pitable home.  Unto  our  subject  and  his  wife- 
have  been  born  six  children:  Thomas,  Laura  E., 
Anna  M.,  George,  Clarence  R.  and  Nellie. 

ilr.  Bourchier  takes  quite  an  interest  in  polit- 
ical affairs,  and  b}^  his  ballot  supports  the  men 
and  measures  of  the  Democracy.  He  has  served 
as  School  Director,  and  the  cause  of  education  re- 
ceives his  hearty  support.  He  and  his  wife  are 
devout  and  consistent  members  of  the  Methodist 
Episcopal  Church,  and  also  take  an  active  interest 
in  the  work  of  the  Sunday- -school.  The  family  is 
one  of  prominence  in  this  community  and  well 
deserves  representation  in  this  volume. 


JOSEPH  WILLIS  CALDWELL,  who  is  suc- 
cessfully engaged  in  farming  in  township  5, 
range  6.  Randolph  Count}',  has  the  honor 
^;j_,^  of  being  a  native  of  this  state.  He  was 
born  in  Warren  County  in  1839.  His  grandpar- 
ents, Joseph  and  Mary  (Reed)  Caldwell,  were  na- 
tives of  Ireland  and  Scotland,  respectively, and  on 
emigrating  to  this  country,  located  in  Ohio,  where 
they  were  married.  The  former  was  a  son  of  Sam- 
uel Caldwell,  who  came  to  America  in  the  "May- 
flower."    The  family  is  noted  for  longevity. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  William  Caldnell,  w.<is 
born  in  Coshocton  County,  Ohio,  in  1807,  and  in 
1818  went  to  Pittsburgh,  and  thence  removed  to 
Indiana,  where  for  two  years  he  engaged  in  teach- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


343 


ing  school.  On  the  expiration  of  that  period  he 
went  to  Galena,  III.,  where  he  engaged  in  teaching 
in  a  log  schoolhouse,  and  also  worked  in  the  lead 
mines  until  the  breaking  out  of  the  Black  Hawk 
War  in  1832,  when  he  entered  the  service.  He 
was  wounded  at  Ash  Grove,  and  was  taken  to  Big 
Mound,  111.,  where  he  remained  for  two  months. 
He  then  rejoined  his  company,  and  followed  the 
Indians  to  Oakwalks. 

The  troops  there  disbanded,  and  Mr.  Caldwell 
went  to  Warren  County,  where  he  married  Jane 
Orr,  a  native  of  Kilrain,  Ireland.  When  a  maiden 
of  seven  3'ears,  Mrs.  Caldwell  became  a  resident  of  1 
Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  and  thence  she  came  to  Illinois  in 
1834.  B}-  their  marriage,  which  was  celebrated  in 
September,  1835,  the3'  became  the  parents  of  a  large  ' 
family,  of  whom  we  note  the  following:  .James  A.,  I 
who  is  a  farmer  living  six  miles  north  of  Sparta,  1 
married  Lizzie  Ilolworth,  and  they  had  ten  chil- 
dren, nine  of  whom  are  yet  living;  Alex  M.  died 
in  1860;  Joseph  AV.  is  the  next  younger;  Mary  E. 
is  the  widow  of  Charles  A.  Beattie,  and  lives  in 
Randolph  Countj-  with  her  two  children;  Martha 
M.  is  the  wife  of  William  J.  Dickey,  b3'  whom  she 
has  five  children;  Elizabeth  A.  is  the  widow  of 
Thomas  Crawford,  of  Coulterville,  and  had  six 
children,  three  of  whom  are  living;  William  F., 
who  was  married,  was  killed  by  the  caving  in  of  a 
silver  mine  in  New  Mexico;  Stephen  A.  died  at 
the  age  of  nine  years;  and  one  child  died  in  in- 
fanc\'. 

The  father  of  this  family'  secured  one  hundred 
and  sixty  acres  by  a  land  warrant  in  AVarren  County, 
entered  a  quarter-section,  and  also  purchased  one 
hundred  and  sist_v  acres.  lie  there  made  his  home 
until  1849,  when  he  removed  to  Putnam  Count^', 
and  after  residing  there  for  ten  years,  came  to 
Randolph  Countj',  in  1859.  In  the  spring  of  1864 
he  removed  to  the  farm  upon  which  our  subject 
now  resides,  making  it  his  home  until  his  death  in 
1884.  For  a  number  of  j'ears  he  engaged  in  teach- 
ing school,  and  was  also  a  teacher  of  shorthand. 
His  extensive  reading  and  excellent  memory'  made 
him  a  well  informed  man.  In  politics  he  was  fii-st 
a  Whig,  and  afterward  a  Republican, and  for  some 
years  he  faithfully-  served  as  Justice  of  the  Peace. 
He    was   a   member    of   the    Associate   Reformed 


Church,  was  one  of  the  foundei-s  of  the  Seceder 
Church  of  Warren  County,  which  he  joined  in 
1828,  and  later  became  a  member  of  the  United 
Presbyterian  Church.  In  1848  he  was  made  one 
of  its  Elders,  and  filled  the  position  until  his  death. 
He  was  trulj'  one  of  nature's  noblemen,  and  was 
noted  for  his  charity'  and  benevolence.  His  wife, 
who  was  born  November  6,  1808,  is  living  with  her 
son,  at  the  age  of  eightj'-five  3'ears. 

Mr.  Caldwell  whose  name  heads  this  record  re- 
moved from  his  native  count\-  to  Putnam  County 
in  1859,  and  thence  came  to  Randolph  Countj-, 
where  he  has  since  made  his  home.  He  remained 
with  his  parents  until  1861,  when,  prompted  by 
patriotic  impulses,  he  joined  Compan3-  II,  of  the 
Twent3--second  Illinois  Regiment.  He  was  three 
times  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Chickamauga,  and 
was  taken  prisoner  at  Crawfish  Springs,  but  was 
afterward  paroled  and  exchanged.  When  he  se- 
cured his  release  from  southern  imprisonment  he 
went  home  on  a  visit,  but  after  two  months  re- 
joined his  regiment  in  Tennessee,  and  continued 
in  the  service  until  honorablj'  discharged  in  Spring- 
field in  1864.  For  a  year  after  being  mustered 
out  he  remained  at  home,  and  then  purchased  a 
farm  of  one  hundred  acres,  upon  which  he  resided 
for  seven  3'ears,  when  in  1873  he  removed  to  his 
present  farm. 

In  1865,  Mr.  Caldwell  married  Miss  Amanda  J. 
Ireland,  a  native  of  this  count3',  and  a  daughter 
of  Martin  and  Mary  (Siiort)  Ireland,  natives  of 
Kentuck3'.  from  which  state  they  came  to  Illinois 
in  1836.  Her  father  died  in  1884,  but  her  mother 
is  now  living  in  Mill  Creek.  The  famih'  is  of 
Irish  descent,  and  was  founded  in  America  in 
Colonial  days.  Mr.  Ireland  was  numbered  among 
the  boys  in  blue  of  Compan3'  H,  Twentj'-second 
Illinois  Infantr3-.  He  enlisted  in  1861,  and  served 
until  1864.  He  was  wounded  at  the  battle  of 
Stone  River  and  at  Chickamauga.  He  had  four 
sons  in  the  service:  John  aud  William  H.  H.  in 
Company  H,  Twent3--second  Illinois;  Thomas  in 
Compan3-  C,  Thirtieth  Illinois;  and  Peter  in  Com- 
pany F,  One  Hundred  and  Fift3--fourth  Illinois  In- 
fantrj-.  John  died  in  the  hospital  at  Murfrees- 
boro,  Tenn. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Caldwell  have  reared  two  orphan 


344 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


children.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  months  Nancy 
Tash  came  to  them,  and  remained  with  them  until 
her  marriage  to  Sylvester  Brown.  Charles  E.  Ire- 
land has  found  a  home  with  them  since  the  age  of 
six  years.  He  is  now  a  student  in  the  Gem  City 
Business  College  of  Quincj',  111.  Our  subject  and 
his  wife  are  faitiiful  and  consistent  members  of 
the  Presbyterian  Church  of  Sparta,  in  which  he 
has  served  as  Elder  for  eight  j'ears.  They  are 
prominent  in  church  and  benevolent  work,  and 
are  ever  found  on  the  side  of  right.  Mr.  Caldwell 
is  a  member  of  the  Sparta  Building  and  Loan  As- 
sociation and  of  the  creamer^'  company.  As  the 
result  of  earnest  effort  and  close  application,  he 
has  met  with  good  success  in  business,  and  is  now 
the  owner  of  a  fine  farm  of  eighty  acres.  In  poli- 
tics, he  is  a  Republican,  and  is  a  charter  member 
of  Sparta  Post  No.  181,  G.  A.  R.,  in  which  he  lias 
held  all  the  offices. 


i^ 


\Jl  OHN  A.  C.  FLOYD,  who  carries  on  general 
farming  on  section  22,  Carbondale  Town- 
ship, .Jackson  Count}',  was  born  March  27, 
^^^^  1844,  in  the  neighborhood  of  his  present 
home.  His  parents,  Nathaniel  W.  and  Nancj^ 
(Bush)  Floyd,  were  botlunatives  of  Kentucky,  and 
in  that  state  their  marriage  was  celebrated.  About 
1841  the\'  came  to  Illinois,  settling  northwest  of 
Carbondale,  and  later  removed  to  Rockwood,  Ran- 
dolph County,  where  the  father  carried  on  a  wood- 
yard.  During  the  Civil  War  he  was  a  member  of 
the  Home  Guards.  He  met  his  death  by  accident 
about  twenty  years  ago.  His  wife  still  survives 
him,  at  the  age  of  eighty,  and  makes  her  home 
with  our  subject,  who  is  the  only  survivor  in  a 
family  of  eleven  children.  Mrs.  Floyd  is  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Christian  Church,  and  her  husband  was 
one  of  its  ministers  for  thirty  years.  In  politics 
he  supported  the  Republican  party. 

Under  the  parental  roof  Jolin  Floj'd  was  reared, 
and  in  the  schools  of  Rockwood  he  was  educated. 
Responding  to  the  country's  call  for  troops  July  1, 
1861,  he  became  a  member  of  Company  A,  Seventh 
Illinois  Infantry.  He  was  the  first  man  in  Jackson 
County  to  enlist  in  the  Union  army.    With  his  regi- 


ment he  was  sent  to  Irontou,  and  to  Pilot  Knob 
after  Jefferson  Thompson.  He  then  aided  in  build- 
ing Ft.  Holt,  and  afterward  participated  in  the 
battles  of  Ft.  Henry  and  Ft.  Donelson,  and  was 
chased  by  the  enemy  to  Clarksville.  Subsequently. 
Mr.  Floyd  was  under  fire  at  the  battles  of  Nash- 
ville, Sliiloh  and  Corinth,  and  after  a  thirty  days' 
furlough  spent  at  home;  he  rejoined  his  regiment 
at  Corinth  and  then  moved  on  to  Pulaski.  After 
the  battle  of  Tuscumbia,  he  went  with  the  arm}-  to 
Florence,  Ala.  His  brother,  Armistead,  was  taken 
prisoner,  and  died  in  Andersonville  Prison.  Only 
four  of  the  company  escaped  capture  after  a 
hard  run.  This  was  followed  by  a  battle  against 
General  Hood's  forces  at  Altoona  Pass,  where  our 
subject  was  wounded  in  the  neck  and  in  the  left 
shoulder.  He  was  then  sent  to  the  hospital  at 
Rome,  Ga.,  later  to  Chattanooga  Hospital,  thence 
to  Nashville,  and  on  to  EvansviUe,  Iiid..  where  he 
was  discharged  May  8,  1865,  after  three  years  and 
ten  months  of  hard  service,  during  which  he 
spent  one  year  in  the  mounted  infantiy.  He  was 
always  found  at  his  post,  faithful  to  his  countr}' 
and  the  Union  cause.  He  now  receives  a  pension 
of  124  per  month. 

Mr.  Floyd  was  married  January  19,  1865,  to 
Eliza  Boien,  who  was  born  in  Jackson  County, 
September  22,  1841,  and  is  a  daughter  of  James 
and  Sarah  (Wingett)  Boren.  the  former  a  native 
of  Tennessee,  and  the  latter  of  South  Carolina. 
Her  parents  were  married  and  came  to  Illinois  in 
1829,  locatingon  section  26,  Carbondale  Township, 
being  among  the  first  settlers  of  the  community. 
His  death  occurred  at  the  age  of  eightj'-foui-,  and 
his  wife  passed  away  at  the  age  of  seventj-two. 
To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Floyd  were  born  four  children,  of 
whom  two  are  yet  living:  Alfred  T.,  who  married 
Elizabeth  Timpner,  'o\-  whom  he  has  one  child; 
and  Sarah  L.  They  are  also  rearing  three  orphan 
children. 

Upon  his  marriage,  Mr.  Floyd  located  in  The 
Glades,  and  after  two  years  located  upon  a  fruit 
farm,  where  he  also  spent  two  years.  He  then 
bought  the  old  homestead  of  seventy-nine  acres, 
on  which  he  has  since  made  his  home.  His  land 
is  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation  and  well  im- 
jiroved,  and  the  owner  is  regarded  as  one  of   the 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD 


345 


representative   agriculturists   of   the   community. 

He  takes  an  active  interest  in  politics,  and  is  a 
warm  advocate  of  Republican  principles.  He  be- 
longs to  the  Grand  Army  post,  and  has  served  as 
Officer  of  the  Day  for  three  terms.  He  and  his 
wife  and  botli  children  are  meml^ers  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church,  and  are  people  of  generous  and  be- 
nevolent im|)ulses,  highl}'  respected  by  all. 


[(s). ^mMp... ,@j 

(^         '®f^i^~ "^ 

j^^  AMUEL  W.  MARSHALL,  M.  D.,  is  one  of 
*^^^  the  foremost  members  of  the  medical  pro- 
|(l/jl)  fession  of  Sparta,  as  well  as  one  of  its 
most  progressive  and  valued  citizens.  His 
grandfather,  James  Marsliall,  was  a  native  of  Ire- 
land, and  in  1795  founded  the  family  in  America. 
He  settled  in  the  Eairfield  District  of  South  Caro- 
lina, and  there  successfully  engaged  in  teaching, 
and  also  served  as  Justice  of  the  Peace. 

The  father  of  the  Doctor,  Robert  W.  Marshall, 
was  born  in  South  Carolina  in  1799,  and  removed 
thence  to  Randolph  County,  111.,  in  1836.  lie  lo- 
cated four  miles  north  of  Sparta,  and  there  made 
his  home  until  his  death,  which  occurred  March  4, 
1871.  He  was  educated  by  private  instructors,  and 
was  a  classical  scholar.  At  the  age  of  thirty  he 
entered  the  Charleston  Medical  College,  from 
which  he  was  graduated  in  1834.  He  then  began 
practice,  which  he  continued  throughout  his  life. 
He  was  a  man  of  recognized  ability  as  a  surgeon 
and  stood  at  the  head  of  the  profession  in  this  part 
of  the  state.  In  politics  he  was  a  Republican.  In 
religion  he  was  a  member  of  the  Koformed  Pres- 
byterian Church,  in  which  he  served  as  Elder.  He 
was  a  charitable,  noble  man,  and  had  no  enemies, 
for  all  who  came  in  contact  with  him  recognized 
his  goodness  and  were  his  friends. 

In  1834  Robert  W.  Marshall  married  Susanna, 
daughter  of  James  Arnett,  and  a  native  of  South 
Carolina.  She  was  also  a  member  of  the  Reformed 
Presbyterian  Church,,  and  her  death  occurred  in 
1852.  The  family  numbered  eight  children:  Elea- 
nore,  who  died  in  South  Carolina;  William  T., 
who  died  about   1873;  Ellen  C,  wife  of  William 


MeClinton,  of  Sparta;  Samuel   W.;    Sarah    Jane, 

who  died  at  the  age  of  six  3^ears;  Sarah,  who  be- 
came the  wife  of  W.  J.  Porch,  of  Randolph  County, 
and  died  in  the  fall  of  1876,  leaving  two  children, 
Eliza  and  William;  Henrietta,  and  Charles  F.,  who 
was  educated  in  the  St.  Louis  Medical  College,  and 
was  practicing  in  Baldwin,  111.,  at  the  time  of  his 
death.    He  married  Hattie  C.  Kenned}'. 

The  birth  of  Dr.  Marshall  occuned  in  Randolph 
County  in  1840.  He  remained  with  his  parents 
upon  the  farm  until  1864,  although  in  the  mean- 
time he  attended  Union  Academy.  In  1860  he 
commenced  the  study  of  medicine  with  his  father, 
and  in  1862  began  a  course  of  lectures  in  the  St. 
Louis  Medical  College,  from  which  he  was  gradu- 
ated in  1864.  He  then  located  in  Sparta,  but  the 
following  fall  was  appointed  assistant  surgeon  of 
the  Eighty-fourth  Illinois  Infantiy,  under  Dr.  Kile. 
As  his  superior  was  at  brigade  headquarters.  Dr. 
Marshall  was  the  onl}'  surgeon  with  the  regiment. 
After  six  months'  service  he  returned  to  Sparta, 
where  he  has  since  engaged  in  practice. 

In  1866  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  the  Doc- 
tor and  Miss  Marcella  Eiker,  a  native  of  Pennsyl- 
vania, who  came  to  this  place  with  her  parents, 
Samuel  and  Elizabeth  (Hoover)  Eiker.  Her  par- 
ents were  both  born  in  the  Ke3Stone  Slate,  and 
are  now  deceased.  While  the  Doctor  and  his  wife 
have  no  children  of  their  own,  they  have  reared 
three  orphan  children.  Alice  was  educated  in 
Monmouth  ■College,  and  is  the  wife  of  C.  C.  French, 
pastor  of  the  United  Presb3terian  Church  of 
Greenwich,  N.  Y.;  Frank  E.  received  a  commercial 
education,  and  is  now  book-keeper  in  the  Carothe' 
Plow  Works;  Finley  C.  is  book-keeper  for  the 
Keys  Commission  Company,  at  llie  National  Stock 
Yards  at  East  St.  Louis. 

Dr.  Marshall  votes  with  the  Republican  part}'. 
He  has  been  a  member  of  the  School  Board  for  fif- 
teen years,  and  for  about  five  years  was  its  Presi- 
dent. Socially  he  is  connected  with  the  Grand 
Army  of  the  Republic,  is  a  member  of  the  Ameri- 
can Medical  Association,  and  belongs  to  the  South- 
ern Illinois  Medical  Association,  of  which  he  has 
served  both  as  Vice-President  and  President.  He 
and  his  wife  hold  membership  with  the  United 
Presbyterian  Church,  in  which  he   has  held  the  of- 


U6 


iPORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


fice  of  Elder  for  fifteen  years.  They  are  earnest 
workers  in  its  interest,  doing  much  for  its  ad- 
vancement and  upbuilding. 


^]0I1N  LICKISS.  England  has  contributed 
to  the  United  Slates  many  estimable  citi- 
zens, but  she  has  contributed  none  more 
worthy  of  success  than  the  subject  of  this 
sketch,  who  for  j^ears  has  been  prominently  iden- 
tified with  the  growth  and  development  of  Ran- 
dolph County.  For  some  time  he  engaged  in  farm- 
ing in  township  6,  range  5,  but  in  August,  1893, 
disposed  of  his  estate  and  purchased  property  in 
Steeleville,  where  he  is  now  living. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  Yorkshire,  England, 
November  5,  1836,  and  is  the  third  in  the  family 
of  Captain  John  and  Mary  A.  (Scott)  Lickiss.  His 
father,  who  was  also  a  native  of  England,  followed 
a  sea-faring  life  for  forty  years,  but  in  April, 
1865,  he  brought  his  family  to  America  and  lo- 
cated upon  land  near  Steeleville,  111.  There  he 
continued  to  reside  until  his  death,  which  occurred 
July  18,  1888.  His  widow  is  still  (1894)  living, 
and  although  eighty-three  years  of  age,  is  vigorous 
and  strong;  she  makes  her  home  with  our  subject. 

Having  attended  school  until  fifteen  years  of 
age,  our  subject  then  entered  a  merchant's  office, 
where  he  completed  his  business  education.  He 
remained  in  that  office  as  clerk  until  his  father 
concluded  to  come  to  America,  when  he  joined 
the  family,  and  crossing  the  ocean  located  in  Ran- 
dolph County.  For  a  few  years  he  assisted  his 
father  in  the  cultivation  of  the  home  farm,  after 
which  he  came  to  Steeleville  and  entered  the  em- 
ploy of  the  firm  of  Lickiss  <fe  Son,  his  uncle  and 
cousin,  for  whom  he  clerked  three  years.  He  then 
went  to  Chester  and  accepted  a  position,  as  book- 
keeper for  John  F.  Schuchert,  with  whom  he  re- 
mained for  three  years. 

Returning  to  Steeleville,  Mr.  Lickiss  embarked 
in  the  mercantile  business,  which  he  conducted  for 
three  years.  He  then  disposed  of  the  stock  and 
accepted  a  position  with  H.  C.  Cole  &  Co.,  in 
whose  employ  he  worked  for  twelve  years.  Owing 
to  failing  health  he  resigned  that  position,  and  lo- 


cating upon  his  farm  near  Steeleville,  superin- 
tended the  management  of  the  estate  until  August, 
1893.  As  above  stated,  he  now  makes  his  home 
in  Steeleville.  In  politics  he  is  a  Democrat  and 
never  fails  to  cast  his  ballot  for  the  nominees  of 
that  party.  Socially  he  affiliates  with  Chester 
Lodge  No.  57,  I.  O.  O.  F.,  and  has  been  the  in- 
cumbent of  the  various  chairs  in  the  lodge,  which 
he  has  also  represented  in  the  Grand  Lodge. 

In  1858  Mr.  Lickiss  married  Miss  Sarah  F., 
daughter  of  Staple  and  Sarah  (Doty)  Malone,  na- 
tives of  South  Carolina,  who  came  to  Illinois  in  an 
early  day.  Mrs.  Lickiss  was  born  in  Randolph 
County,  111.,  and  by  her  marriage  has  become  the 
mother  of  eleven  children,  eight  of  whom  are  de- 
ceased. Those  living  are:  Rebecca,  who  married 
Hubert  Townsend,  a  prominent  insurance  agent 
of  St.  Louis,  Mo.;  Mary  F.,  who  married  Alexander 
Allison,  a  farmer  and  stock-dealer  residing  in 
Chester;  and  Alice  C,  who  resides  with  her  par- 
ents. Mr.  Lickiss  and  his  wife  are  members  of  the 
Baptist  Church,  and  he  is  a  Deacon  in  the  congre- 
gation at  Steeleville. 


SAAC  C.  BEARE.  There  is  something  about 
the  life  of  a  prosperous  and  popular  }'Oung 
man  very  pleasant  to  contemplate — something 
that  gives  encouragement  to  those  seeking  to  m.ake 
for  themselves  desirable  positions  in  life.  Such 
an  example  is  given  in  the  person  of  Isaac  C. 
Beare,  who  is  generally'  conceded  to  deserve  un- 
limited praise  for  the  success  he  has  attained,  be- 
ing at  the  present  time  Count3'  Clerk  of  Randolph 
Count.y. 

Our  subject  is  a  native  of  Randoljjh  County  and 
was  born  February  20,  1860.  He  is  the  son  of 
Christian  and  Martha  L.  Beare,  natives  of  Switz- 
erland. Thev  made  the  trip  to  the  United  States 
in  1830,  locating  in  Stark  County,  Ohio,  and 
about  1840  came  to  this  county,  where  they  fol- 
low farming. 

Isaac,  of  this  sketch,  was  the  sixth  child  in  order 
of  birth  of  his  parents'  family  of  seven  children. 
He  attended  school  some  in  the  country,  but 
gained  his  education  mainly  in  the  Central  Wes- 


'     \%v, 


-3is^'>'*^ 


".r.  ,fe'        JtSi^  ■ 


K^' 


% 


<Q6aX^^^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


leyan  College  at  Warren  ton,  Mo.  When  starting 
out  in  life  for  himself  he  clerked  for  eight  months 
in  his  brother's  store  in  Ellis  Grove,  this  county, 
remaining  with  him  until  1890. 

Mr.  Beare  has  always  been  a  member  of  the 
Democratic  party,  and  is  active  in  public  life.  In 
1890  he  was  elected  to  the  important  office  of 
County  Clerk,  assuming  the  duties  of  the  office 
December  4  of  that  year.  He  is  a  man  of  excel- 
lent habits,  possesses  a  keen  and  intelligent  mind, 
and  in  the  incumbency  of  his  office  gives  entire 
satisfaction.  He  possesses  many  social  qualities 
and  has  a  host  of  warm  friends  who  delight  in  his 
success. 


349 


J'OHN  McQuillan,  an  enterprising  farmer 
residing  on  section  17,  township  3,  range  8 
west,  Monroe  County,  was  born  in  Dayton, 
Ohio,  April  2,  1820,  and  is  a  son  of  Ed- 
ward McQuillan,  a  native  of  the  North  of  Ireland, 
who  in  early  life  emigrated  to  this  country,  and 
died  in  Brown  County,  Ohio.  When  John  was 
quite  a  small  lad  his  parents  removed  to  Cincin- 
nati, and  a  few  years  later  to  Brown  County.  He 
was  a  youth  of  ten  when  his  father  died,  and  his 
mother  died  of  the  cholera  in  1832.  He  was  thus 
left  an  orphan  at  the  age  of  twelve  years,  and 
then  went  to  live  with  his  eldest  brother  and  sis- 
ter, with  whom  he  continued  until  sixteen  3'ears 
of  age.  At  that  time  he  went  to  Cincinnati,  and 
began  serving  an  apprenticeship  to  the  butcher's 
trade  under  Henry  Cottom.  Two  years  were  spent 
in  that  city,  after  which  his  employer  purchased  a 
farm  in  Monroe  County,  III.,  three  miles  west  of 
Red  Bud,  and  our  subject  accompanied  him  to 
the  west  in  1839,  continuing  in  his  service  for 
two  3'ears  and  a-half. 

In  1841,  Mr.  McQuillau  went  to  St.  Louis,  where 
he  worked  at  his  trade,  and  followed  other  pur- 
suits whereby  he  might  earn  an  honest  living.  He 
continued  in  that  city  until  1849,  since  which  time 
he  has  lived  in  Monroe  County.  In  1847,  be  pur- 
chased his  present  farm  of  James  Eckels,  paying 
$1,000  for  one  hundred ^nd  twenty  acres.  A  lo<^ 
house  was  the  only  improvement  upon  the  place, 
which  was  largely  covered  with  brush,  but  he  at 
once  began  to  clear  and  develop  the  land,  and  has 


made  additional  purchases  from  time  to  time  un- 
til he  now  owns  twelve  hundred  acres  in  one  bod  3-. 
He  also  has  two  hundred  .acres  in  St.  Clair  County. 

On  the  otii  of  .September,  1842,  Mr.  McQuillan 
married  Jliss  Mary  Thompson, daughter  of  Robert 
Thompson,  who  was  born  in  England,  and  there 
spenthis  entire  life.  His  daughter  came  to  America 
in  1840  with  her  mother,  two  brothers  and  a  sister, 
and  located  in  St.  Louis.  Her  death  occurred  July 
28,  1885,  and  was  widely  mourned.  Seven  chil- 
dren were  born  of  that  union,  of  whom  five  are 
still  living:  Edward,  who  is  fanning  in  St.  Clair 
County;  Elizabeth,  wife  of  Louis  Gregson,  of  Mon- 
roe C'ount3-;  John,  who  is  engaged  iu  merchandis- 
ing in  Red  Bud;  Mary,  wife  of  Theodore  Klink- 
hardt,  a  resident  farmer  of  tliis  community;  and 
Martha,  wife  of  Joseph  Roscoe.  They  live  with 
our  subject.  .Sarah  became  the  wife  of  Valentine 
Rapp,  and  died  December  23,  1876.  There  are 
also  twenty-three  grandchildren. 

Mr.  McQuillan  is  one  of  the  oldest  settlers  of 
this  township.  His  land  is  now  operated  by  his 
children,  and  he  gives  his  time  to  mechanical  con- 
trivances. He  lias  patented  three  inventions — a 
cart  replacer,  a  car  coupler  and  a  portable  ladder. 
All  of  these  are  useful  and  will  probably  have  a 
good  sale.  His  home  is  adorned  with  pictures, 
the  beautiful  frames  of  which  he  has  made  in  his 
leisure  moments.  Much  of  the  furniture  is  also 
his  handiwork,  for  he  possesses  great  mechanical 
skill.  Mr.  McQuillan  sUirted  out  in  life  emptv- 
handed,  but  by  determined  efforts  overcame  the 
obstacles  in  his  path,  and  has  steadily  worked  his 
way  upward  to  a  position  of  wealth  and  affluence. 
He  is  now  one  of  the  largest  land-owners  in  the 
county.  He  cast  his  first  Presidential  vote  for 
William  Henry  Harrison,  and  since  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Republican  party  has  been  one  of  its 
stanch  supporters.  In  religious  belief  he  is  a 
Catholic. 


<i^*)HOMAS  McINTYRE,  one  of  the  pioneers  of 
1(^0^  Kan'^'jlpli  County,  now  makes  his  home  on 
^^^^'  section  1,  township  4,  range  6,  and  has  the 
confidence  and  esteem  of  the  people  throughout 
this  part  of  the  countiy.  He  is  a  son  of  John  Mc- 
Intyre,  who  was  born  in  1787  in  the  Highlands  of 


350 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


Scotland,  where  also  his  grandfather,  Daniel  Mc- 
Intyre,  was  born. 

The  maiden  name  of  the  motlier  of  our  subject 
was  Margaret  Oatl3-.  She  was  born  in  Paislej', 
Scotland,  in  April,  1797,  and  was  the  daughter  of 
Thomas  (^atly.  Her  parents  were  born  and  mar- 
ried in  Scotland.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  John  Mclnt3-re 
resided  in  Renfrewshire,  Scotland,  where  the 
former  carried  on  his  occupation  of  a  weaver  until 
1839,  when  he  crossed  the  Atlantic,  and  after 
landing  in  America  came  west  as  far  as  Illinois, 
where  he  made  his  home.  He  had  visited  this 
country  in  1804,  when  a  lad  of  seventeen  j-ears, 
in  the  interest  of  the  Hudson  Bay  Fur  Company, 
and  had  traded  among  the  Indians.  He  remained 
for  eleven  years,  and  during  that  time  learned  the 
Indian  language,  which  he  could  speak  very  well. 

After  locating  in  Randolph  County,  the  father 
of  our  subject  purchased  one  hundred  and  twenty 
acres  of  land  on  section  12,  township  4,  which  was 
then  in  its  primitive  wilderness.  The  following 
year,  after  erecting  a  cabin,  he  was  joined  by  his 
family,  who  aided  in  hewing  out  a  home  from  the 
wilderness.  They  suffered  all  the  privations  in- 
cidental to  pioneer  life.  From  their  home  to  the 
Okaw  River  there  was  not  a  cultivated  farm. 
Their  neighbors  were  few,  but  Indians,  deer  and 
wildcats  were  veiy  plentiful.  The  first  year  after 
coming  here  there  was  an  immense  prairie  fire. 
Undaunted  b\-  obstacles,  tiie  father  worked  with 
diligence  and  soon  accumulated  considerable  prop- 
erty. 

The  parental  family  included  four  children,  of 
whom  those  living  are,  Daniel,  who  lives  in  Ar- 
kansas; John,  who  resides  in  Oklahoma;  and  our 
subject.  The  parents  were  members  of  the  Pres- 
byterian Church.  The  father  died  in  1865,  and 
his  good  wife  followed  him  to  the  better  land  ten 
years  later.  John  Mclntyre  was  a  Republican  in 
politics.  He  was  very  prominent  among  the  pio- 
neers of  this  county,  with  whose  interests  his  name 
has  been  inseparably  connected,  and  his  worth  was 
appreciated  throughout  the  entire  community. 

Thomas  Mclntyre  was  born  September  10,  1835, 
in  Renfrewshire,  Scotland,  and  was  five  years  of 
age  when  his  parents  emigrated  to  America.  Their 
landing  was  made  in  New  York  harbor,  whence  they 


went  to  Philadelphia.  From  there  they  went  to 
Pittsburgh,  and  later  came  by  boat  to  Chester,  this 
county,  the  trip  being  made  down  the  Ohio  and  up 
the  Mississippi  River.  While  at  Louisville,  our 
subject  and  his  brother  John,  who  were  both  young 
in  years,  took  a  skiflf  and  began  to  row  down  the 
river.  Being  in  ignorance  of  the  falls,  which  were 
just  ahead  of  them,  they  would  have  plungeii 
over  had  they  not  been  rescued  by  people  from 
the  shore.  Young  Mclntyre  after  coming  to  this 
county  attended  school  on  Flat  Prairie,  which  was 
conducted  in  a  rude  log  house. 

January  31,  1876,  Thomas  Mclntyre  and  Miss 
Sarah  Ann  Curry  were  united  in  marriage.  The 
lady  was  a  native  of  Ireland,  where  her  birth  oc- 
curred January  13,  1839,  and  after  her  parents  lo- 
cated in  Knox  Count}',  Ohio,  she  was  there  reared 
to  mature  years  and  given  a  good  education.  B3' 
her  union  with  our  subject  has  been  born  one  child, 
Maiy  Ellen.  Mrs.  Mclntyre  is  a  devoted  mem- 
ber of  the  Reformed  Presbj'terian  Church,  and 
although  our  subject  is  not  a  member,  he  is  a  reg- 
ular attendant  and  a  liberal  contributor  to  tlie 
same.  Although  in  early  life  a  Republican,  he 
now  reserves  the  right  to  vote  for  the  man  whom 
he  considers  will  best  fill  the  ofHce.  He  has  been 
School  Director  of  his  district  for  sis  years  and  is 
a  man  of  much  influence  in  his  community. 

•il  OHN  H.  BARTON,  editor  of  the  Herald  of 
Carbondale,  and  one  of  the  prominent  citi- 
^,^1  .  zens  of  the  community,  was  born  in  West 
^5^^  Carlisle,  Ohio,  January  2,  1837.  His  par- 
ents, Henry  and  Charlotte  (Harris)  Barton,  were 
also  natives  of  the  Buckeye  State,  tlie  former  born 
in  1809,  and  the  latter  in  1813.  The  mother  was 
a  daughter  of  Lazarus  Harris,  one  of  the  early  set- 
tlers of  Ohio.  Her  entire  life  was  spent  in  that 
state,  and  her  death  there  occurred  in  1857.  Mr. 
Barton  early  in  the  late  war  enlisted  in  the  Light 
Artillery  of  West  Virginia,  and  was  wounded  at 
the  battle  of  Cross  Kej-s,  Va.  After  his  recoverj' 
he  did  hospital  service  in  Washington,  D.  C,  until 
discharged  on  account  of  disabilit_y  resulting  from 
his  wound.     He  then  continued    his  residence  in 


Portrait  ang  biographical  record 


351 


the  Capitol  City  until  called  to  the  home  beyond, 
in  1890.  In  the  Barton  family  were  ten  children, 
of  whom  four  are  yet  living,  namely:  John  H.; 
David  L.,  of  Mercer,  Pa.;  Vina,  of  Colorado 
Springs,  Colo.;  and  Mrs.  Flora  Nelson,  of  Urichs- 
villc,  Ohio. 

Our  subject  acquired  liis  education  in  West  Bed- 
ford, Ohio,  and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  years  began 
learning  the  printer's  trade  under  Joseph  Medill,  ou 
the  Coshocton  Republican,  in  1851.  He  worked  at 
the  case  for  some  time  and  became  thoroughly  famil- 
iar with  the  business.  He  was  thus  employed  until 
October,  1860,  when  he  removed  to  Cairo,  111- 
During  the  war  he  entered  the  service  of  his 
countr3',  and  for  two  years  faithfully  defended  the 
Old  Flag  and  the  cause  it  represented.  He  held 
the  rank  of  First  Lieutenant  of  Company  I,  Eigh- 
teenth Illinois  Infantry'. 

It  was  in  September,  18G6,  that  Jlr.  Barton  ar- 
rived in  Carbondale,  where  he  has  since  made  his 
home.  He  purchased  the  paper  called  the  New 
Era  and  continued  its  publication  until  1872, 
when  he  retired  for  a  season.  In  1868  he  pur- 
chased the  Free  Press,  which  he  sold  in  1892.  He 
is  now  at  the  head  of  the  Hei-ald,  which  is  a  bright, 
newsy  sheet,  ably  conducted  and  edited.  It  is  de- 
voted to  the  local  interests  of  the  community  and 
to  the  geneial  advancement  of  civilization  and 
education. 

The  entire  Barton  famil}'  has  supported  the  Re- 
publican party,  and  its  members  have  ever  been 
faithful  to  their  country.  In  the  late  war,  the 
father  of  our  subject  and  five  of  his  sons  were  in 
the  service  at  one  time.  The  eldest  son,  Lafayette, 
was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Shiloh;  Alonzo  D.  died 
from  the  effects  of  a  wound  received  at  Mills 
Springs,  Kj'.;  Lewis  W.  died  from  disease  at  Tus- 
cumbia,  Ala.,  and  John  II.  and  David  L.  aie  3'et 
living. 

September  10,  1863,  Mr.  Barton  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Joanna  Meagher,  who  was 
born  in  Ypsilanti,  Mich.,  in  June,  1838.  She  was 
educated  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  and  is  a  lady  of  cul- 
ture and  refinement.  Six  children  grace  their 
union:  David  L.,  John  L.,  E.  E.,  Flora  L.,  Josie 
May  and  Dick  S.  Mr.  Barton  is  a  member  of  the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  and  his  wife  belongs 


to  the  Catholic  Church.  He  is  a  Royal  Arch  Mason, 
and  has  served  as  Master  of  the  blue  lodge  and  as 
High  Priest  of  the  chapter.  He  has  also  served  as 
Commander  of  John  W.  Lawrence  Post  No.  297, 
G.  A.  R.  He  has  frequently  been  sent  as  a  dele- 
gate to  the  state  conveniions  of  his  party,  but  has 
never  been  an  office-seeker,  preferring  to  devote 
his  entire  time  and  attention  to  his  business  inter- 
ests. 


'RITZ    STUMPF  is  a  native-born  citizen  of 
Monroe  County  and  is   now  an  important 
^\  member  of   its  farming  community,  own- 

ing and  ably  managing  a  finely  improved  farm 
within  the  corporate  limits  of  township  1,  ranges 
9  and  10  west.  Mr.  Stumpf  was  the  joungestson 
born  to  his  parents.  His  birth  occurred  on  his 
fntlier's  homestead  January  27,  18.56,  and  he  was 
reared  and  educated  here.  He  was  bred  to  the  life 
of  a  farmer,  and  having  a  natural  taste  for  this 
calling,  he  adopted  it  for  his  life  work  when  he 
arrived  at  years  of  discretion.  He  owns  the  old 
home  estate,  which  comprises  one  hundred  and 
seventeen  acres,  all  under  excellent  tillage  and 
amply  i)rovided  with  neat  and  well  ordered  build- 
ings. For  a  period  of  thirteen  years  prior  to  pur- 
chasing his  present  estate,  he  farmed  rented  land. 
His  career  as  a  farmer  has  shown  him  to  be  sharp, 
practical  and  a  good  manager.  He  conducts  his 
work  in  a  business-like  manner,  so  as  to  secure 
good  returns,  and  the  income  that  he  derives  from 
the  cultivation  of  his  land  is  very  satisfactory. 
He  is  actively  interested  in  all  that  pertains  to  the 
welfare  of  his  native  township,  and  no  one  is  more 
zealous  in  promoting  its  interests  than  he.  In 
politics  Mr.  Stumpf  is  a  stanch  Republican  and  his 
influence  is  used  to  advance  the  cause  of  his  party. 
Our  subject  is  a  son  of  John  Stumpf,  who  was 
born  near  Darmstadt,  Germany,  in  1819.  In  his 
native  country  he  early  learned  the  trade  of  a 
baker  and  followed  it  until  coming  to  the  United 
States  m  1834.  He  at  once  bought  forty  acres  of 
land  in  this  county  and  township,  which  was  a 
wild  and  heavily  timbered  piece  of  land,  and  which 
is  still  a  part  of  the  present  estate  of  our  subject. 


352 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Tlie  father  worked  hard  and  long  to  bring  about 
its  cultivation.  John  Stunipf  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Elizabeth  Rodeinech,  on  tlie  19th 
of  April,  1838,  who  bore  her  husband  nine  chil- 
dren. Three  of  the  family  died  in  infancy,  and 
those  who  grew  to  mature  years  are:  Philip  and 
Michael,  farmers  in  this  county';  Catherine,  who 
married  Henry  Beck  and  resides  in  Columbia; 
Henrietta,  wlio  married  William  Diesel  and  is  now 
deceased;  Elizabeth,  tlie  wife  of  Paul  Miller,  and 
our  subject.  Tlie  parents  of  this  family  were  hon- 
ored members  of  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church 
at  New  Hanover;  and  the  fatlier  passed  from  this 
life  in  1882.  His  good  wife  is  yet  living  and 
makes  lier  home  with  our  subject. 

Our  subject  was  married  when  twent3-  years  of 
age  to  Elizabeth  Klohr,  a  daughter  of  Jacob  and 
Margaret  Klohr.  Mrs.  Slumpf  is  a  native  of  Mon- 
roe County-,  and  by  her  union  with  our  subject 
has  become  the  mother  of  two  children,  Jacob  and 
Catherine.  She  was  called  from  this  life  on  the 
15th  of  December,  1880,  and  Mr.  Stumpf  took  as 
his  second  wife  Miss  Theresa,  a  daughter  of  Chris- 
tian and  Theresa  (Roemann)  Scheler.  By  tiiis 
second  marriage  five  children  were  born,  Fred, 
Minnie,  Louis,  William  and  Edward.  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Stumpf  are  valued  members  of  the  Evangel- 
ical Lutheran  Church  at  New  Hanover  and  are  held 
in  iiigh  esteem  in  the  community  in  which  they 
live. 


Hi-3 


=+ 


^  OHN  BAER,  a  highly  respected  farmer  re- 
siding on  section  20,  township  3,  range  8 
west,  Monroe  Countj',  was  born  in  the 
province  of  Hessen,  Germany,  March  2, 
1818,  and  in  the  land  of  his  birth  spent  the  days 
of  his  boyhood  and  youth.  He  w.as  educated  in 
its  public  schools  and  there  learned  the  tailor's 
trade.  In  1838,  at  the  age  of  twenty  years,  he 
came  to  the  United  States,  landing  in  Baltimore, 
Md.,  whence  he  went  to  Louisville,  K3'.,  making 
the  journey  in  a  flatboat  from  Wheeling.  In 
Louisville  he  worked  at  his  trade  for  about  two 
years  and  then  removed  to  St.  Louis.  On  leav- 
ing that  cit}'  he  took   up  his   residence  in   Belle- 


ville,  111.,   and   later   came   to   Monroe   County, 
where  for  a  time  he  worked  as  a  farm  hand. 

In  1840  Mr.  Baer's  parents  came  to  America 
and  entered  a  farm  near  Lebanon,  St.  Clair  Count}'. 
Our  subject  aided  in  its  operation  for  two  years 
and  then  came  with  his  father.  William  Baer,  to 
Monroe  Count}',  where  the  latter  entered  Govern- 
ment land  on  Prairie  du  Round.  This  was  a  wood- 
land tr.act,  but  the  labors  of  the  father  and  sons 
cleared  it,  making  of  it  a  good  farm,  upon  which 
Mr.  Baer,  Sr.,  spent  his  remaining  da3's.  In  the 
family  were  five  children,  but  only  two  are  now 
living,  John  and  Catherine. 

In  May,  1847,  John  Baer  enlisted  in  the  Mex- 
ican War,  in  Company  B  of  the  St.  Louis  Le- 
gion, under  Captain  Wacliner  and  Colonel  Eas- 
tun.  He  continued  in  the  service  for  eighteen 
months,  and  w.as  mustered  out  in  Independence, 
Mo.,  in  October,  1848.  When  the  war  was  over, 
Mr.  Baer  returned  to  this  count}'  and  was  given  a 
land  grant  of  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres  in  rec- 
ognition of  his  services.  He  began  farming  for 
himself  in  1850,  and  in  1851  cliose  as  a  com[)an- 
ion  and  helpmate  on  life's  journey  Miss  Barbara 
Welsch,  whose  parents  were  natives  of  Germany. 
His  farm  was  a  wild  and  unimproved  tract,  not  a 
furrow  having  been  turned  nor  an  improvement 
made  thereon,  but  he  at  once  began  clearing  it,  and 
in  course  of  time  the  timber  land  w.as  transformed 
into  rich  and  fertile  fields.  For  a  number  of  years 
he  carried  on  general  farming  and  stock-raising, 
but  his  place  is  now  rented. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Baer  were  born  thirteen 
children,  twelve  of  whom  are  yet  living:  William, 
a  farmer  of  Washington;  Henry,  an  .igriculturist 
of  Belleville,  III.;  John,  who  is  living  in  San  Fran- 
cisco; Louisa,  wife  of  John  Wicklein;  John  Jacob; 
Sophia,  wife  of  John  Valentine,  of  Monroe  Coun- 
ty; George  August  and  Ernest  William,  both  of 
whom  are  farmers  of  Washington;  Catherine 
Mary,  wife  of  Carl  Ilartman,  a  merchant  of  Burks- 
ville;  Magdelena,  wife  of  Herbert  Burt,  of  Wash- 
ington; August,  Carl  and  Carrie,  who  are  still  at 
home. 

In  politics  Mr.  Baer  is  a  supporter  of  Republican 
principles.  For  one  year  he  served  as  Town- 
ship  Supervisor,  and    for   many  years   has   been 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPfflCAL   RECORD. 


353 


School  Director.  The  cause  of  education  finds  in 
him  a  warm  friend  and  he  takes  an  active  interest 
in  everytliing  pertaining  to  the  welfare  of  the  com- 
munitj'  and  its  upbuilding.  He  is  a  member  of 
the  Evangelical  Church,  and  is  one  of  the  oldest 
settlers  of  the  township.  He  can  relate  many  in- 
teresting incidents  of  the  da^'S  when  tliis  was  a 
pioneer  settlement,  and  iie  lived  in  true  frontier 
stj'le.  His  life  has  been  well  and  worthily  passed, 
and  by  his  own  industrious  efforts  he  has  acquired 
the  competence  which  now  enables  him  to  live 
retired. 

-^v o♦o.•@^><^■.o♦o.. V- 

EWIS  LEMEN,  a  representative  farmer  of 
?g)  township  3,  range  9,  living  on  section  7, 
^  was  born  in  Monroe  County,  Jul3-  29,  1853, 
and  is  a  son  of  Josiah  D.  and  Susan  (Bales)  Lemen, 
both  of  whom  were  natives  of  Illinois.  The  father 
was  born  and  reared  in  tliiscountr3',  and  attended 
the  common  schools,  where  he  completed  his  edu- 
cation. A  well  spent  life  and  close  attention  to 
the  details  of  his  business  made  his  career  a  pros- 
perous one.  He  was  a  good  neiglibor  and  a  kind 
hearted  man,  and  the  community  recognized  in 
him  a  valued  citizen.  His  wife  w.as  left  an  orphan 
when  quite  young.  She  proved  to  her  husband  a 
faithful  companion  and  helpmate,  but  siie  died  in 
December,  1863,  at  the  early  age  of  twenty-nine 
3'ears.  The}'  were  the  parents  of  six  children: 
Lewis,  William,  Albert,  Jennie,  and  two  who  died 
in  infancy.  Mr.  Lemen  married  for  his  second  wife 
Bridget  Riley,  who  is  also  now  deceased.  Of  the 
six  children  of  that  union  three  died  in  infancy. 

Tlie  great-grandfather  of  our  subject,  Elder 
James  Lemen,  was  the  third  son  of  the  Rev.  James 
and  Catherine  Lemen,  who  emigrated  from  Vir- 
ginia to  Illinois  in  1786.  They  were  the  parents 
of  six  sons  and  two  daughters,  all  of  whom  were 
leading  members  of  the  Baptist  Church,  four  of 
the  sons  being  ordained  ministers.  Elder  James 
Lemen  was  born  in  Illinois,  October  8,  1787,  and 
was  the  second  white  child  born  of  American  par- 
entage in  this  territoiy.  When  about  twenty  j-ears 
of  age,  he  joined  the  church  and  commenced 
preaching.  He  was  ordained  in  New  Design,  111., 
in  the  only  Baptist  Church  in  the  state,  in  1809, 


the  organization  having  been  effected  in  1796.  He 
and  Elder  John  Baugh  were  the  only  members  of 
what  was  then  known  as  Cantine  Creek  Church, 
now  Bethel  Church,  with  which  Elder  Lemen  con- 
tinued his  membership  for  over  sixty  years,  or  un- 
til the  time  of  his  death.  He  was  an  active  and 
efficient  minister  of  the  Gospel,  who  traveled  far 
and  wide  organizing  and  building  churches  and 
laboring  with  marked  success.  He  did  his  work  in 
Illinois,  Missouri  and  other  western  states.  His 
father  was  the  first  person  baptized  by  immer- 
sion in  Illinois,  and  at  the  father's  ordination 
Elder  Lemen  assisted.  He  also  preached  his  fa- 
ther's funeral  sermon,  and  his  brother  Joseph 
[)reached  the  funeral  sermon  of  their  mother.  By 
the  marriage  of  Mr.  Lemen  and  Polly  Pullian, 
which  was  celebrated  on  the  8th  of  December, 
1813,  were  born  eleven  children.  On  Tuesday 
evening,  February  8,  1867,  the  life  of  this  good 
man  ended.  He  walked  fearlessly  in  the  path  of 
duty,  and  nothing  could  turn  him  from  the  course 
which  he  believed  to  be  right.  He  was  conscien- 
tious and  true  in  all  things,  and  lived  as  a  faithful 
follower  of  the  divine  teaching.  He  was  untiring 
in  his  labors  in  the  ministry,  and  both  by  precept 
and  example  he  led  manj-  to  enter  the  straight  and 
narrow  way.  On  his  death,  the  following  resolu- 
tions were  passed: 

Whereas,  God  in  His  wisdom  and  goodness  has 
seen  fit  to  remove  from  us  our  beloved  brother, 
the  Rev.  James  Lemen,     Therefore 

Resolved,  That  in  his  deatli,  the  ministers  aud 
churches  of  this  association  liave  lost  an  eternal 
friend  and  wise  counselor;  that  1)3'  his  firm  ad- 
herence to,  and  advocacy  of,  Bible  doctrine,  com- 
pleted with  his  consistent  Christian  life,  he  not 
only  endeared  himself  to  us  while  he  lived,  but 
left  a  name  and  memoiy  that  unite  us  to  him  and 
the  God  whom  he  loved,  a  memory  that  gives 
warning  in  danger,  cheerfulness  in  adversity  and 
Iiumility  in  prosperit}'. 

That  in  this  heavy  blow  we  recognize  Him  who 
handles  the  rod,  and  that  we  praise  Him  for  the 
grace  which  enabled  the  departed  and  ourselves  to 
know  it  was  for  our  mutual  and  eternal  good. 

That  we  sympathize  with  the  afflicted  relatives, 

hoping  that  tlie\'  may  so  imitate  the  virtues  of  the 

departed  that  he  may  not  i)rove  to  he  lost  to  them, 

but  onlj'  gone  before. 

1       Lewis   Lemen   was    reared    in  Illinois,  and  re- 


354 


iHHrriurr  and  biographical  record. 


mained  with  his  parents  uutil  llieir  deaths.  He 
was  married  May  19,  1881,  to  Mary  V.  Tolin,  and 
they  liave  become  the  parents  of  four  children, 
Clyde  v.,  p:dith  I.,  Carrie  M.and  William  T.  The 
wife  and  mother  was  born  on  the  farm  which  is  now 
her  home.  In  early  life  she  attended  the  common 
schools,  and  at  the  age  of  sixteen  entered  Almira 
College,  at  Greenville,  III.,  where  she  studied  tliree 
terms.  She  is  a  woman  of  intelligence,  well  posted 
on  matters  pertaining  to  history,  and  is  a  fine  con- 
vijrsationalist. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lemen  began  their  domestic  life 
upon  the  farm  where  they  yet  reside,  and  in  con- 
nection with  agricultural  pursuits  lie  has  also  en- 
gaged in  teaching.  He  entered  upon  this  work  at 
the  age  of  twenty  years,  and  followed  it  for  fif- 
teen consecutive  years,  after  which  lie  rested  from 
that  labor  foi-  a  few  years.  He  is  now  teaching 
near  Columbia,  and  is  recognized  as  a  competent 
and  able  instructor.  The  cause  of  education  has 
ever  found  in  him  a  warm  friend,  and  he  believes 
it  to  be  one  of  the  safeguards  of  the  nation.  He 
has  served  as  vSchool  Director  for  several  years. 

In  his  political  views,  Mr.  Lemen  is  a  Populist 
and  takes  an  active  part  in  local  politics.  JSociall}', 
he  is  connected  with  the  Ancient  Order  of  United 
Workmen.  Both  he  and  his  wife  are  faithful  mem- 
bers of  the  Baptist  Church,  and  are  highly  re- 
spected citizens,  who  hold  an  enviable  position  in 
social  circles.  They  are  worthy  representatives  of 
one  of  the  oldest  families  of  the  state,  and  well  de- 
serve mention  in  this  volume. 


\Ti  OIIX  MrCLINTON  is  one  of  the  native  sons 
of  Randolph  County,  and  a  leading  and  in- 
(lucntial  farmer  of  township  5,  range  5.  He 
was  born  here  September  22,  1822,  his  par- 
ents being  Samuel  and  Nancy  (Miller)  McClin- 
ton.  His  grandfather,  John  McClinton,  was  a 
native  of  Ireland,  and  when  a  small  boy  was 
brought  by  his  parents  to  this  country,  the  family 
locating  in  South  Carolina.  He  came  to  Randolph 
County'  in  1802,  and  his  death  occurred  the  fol- 
lowing year.  He  was  a  blacksmith  and  farmer, 
and  on  removing  westward,  bought  Government 


land  near  Kaskaskia,  becoming  one  of  the  first  sel- 
lers of  that  locality. 

Samuel  McClintou  was  born  in  the  Abbeyville 
District  of  South  Carolina  in  the  year  1800,  and 
was  brought  by  his  parents  to  Illinois,  where  he 
spent  the  remainder  of  his  da3's.  Throughout  life 
he  followed  the  occupation  of  farming.  He  died 
in  1856,  on  the  old  homestead,  three  miles  north  of 
Sparta.  His  wife,  who  was  also  born  in  the  Ab- 
beyville District,  passed  away  in  Randolph  Coun- 
ty in  1841.  Both  were  faithful  members  of  the 
United  Presbyterian  Church,  and  were  highly  re- 
spected. Their  family  numbered  six  sons  and  five 
daughters,  and  with  one  exception  the  children 
are  all  yet  living,  namely:  John,  Jurenda,  Will- 
iam, James,  Berele,  David,  Joseph,  Serena,  Mary, 
BetS3'  J.  and  Nancy  J. 

In  the  county  of  his  birth,  John  McClinton 
spent  the  days  of  his  boyhood  and  youth.  The 
subscription  schools  afforded  him  his  educational 
privileges,  and  he  remained  with  his  parents  until 
he  had  attained  his  majority.  He  thus  became 
familiar  with  all  the  duties  of  farm  life,  and  to 
agricultural  pursuits  has  since  devoted  his  ener- 
gies. As  a  companion  and  helpmate  on  life's  jour- 
ney he  chose  Miss  Mary  Keuned^^,  who  was  born 
near  Fayetteville,  Tenn.  They  were  married  in 
1844,  and  became  the  parents  of  six  sons  and  two 
daughters:  William  T.,  now  residing  in  Kansas; 
James  R.;  Mary,  deceased;  Samuel, also  of  Kansas; 
Joseph  C.,  who  is  living  in  Indian  Territory;  John 
F.;  Clinton  A.,  of  Idaho;  and  Millie  V.,  the  wife 
of  James  W.  Hood. 

Soon  after  his  marriage,  Mv.  McClinton  pur- 
chased forty  acres  of  land  and  began  farming  for 
himself.  He  cultivated  that  tract  until  1856,  when 
he  purchased  his  present  farm.  He  now  owns  one 
hundred  and  thirt}'  acres  of  rich  and  highly  cul- 
tivated land,  pleasantly  situated  four  miles  south- 
east of  Sparta,  and  the  farm  is  one  of  the  finest  in 
the  community.  The  owner  is  recognized  as  a 
progressive  agriculturist,  and  the  neat  appearance 
of  his  place  indicates  to  the  passer-by  his  enter- 
prise. In  politics,  Mr.  McClinton  has  been  a  Re- 
publican since  the  organization  of  the  party.  His 
first  Presidential  vote  was  cast  for  John  P.  Hale. 
He   and    his    family    are  members  of  tte  United 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


355 


Presbyterian  Church,  and  are  people  of  promi- 
nence in  this  commnnity,  holding  an  enviable 
position  in  social  circles  where  true  worth  and  in- 
telligence aie  received  as  the  passports  into  good 
society. 


/RITZ  BEGEM  ANN,  who  resides  in  Steele- 
^  ville  and  follows  farming  in  Randolph 
County,  being  one  of  the  successful  agri- 
culturists of  the  community,  claims  Germany  as 
the  land  of  his  birth,  which  occurred  about  1840. 
He  was  the  fourtli  child  born  unto  Henry  and 
Wilhelmina  ( Westenbarger)  Begemann,  who  were 
also  natives  of  Germany.  The  father  followed 
farming  in  that  country  until  1848,  when  he  bade 
adieu  to  his  old  home,  and,  accompanied  by  bis 
family,  sailed  for  America,  liaving  determined  to 
try  iiis  fortune  in  the  New  World.  He  located 
near  Steeleville,  where  he  engaged  in  farming 
until  retiring  from  active  business  life  on  account 
of  his  advanced  years.  Me  died  in  1872,  at  the 
age  of  seventy-three.  His  wife  departed  this  life 
in  1849,  soon  after  coming  to  America. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  attended  school  in  his 
native  land  until  the  emigration  of  the  family  to 
the  United  States,  which  occurred  wiien  he  was  a 
lad  of  eiglit  summers.  He  was  afterward  a  stu- 
dent in  the  public  schools  near  Steeleville,  and 
tliere  acquired  a  good  Englisli  education.  In  early 
life  he  became  familiar  with  all  of  tlie  departments 
of  farm  work,  and  aided  liis  father  in  tiie  cultiva- 
tion of  the  home  farm  until  lie  had  attained  his 
majority,  when  he  started  out  in  life  for  himself. 
He  worked  as  a  farm  hand  for  four  years,  after 
which  be  engaged  in  teaming  between  Steeleville 
and  Chester  for  a  period  of  seven  years.  When 
that  time  iiad  expired,  he  engaged  in  farming  for 
himself  and  has  since  carried  on  agricultural  pur- 
suits. His  land  is  always  under  a  high  state  of 
cultivation  and  well  improved,  and  he  is  regarded 
as  one  of  the  practical  and  progressive  farmers  of 
Randolpli  County. 

In  1863  Mr.  Begemann  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Marcella,  daughter  of  Charles  F.  and 
Sarah    (Bryan)  Jay.     Eight   children    were    born 


of   their   union,   but   Allen  died    at  the   age   of 

three  years.  Those  still  living  are:  Emma,  wife 
of  William  Moulic,  a  prominent  druggist  of  Percy; 
Mary  and  John,  who  are  at  home;  Alice  A.,  wife 
of  James  Gillespie,  a  resident  of  Steeleville,  111.; 
Fred,  Albert  and  Bernice,  who  are  yet  attending 
school.  Mr.  Begemann  resides  in  Steeleville  in 
order  to  give  his  children  the  better  educational 
advantages  of  the  town  and  thus  fit  them  for  the 
practical  duties  of  life.  The  family  is  one  of 
prominence  in  the  community,  and  its  members 
rank  higjj  in  the  social  circles  in  which  they  move. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Begemann  are  members  of  the 
Methodist  Church,  in  which  he  serves  as  Trustee, 
and  are  active  workers  in  the  Master's  vineyard. 
By  his  ballot  he  supports  the  Prohibition  party. 
He  has  served  as  Township  Supervisor  for  three 
years,  and  has  been  a  member  of  the  Board  of 
Trustees  of  Steeleville  for  seven  years.  His  long 
continued  service  well  indicates  his  fidelity  to 
duty  and  the  confidence  and  trust  reposed  in  him 
by  liis  fellow-townsmen,  who  regard  him  as  one 
of  the  valued  citizens  of  the  community  and  hold 
him  in  high  esteem  on  account  of  the  many  ex- 
cellencies of  his  character. 


/p^EORGE  H.  BILDERBACK.  The  agricult- 
fll  __  urists  of  Randolph  County  are,  as  a  rule, 
^^4'  possessed  of  general  intelligence,  a  thor- 
ough understanding  of  their  calling  and  great  en- 
ergy, and  they  therefore  rank  well  among  the 
farmers  the  world  over.  One  of  these  gentlemen 
who  are  successful!}'  pursuing  the  peaceful  occu- 
pation of  tilling  the  soil  is  our  subject,  whose 
comfortable  estate  is  located  on  section  25,  town 
ship  7,  range  6. 

Mr.  Bilderback  is  a  native  of  this  county,  and 
was  born  near  Kaskaskia  April  3,  1826.  He  is 
the  second  child  in  a  family  of  eight  children 
born  to  John  and  Sarah  (McCormick)  Bilderback, 
who  were  also  natives  of  Randolph  County,  where 
the  father  died  in  1837,  and  the  mother  departed 
this  life  in  1853.  George  H.  obtained  a  limited  edu- 
cation in  the  schools  near  his  home.  His  father 
d^'ing  when  he  was  but  eleven  years  of  age,  he  was 


356 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


eomiielled  to  aid  in  tlie  cariying  on  of  tlie  home 
farm  in  order  to  support  his  mother  and  sisters. 

Mr.  Hilderback  has  always  followed  the  occupa- 
tion of  a  farmer,  and  when  ready  to  establish  a 
lionie  of  his  own,  in  1856,  he  was  married  to  Miss 
Nanc\'  A.,  daughter  of  James  F.  and  Rachael 
(Long)  Glenn.  Mrs.  Bilderback  was  born  in  Ohio, 
of  which  state  her  parents  were  natives,  and  was 
fifteen  3ears  of  age  when  she  accompanied  them 
on  their  removal  to  this  state.  By  her  union  with 
our  subject  twelve  children  have  been  born,  of 
wliom  those  living  are:  Sarah  R.,  who  is  the  wife  of 
Clarence  Barber,  and  resides  in  this  count}';  Will- 
iam II.;  who  married  Elizabeth  Moore,  and  resides 
near  his  father;  Alice  A.,  who  married  William  C. 
Bilderback  and  lives  near  the  old  home;  INIargaret 
N.,  who  is  tiie  wife  of  Charles  Moore,  and  makes 
her  home  near  Rockwood;  and  Wallace  E.,  at  home. 

Our  subject  and  his  estimable  wife,  together 
with  tbeir  eldest  daughter,  are  members  of  the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church  and  have  established 
a  cozy  home,  where  they  welcome  their  hosts  of 
friends.  Mr.  Bilderback  is  greatly  respected  in 
the  county  where  his  life  has  been  passed,  and  his 
career  has  been  creditable  in  the  extreme.  He  has 
served  as  School  Trustee  and  Director,  and  is  ear- 
nest in  his  efforts  to  forward  the  educational  inter- 
ests of  this  locality.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Re- 
publican party,  and  cast  liis  first  vote  for  General 
Taylor. 

.     • 0^P • 


eOL.  B.  L.  WILEY  was  born  in  Jefferson 
.  Count}',  Ohio,  in  1821,  and  is  a  son  of 
Abel  Wiley.  His  father  was  a  native  of 
Maryland,  and  was  a  carpenter  and  cabinet-maker 
by  trade.  About  the  time  of  his  marriage  he  re- 
moved to  the  Buckeye  State,  locating  in  Jefferson 
County,  where  he  lived  until  1857,  when  he  came 
with  his  family  to  Illinois.  His  last  days  were 
spent  in  the  liome  of  the  Colonel,  and  after  his 
death  his  widow  went  to  live  with  her  daughter 
in  Putnam  County,  111. 

Colonel  Wiley's  educational  privileges  were  quite 
limited.  For  many  years  he  worked  at  the  car- 
penter's trade  as  a  means  of  livelihood.  In  1846 
he  enlisted  in   the   Mexican    AVar,  and  served  as  a 


non-commissioned  officer  for  a  year.  Previous  to 
that  service  he  had  come  to  Illinois,  where  he  en- 
gaged in  teaching  school.  In  1847  he  located  in 
Jonesboro,  this  state,  where  he  followed  carpenter- 
ing for  some  time. 

On  tlie  5th  of  December,  1850,  theColonel  was 
united  in  mariiage  with  Miss  Emily,  daughter  ol 
Winstead  Davie,  of  Union  County,  111.  The  lady 
was  born  in  1830,  in  that  county,  and  tliere  they 
began  their  domestic  life,  but  in  1860  came  to 
Jackson  County  and  settled  upon  the  old  home 
farm.  The  following  year  Mr.  Wiley  responded 
to  President  Lincoln's  call  for  troops,  enlisting  in 
the  Fifth  Illinois  Cavalry.  He  was  appointed 
Lieutenant-Colonel  by  Governor  Yates,  and  served 
in  that  capacity  until  1863,  when  he  resigned  and 
returned.  He  then  entered  the  Provost-Marshal's 
office  in  Cairo,  where  he  was  employed  until  1865, 
when  he  returned  to  the  farm.  The  four  suc- 
ceeding years  of  his  life  were  devoted  to  agricult- 
ural pursuits,  and  in  1869  he  was  appointed  by 
Governor  Palmer  as  Commissioner  of  the  Insane 
Asylum  at  Anna,  which  position  he  filled  for  three 
years. 

Unto  the  Colonel  and  Mrs.  Wiley  were  born 
nine  children,  eight  of  whom  are  yet  living,  viz.: 
AVilliam,  John,  Anna,  Ben,  Dan,  Ciiarles,  Mary 
and  Henry.  James  is  now  deceased.  Colonel 
Wiley  was  a  prominent  and  influential  member  of 
the  Masonic  fraternity,  which  he  joined  during 
the  Mexican  War,  and  was  Deputy  Grand  Master 
of  the  state.  On  the  organization  of  the  Repub- 
lican party  he  joined  its  ranks,  and  was  ever  one 
of  its  stalwart  supporters.  He  was  one  of  the  few 
who  voted  for  Fremont  in  1856  in  this  locality. 
For  many  years  he  was  County  Commissioner,  and 
was  twice  nominated  for  Congress.  His  death  oc- 
curred in  March,  1890,  and  many  warm  friends 
mourned  his  loss,  for  he  was  a  prominent  and 
highly  respected  citizen. 

John  Wiley,  son  of  the  Colonel,  was  born  Au- 
gust 10,  1854,  in  Jonesboro,  111.  He  was  educated 
in  the  district  schools,  and  spent  his  childhood 
days  in  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads.  In  1880 
he  married  Margaret  Applegate,  who  was  born  in 
Williamson  County,  111.,  April  12,  1854,  and  is  a 
daughter  of  Louis   Applegate,  a  native  of  Ohio, 


C/y^ ceOfT/.  ^^  g/7^<^^^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


359 


and  a  veteran  of  the  Civil  War,  who  is  still  living 
in  Jackson  Conntj-.  Four  children  grace  the  union 
of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wiley:  Charles,  Bessie,  Fannie 
and  John. 

Mr.  Wile_y  is  now  the  owner  of  eighty  acres  of 
land,  the  greater  part  of  which  is  cievoted  to  fruit- 
growing. In  his  business  dealings  he  lias  met  with 
good  success  and  acquired  a  comfortable  compe- 
tence. He  holds  membership  with  the  Methodist 
Episcopal  Church,  and  belongs  to  the  Masonic  fra- 
ternity of  Makanda.  In  politics  he  is  a  Repub- 
lican. He  has  served  on  the  School  Board,  and  for 
two  terms  has  been  Township  Supervisor.  He  is 
a  representative  and  progressive  citizen,  one  who 
manifests  a  commendable  interest  in  everything 
pertaining  to  the  welfare  of  the  community. 


l®), ^^^mh... ,(Sj 

(^         '^f^^'" ^^ 

REDERICK  KOCH,  Sn.,  who  is  living  a  re- 
tired life  in  Columbia,  was  born  in  the 
kingdom  of  Prussia,  Germany,  August  7, 
1828,  and  is  a  son  of  Frederick  and  Christina 
Koch.  His  bo3'hood  days  were  spent  in  his  native 
land,  and  its  public  schools  afforded  him  his  edu- 
cational privileges.  He  learned  the  trade  of  car- 
pentering with  his  father.  When  aj'oung  man  of 
twenty-two  he  determined  to  stek  a  home  and  for- 
tune beyond  the  Atlantic,  and  has  never  had  oc- 
casion to  regret  the  fact  that  he  carried  out  his 
resolution. 

In  1850  Mr.  Koch  sailed  for  America,  and  took 
up  bis  residence  in  AVaterloo,  where  for  one  year 
he  worked  at  his  trade.  In  1851  he  came  to  Col- 
umbia and  embarked  in  business  as  a  carpenter, 
continuing  operations  along  that  line  until  1876, 
when  he  began  farming.  He  had  previously  pur- 
chased land  in  the  American  bottoms,  where  he 
now  owns  eight  hundred  acres.  All  is  under  a 
high  state  of  cultivation  and  well  improved,  and 
to  the  raising  of  grain  his  time  has  been  devoted. 
His  first  purchase  of  land  was  a  tract  of  three  acres 
near  Columbia.  In  1864  he  bought  one  hundred 
and  seventeen  acres,  and  to  this  he  has  added  from 
time  to  time  as  his  financial  resources  would  per- 


mit, until  he  is  now  one  of  the  extensive  land- 
owners of  the  county. 

In  1851  Mr.  Koch  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Johanna  Genzel.  The  lady  is  a  native  of 
Prussia,  Germany,  and  came  to  America  in  the 
year  of  her  marriage.  A  family  of  six  children 
has  been  born  to  them,  namely:  Frederick,  who  is 
now  a  contractor  and  builder  of  Columbia;  Annie, 
wife  of  Fred  Jleyer,  a  prominent  merchant  of  this 
place;  Louisa,  now  the  wife  of  George  Young,  a 
rejuesentative  farmer  of  Columbia  Precinct,  Mon- 
roe County;  Harriet,  wife  of  Albert  Kuener,  who 
is  employed  as  a  traveling  salesman;  Henrietta, 
wife  of  Joseph  Southof,  who  is  clerking  in  Colum- 
bia; and  Emma,  wife  of  Charles  Rey,  a  resident 
farmer  of  Hanover  Precinct. 

Mr.  Koch  has  a  pleasant  home  in  Columbia, 
which  stands  as  a  monument  of  his  enterprise.  On 
all  sides  are  seen  his  handiwork,  for  he  has  erected 
many  buildings  in  this  place.  In  his  business  deal- 
ings he  has  met  with  prosperity,  for  he  carries  for- 
ward to  a  successful  completion  whatever  he  un- 
dertakes, and  by  his  own  efforts  he  has  worked  his 
wa}'  upw-ard  from  an  humble  position  to  one  of 
wealth  and  afliuence.  In  politics  he  is  a  supporter 
of  the  Democratic  party  and  its  principles,  but  has 
never  been  an  office-seeker.  He  and  his  family  are 
all  members  of  the  Evangelical  Church,  in  which 
he  has  served  as  Trustee.  A  public-spirited  and 
progressive  citizen,  he  manifests  a  commendable 
interest  in  everything  pertaining  to  the  welfare  of 
the  community,  and  well  deserves  representation 
in  the  history  of  his  adopted  county. 


I^^^ENRY  C.  COLE.  The  following  is  a 
Wji,  brief  sketch  of  the  career  of  Mr.  Cole.  lie 
'A^  is  a  member  of  the  H.  C.  Cole  Milling 
(j^  Company,  of  Chester,  and  devotes  the 
greater  part  of  his  time  and  attention  to  purchas- 
ing supplies  in  the  way  of  grain  for  their  large 
nulls.  A  native  of  this  city  he  was  born  May 
13,  1852,  and  is  the  fourth  child  in  a  family  of  six 
children  born  to  Herman  C.  and  Emily  (Cocks) 
Cole.  He  passed  his  boj'hood  in  attendance  at  the 
public  schools,  and  later  continued  his  studies  in  the 


360 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


University  of  Illinois  at  Champaign.  In  1873  here- 
turned  to  this  city  and  engaged  with  his  father  in 
the  milling  business.  lie  continued  thus  employed 
until  the  death  of  tlie  latter,  in  1874,  when  the 
business  was  transferred  to  the  tliree  sons,  the  other 
members  of  the  firm  being  Charles  B.  and  Zachary 
T.  They  operated  under  the  firm  name  of  H.  C. 
Cole  (t  Co.  until  Julj-,  1888,  when  the  style  was 
changed  to  the  H.  C.  Cole  Milling  Company-,  by 
which  it  is  known  throughout  this  portion  of  the 
state. 

The  marriage  of  our  subject  with  Miss  Blanche 
Dolbee  occurred  April  24,  1878.  Mrs.  Cole  was 
born  .Tune  ,5,  1852,  in  Alton,  and  was  the  daughter 
of  Shadrach  H.  and  Hannah  E.  Dolbee.  B\'  her 
union  with  our  subject  have  been  born  three  sons 
and  three  daughters,  to  whom  they  are  giving 
good  educationb^,  fitting  them  to  occup}-  honorable 
positions  in  life. 

Mr.  Cole  has  always  been  keenly  alive  to  the  in- 
terests of  his  counts,  and  has  been  an  important 
factor  in  promoting  them.  He  has  been  the  re- 
cipient of  public  honors  from  his  fellow-citizens, 
who  have  lecognized  his  superior  business  tact  and 
other  fine  qualifications  and  have  called  him  to 
assist  in  the  administration  of  public  affairs.  He 
has  been  Alderman  of  the  city,  and  is  at  present  a 
member  of  the  School  Board. 


\TU^  ON.  JOHN  .J.  DOUGLAS,  a  progressive 
ifjj  farmer  of  township  7,  range  6,  Randolpii 
/•y^  Count}-,  has  risen  to  a  position  in  agricult- 
1^;  ural  affairs  which  many  might  env\-.  He 
was  born  in  the  citj'  of  Chester,  August  17,  1849, 
and  has  since  made  his  home  in  this  count}-.  His 
father,  Jolin  Douglas,  Sr.,  was  born  in  Roxburgh- 
shire, Scotland,  and  was  a  son  of  James,  who  lived 
and  died  in  Scotland.  His  wife,  the  grandmother 
of  our  subject,  came  to  America,  and  settled  in 
Chester  in  1843.  Her  son  John  was  at  that  time 
twenty-nine  j'ears  of  age.  He  was  a  miller  by  trade, 
*  and  worked  in  tlie  Holmes  Mills  at  Chester  until 
July  4,  1849,  when  he  died  with  cholera.  He  was 
married  in  September  of  the  previous  year  to  Mar- 
garet Craig,  who  became  the  mother  of  our  sub- 


ject. Mrs.  Margaret  Douglas  was  a  daughter  of 
John  and  Sarah  Craig,  who  resided  on  a  farm  near 
Chester. 

His  mother  dying  when  he  was  but  a  lad  of  six 
years,  our  subject  went  to  live  with  an  uncle, 
James  Douglas.  He  was  cared  for  by  him  the 
same  as  though  one  of  his  own  children,  and  at- 
tended the  counti-}-  schools,  at  the  same  time  learn- 
ing the  duties  of  farm  work.  When  fifteen  years 
old,  his  ancle  died,  but  our  subject  still  remained 
on  the  farm,  helping  to  support  the  faniih-  for 
three  years,  when  he  went  to  learn  the  trade  of  a 
miller  at  Chester.  He  completed  his  apprentice- 
ship in  three  years,  and  aftetwaid  attended  the 
commercial  college  of  Bryant  &  Stratton  at  St. 
Louis,  completing  the  course  and  fitting  himself 
to  enter  business. 

AVhen  twenty-three  years  of  age.  our  subject  com- 
menced farming  on  his  own  account  on  the  land 
which  is  still  his  home.  The  farm  at  the  time  of 
his  settlement  on  it  consisted  of  one  hundred  and 
twenty  acres  of  only  partially  improved  land,  but 
by  hard  work  and  sagacious  management  he  has 
made  it  one  of  the  finest  farms  to  be  found  in  the 
county  and  it  now  comprises  three  hundred  and 
twent}'  broad  and  fertile  acres.  He  carries  on 
general  farming  and  stock-raising,  and  his  land 
yields  him  abundant  harvests  in  return  for  the 
labor  expended.  In  1871,  Mr.  Douglas  took  a 
trip  across  the  Atlantic,  visiting  the  old  home  of 
his  parents. 

October  30,  1872,  John  J.  Douglas  and  Miss 
Belle  Adams  were  united  in  marriage.  Mrs.  Doug- 
las is  a  daughter  of  David  and  Margaret  (Doug- 
las) Adams,  both  natives  of  Scotland,  while  the 
daughter  was  born  in  this  county.  To  this  mar- 
riage have  been  born  the  following  named  children : 
Alice,  Everett,  Irving,  Elmer,  Robert  and  Maggie, 
the  last  two  being  twins.  They  are  all  at  home 
and  constitute  a  happy  faniil}'.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Douglas  are  devoted  members  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church. 

In  his  political  affiliations  our  subject  is  a  stanch 
Republican,  and  in  1892  was  elected  a  member  of 
the  Thirty-eighth  General  Assembly,  to  represent 
Randolph,  Perr}-  and  Monroe  Counties  in  the 
State  Legislature,     During  this  session  he  served 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


361 


on  the  Road  tind  Bridges,  Fees  and  Salaries,  Mines 
and  Mining  and  tlie  Horticultural  Committees, 
making  a  careful  and  diligent  member.  He  is 
classed  among  the  pre-eminently  successful  agri- 
culturists of  bis  township  and  has  lost  no  opportu- 
nity for  improving  his  estate  or  contributing  to 
the  welfare  of  the  community,  who  hold  him  in 
such  high  esteem. 


^;^ 


'i-^m-r 


^,-  XTON  SCHIEFERSTEIK,  one  of  the  prom- 
(@/u[[    inent  and    successful   farmers  of    Monroe 

Ij  Hi  County,  who  carries  on  agricultural  pur- 
suits on  section  1,  township  3,  range  10 
west,  claims  German3'  as  the  land  of  his  birth, 
which  occurred  on  the  16th  of  February,  1825. 
His  parents,  Casper  and  Mary  (Keambel)  Schiefer- 
stein,  were  also  natives  of  the  same  countr^^  and 
in  its  schools  were  well  educated.  The  father 
earned  a  livelihood  by  selling  yeast.  He  and  his 
wife  never  left  their  native  land,  but  continued 
there  to  reside  until  called  to  the  home  be3'ond. 
Thej'  were  both  members  of  the  Lutheran  Church, 
and  both   died  when  about  Qfty-two  jears  of  age. 

Under  the  parental  roof  Anton  Schieferstein 
passed  his  boj'hood  days,  and  in  the  public  schools 
was  educated,  becoming  familiar  with  all  the  com- 
mon branchesof  learning.  When  he  started  out  in 
life  for  himself,  he  worked  as  a  farm  hand  by  the 
year  for  $15.  After  his  marriage,  he  also  engaged 
in  peddling  yeast,  as  did  his  father.  Ere  leav- 
ing his  native  land,  he  chose  as  a  companion  and 
helpmate  on  life's  journey  Miss  Catherine  Gard- 
ner, who  was  also  born  in  Germany. 

Hoping  to  at  least  secure  a  comfortable  home,  if 
not  a  fortune,  in  the  isew  World,  Mr.  Schieferstein 
left  the  Fatherland  and  with  his  family  crossed  the 
briny  deep.  On  arriving  in  this  country,  he  came 
direct  to  Monroe  Count}-,  111.,  and  as  he  had  no 
capital  with  which  to  purchase  land,  he  rented  a 
farm  for  two  years.  By  industry-  and  enterprise 
he  was  enabled  to  secure  some  money  during  that 
period,  and  on  its  expiration  he  bought  eighty 
acres  of  land  near  where  he  now  lives.  He  has 
added  to  this  from  time  to  time  as  his  financial  re- 
sources have  increased,  until  he  now  owns  over 


four  hundred  acres  of  valuable  land  under  a  high 
state  of  cultivation  and  well  improved. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Schieferstein  were  born  ten 
children,  but  six  of  the  number  are  now  deceased. 
The  four  still  livuig  are,  Lizzie,  Lena,  Ben  and 
Josephine.  The  last-named  is  still  with  her  par- 
ents, but  the  others  are  all  married.  Our  subject 
and  his  wife  hold  membership  with  the  Lutheran 
Church,  contribute  liberall}'  to  its  support,  and 
take  an  active  interest  in  its  welfare.  In  his  polit- 
ical views,  Mr.  Schieferstein  is  a  stalwart  Republi- 
can. He  has  led  a  busy  and  useful  life,  and  by  his 
well  directed  efforts,  perseverance  and  economy,  he 
has  accumulated  a  valuable  property,  and  his  com- 
fortable competence  now  enables  him  to  live  re- 
tired. He  rents  his  land,  and  in  his  elegant  home 
he  is  spending  his  declining  years  in  rest  from  all 
business  cares.  He  is  a  leading  and  influential 
citizen,  and  one  who  has  the  high  regard  of  all 
with  whom  he  has  been  brought  in  contact. 


'^OHN  FULLFORD.  The  name  of  FuUford 
is  known  and  respected  throughout  Ran- 
^^  ]  dolph  County  as  belonging  to  one  of  the 
'f^if.'  earliest  pioneers  of  this  section  of  the  coun- 
try. The  present  representative  of  the  name  is  a 
son  of  an  old  pioneer,  who  for  many  years  has 
been  an  important  factor  in  the  agricultural  life 
of  township  7,  range  6,  where  he  is  one  of  the 
well-to-do  citizens. 

John  Fullford  was  born  on  the  home  farm  where 
he  still  resides  November  9,  1848,  and  is  the 
younger  of  the  two  sons  born  to  Thomas  and  Mary 
A.  (Tudor)  Fullford,  natives  of  England.  The 
parents  were  married  in  their  native  country,  and 
on  coming  to  America  in  1846,  the  father  worked 
in  the  rolling  mills  in  New  York  State  for  seven 
j'ears.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time  deciding  to 
trj'  his  fortunes  in  this  then  western  countr}',  he 
came  to  Illinois  and  located  upon  the  farm  which 
we  have  mentioned.  Here  he  followed  the  avoca- 
tion of  a  farmer  for  many  j'ears,  and  retired  from 
active  work  fifteen  years  prior  to  his  decease, 
which  occurred  January  27,  1893.     His  widow  is 


362 


POKTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


still  living,  at  the  age  of  seventy-three  years,  and 
makes  her  home  with  our  subject. 

Tlie  subject  of  this  sketch  obtained  his  educa- 
tion in  the  district  scliool  near  his  home,  and  be- 
ing reared  to  farm  pursuits,  lias  spent  his  entire 
life  following  that  occupation.  His  elder  brother, 
Thomas,  dying  in  infancy,  our  subject  on  the  de- 
cease of  his  father  fell  heir  to  his  numerous  estates 
and  is  now  kept  bus3'  looking  after  iiis  propertj', 
which  comprises  both  farm  lands  and  city  real 
estate.  He  is  a  man  of  influence  in  his  community 
and  is  numbered  among  tlie  successful  men  of 
Randolph  County. 

In  1877  John  FuUford  and  Miss  Mary,  daughter 
of  John  Turner,  of  Louisiana,  were  united  in  mar- 
riage. Their  union  has  been  blessed  by  the  birth  of 
seven  children,  Alice  Oracle,  Lydia  Priscilla,  Ar- 
thur Jewett,  Ruby  I'earl,  Ebba  Jewell,  Ida  Cecil 
and  Florence  Elbe.  In  political  matters,  Mr.  FuU- 
ford is  a  Republican  in  the  national  elections, 
but  in  local  affairs  reserves  the  right  to  vote  for 
the  best  man,  irrespective  of  party. 


^^ 


•^m- 


UILLIAM  H.  HUBBARD,  the  able  editor 
of  the  Free  Press  of  Carboudale,  is  a  na- 
^Jf^  five  of  the  Empire  State,  and  his  birth 
occurred  in  Castile,  on  the  29th  of  June,  1849. 
His  fatlier,  William  II.  Hubbard,  was  born  in  New 
York  in  1821,  and  is  a  son  of  Pliny  and  Charity 
(Brooks)  Hubbard,  the  former  born  in  Vermont, 
and  the  latter  in  the  Empire  State.  He  was  a 
solder  in  the  War  of  1812.  The  Hubbard  family 
was  founded  in  America  by  three  brothers  of  Eng- 
lish birth,  who  in  early  Colonial  days  braved  the 
dangers  of  an  ocean  voyage  to  found  homes  in 
the  New  World.  One  settled  in  Connecticut,  an- 
other in  Massachusetts,  and  the  third  in  Vermont. 
Nearly  all  of  the  Hubbards  in  America  are  de- 
scendants of  these  three  brothers. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  bore  the  maiden 
name  of  Evelyn  P.  Wells.  She  was  born  in  New 
York  in  1825,  and  was  a  daughter  of  Walter  and 
Abigail  (Chapin)  Wells.  Her  father  served  in  the 
War  of  1812,  and  drew  a  pension  until  his  death. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.   William    H.   Hubbard,  Sr.,  located 


near  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  and  made  their  home  in 
the  Empire  State  until  1875,  when  they  emigrated 
to  Michigan,  locating  at  Ferry,  where  the  father 
carried  on  merchandising  and  fanning.  He  was 
practically  the  owner  of  that  town.  About  1880 
he  went  to  Chicago,  afterward  resided  in  Texas, 
and  later  took  up  his  residence  in  Kansas  City, 
Mo.,  but  he  is  now  once  more  actively  engaged  in 
business  in  Chicago  as  President  of  tiie  Rutland 
Fire  Insurance  Company,  although  he  makes  his 
home  in  Kansas  City.  In  his  family  were  Bve 
cliildren:  Foster  W.,  William  H.,  Charles  P.,  Frank 
L.,  and  Nellie  L.,  the  wife  of  F.  M.  Hosmer. 

Mr.  Hubbard  whose  name  heads  this  sketch 
began  his  education  in  the  schools  of  Phelps, 
N.  Y.,  and  completed  it  in  Syr.acuse  in  1867.  He 
then  began  reading  law  in  that  city  and  was  ad- 
mitted to  the  Bar.  Opening  an  office,  he  engaged 
in  practice  in  Syracuse  until  1875,  which  j-ear 
witnessed  his  removal  to  Hart,  Mich,  where  he 
followed  his  profession  until  1879.  During  that 
time  he  served  as  Prosecuting  Attorney  of  the 
county.  In  1879  he  again  went  to  Syracuse, 
where  he  continued  in  practice  until  1888,  when 
he  returned  to  Michigan  and  bought  the  St.  Joseph 
County  (Mich.)  liepublican,  which  paper  he  pub- 
lished until  1890.  In  that  year  he  moved  the 
plant  to  Carbondale,  and  established  the  Jackson 
County  Republican.  The  paper  is  now  known  as 
the  Republican  Free  Press.  When  a  boy,  Mr.  Hub- 
bard had  learned  the  printer's  trade,  and  his  prac- 
tical knowledge  of  the  business  now  serves  him  in 
good  stead. 

Our  subject  was  married  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  in 
1867,  to  Mary  I.  Ide,  a  native  of  the  Empire  State, 
who  was  born  in  February,  1849,  and  is  a  daugli- 
ter  of  Darius  and  Mar^'  (Colburn)  Ide,  also  of 
New  York.  Mrs.  Hubbard  died  in  1887,  leaving 
two  children,  M.  Evelyn  and  Charles  W.  In  1888 
Mr.  Hubbard  wedded  Ida  Britton,  who  was  born 
in  S.yracuse,  N.  Y.,  in  1852,  and  is  a  daughter  of 
Matliias  and  Fiances  S.  (Hibbard)  Britton.  Her 
father  was  a  prominent  militia  officer  in  New 
York.  Our  subject  and  his  wife  have  a  daughter, 
Mildred  B.  The  parents  are  both  prominent  niern- 
bers  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  and  take  an  active 
part  in  its  work.     Mr.  Hubbard  is  now  teaching  a 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


363 


class  of  young  ladies  in  the  Sunday-school,  while 

liis  wife  is  in  charge  of  the  infant  class.  Socially, 
he  is  a  member  of  the  Masonic  lodge  of  Cayuga, 
N.  Y.,  of  which  he  has  been  Senior  Deacon;  lie  be- 
longs to  Oceana  Chapter  No.  56,  R.  A.  M.,  of 
Pentwater,  jfich;  and  Central  City  Commandery 
No.  25  of  Syracuse,  N.  Y.  He  takes  a  very  active 
part  in  politics,  and  alwajs  supports  the  men  and 
measures  of  the  Republican  party. 

^' OHN  D.  SMITH,  a  prosperous  general  agri- 
I  culturist  and  successful  stock-raiser  resid- 
j  ing  upon  one  of  the  best  farms  in  Ran- 
li^//  dolph  County,  in  townsiiip  7,  range  6,  has 
for  two  decades  been  identified  with  the  advance- 
ment of  his  present  home  interests,  and,  widely 
known,  is  highly  esteemed  for  his  business  ability 
and  sterling  integritj'  of  character. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  David  Smith,  was 
born  in  Pennsjivania,  his  father  bearing  the  same 
name.  He  came  with  his  father  to  Monroe  County, 
this  state,  in  an  early  da}-  and  assisted  in  clearing 
a  home  out  of  the  wilderness.  They  resided  here 
some  time  before  the  latter  passed  from  this 
life.  He  was  a  teacher  by  profession,  a  hatter  by 
trade  and  a  very  successful  man  in  his  business 
affairs.  David,  Jr.,  gained  his  primary  education 
in  his  native  state,  and  after  coming  to  Illinois 
was  engaged  for  some  time  as  a  stage-coach  driver. 
He  was  married  to  Miss  Fannie  Lylie,  and  later,  in 
1844,  he,  with  his  family,  removed  to  Missouri. 
But  remaining  in  that  state  only  two  years,  he 
again  came  to  Illinois  and  located  in  Chester,  fol- 
lowing the  trade  of  a  butcher,  besides  carrying  on 
general  farming  and  stock-raising  to  some  extent. 
He  died  about  1878,  while  liis  good  wife  is  still 
living  and  makes  her  home  in  Chester,  at  the  ad- 
vanced age  of  seventy-four  years. 

Born  Januarj'  18,  1842,  in  Monroe  County,  111., 
our  subject  is  the  eldest  in  a  family  of  five  chil- 
dren born  to  his  worthy-  parents.  He  was  brought 
to  Randolph  County  when  but  two  years  old, 
and  here  received  his  limited  education.  He  as- 
sisted his  father  in  the  butcher's  business  when  a 
lad  of  ten  3ears,  and  on  attaining  his  majority  was 


given  a  half- interest.  This  partnership  continued 
until  the  death  of  the  father,  when  our  subject 
conducted  the  business  alone  until  1889.  Some 
years  before  this,  however,  Mr.  Smith  bought  a 
fine  farm  and  on  the  above  date  located  thereon. 
He  has  since  been  engaged  in  its  cultivation,  and 
here  he  is  carrying  on  mixed  farming,  paying  con- 
siderable attention  to  the  raising  of  fine  stock. 
He  prepares  his  own  feed  by  steaming  it,  prefer- 
ring this  to  the  raw. '  The  Union  Creamery  is  sit- 
uated on  Mr.  Smitii's  farm,  in  which  he  is  one  of 
the  principal  stockholders.  It  has  been  running 
only  about  two  3-ears,  but  is  one  of  the  leading 
establishments  of  its  kind  in  the  county,  handling 
about  thirty-five  hundred  pounds  of  milk  per  day. 
Mr.  Smith  was  married  in  October,  1863,  to 
Margaret  E.  Aldridge,  a  daughter  of  Amasa  and 
Roxana  (Gray)  Aldridge,  natives  of  Massachusetts. 
Their  union  has  been  blessed  by  the  birtii  of  eight 
children,  one  of  whom  died  in  infancy.  The  liv- 
ing are:  Channing,  who  married  Dais\-  Douglas 
and  resides  on  a  farm  near  his  father;  Chester, 
who  is  engaged  in  the  Clarion  office  at  Chester, 
and  married  Annie  Paulis;  Eunice,  Bertha,  Harry, 
Gertie  and  Edna.  The  last-named  are  yet  under 
the  parental  roof.  Mrs.  Smith  is  a  member  of  the 
Methodist  Church,  while  Mr.  Smith  is  not  identi- 
fied with  any  denomination.  Socially,  our  subject 
is  a  member  of  Lodge  No.  276,  A.  F.  &  A.  M.,  at 
Chester,  and  is  a  stanch  Democrat  in  politics. 


«^ 


=^>J  •••  ^^^jte  •?•  .-^»—  ii'<D  |» 


^lENJAMIN  F.  CLORE.  There  is  no  inher- 
itance so  rich  as  the  records  of  the  worthj' 
lives  of  those  who  have  departed  from  this 
world  and  gone  to  receive  the  reward  which 
awaits  them  in  Heaven.  That  death  loves  a  shin- 
ing mark  was  illustrated  when  it  became  known 
that  Benjamin  F.  Clore,  one  of  Randolph  Count\''s 
best  known  citizens,  had  departed  this  life.  He 
was  born  in  Boone  County, K^-.,  November  2,  1832, 
and  was  a  child  of  two  years  at  the  time  his  father, 
Abram  Clore,  removed  to  this  county. 

Our  subject  attended  the  common  schools  of  his 
neighborhood,  and  amid  adverse  surroundings 
gained  the  rudiments  of  his  education.     His  par- 


364 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


ents  when  locating  here  made  their  home  at  the 
mouth  of  St.  Mary's  River,  near  Chester,  wliere 
our  subject  spent  his  entire  life  on  a  farm,  and 
where  his  death  occurred  December  19,  1891.  His 
marriage  With  Miss  Liieinda  Rupert  occurred  De- 
cember 1,  1854,  and  Mrs.  Clore  at  her  death,  June 
7,  1874,  left  a  famil3-  of  four  sons  and  tiiree 
daughters,  of  whom  we  make  the  following  men- 
tion: Franklin  F.  married  Ella  Condor;  Albert  C. 
married  Anna  Clendenine;  Gilford  became  the 
husband  of  Amanda  Dillinger;  Alice  became  the 
wife  of  Hermann  Grab;  Harriet  L.  married  Cliarles 
Keith,  and  after  his  death  became  the  wife  of  Mr. 
Tiiebold;  Lucretia  married  Vincent  Tucker,  and 
Zachariah  O.  is  still  single. 

The  lady  whom  our  subject  chose  as  his  second 
companion  w.as  Mrs.  Mel  vina  F.  Tingle,  their  union 
taking  place  May  7,  1876.  Mrs.  Clore  died  Octo- 
ber 1  of  the  next  year,  and  November  2, 1880,  our 
subject  was  married  to  Mrs.  Salinda  (Moore)  Petit, 
daughter  or  John  and  Elizabeth  (Mausker)  Moore. 
Mrs.  Salinda  Clore  was  born  and  reared  in  this 
county,  and  by  her  union  with  our  subject  became 
the  mother  of  four  children,  of  whom  the  eldest  is 
Nora  S.  Ozias  died  when  six  years  of  age,  and 
Kennetli  and  Franklin  May  are  residing  with  their 
mother,  who  still  lives  on  the  home  farm. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Clore  were  active  members  of  the 
Methodist  Church,  and  in  his  political  relations 
our  subject  was  a  stanch  Democrat.  He  was  well 
known  to  the  citizens  of  this  section,  and  his  cor- 
rect mode  of  living  gained  for  him  a  popularity 
which  was  merited  in  every  respect. 


G: 


0= 


-^"^ 


^ 


PAUL  I  ROSE.  Township  7,  range  6,  Ran- 
dolph Count}',  is  the  home  of  many  intelli- 
gent, industrious  and  prosperous  farmers, 
jl\  who  from  a  small  beginning  have  won  a 
competence,  securing  a  considerable  amount  of  land 
and  surrounding  themselves  with  man}'  comforts 
and  conveniences.  Among  this  number  may  be 
mentioned  Paul  Irose,  who  is  now  occup^Mng  a 
good  farm  on  section  17. 

Our  subject  is  a  native  of  Poland,  where  he  was 


born  in  June,  1842,  and  where  also  the  birth  of 
his  father,  Daniel  Irose,  occurred.  The  latter  was 
married  in  his  native  land,  and  to  them  were  born 
eight  children,  who  accompanied  them  on  their  re- 
moval to  America  in  1854.  The  wife  and  mother 
dying  while  en  route  to  this  country,  the  father 
came  to  Illinois  and  located  with  his  children  on 
a  farm  five  miles  east  of  Chester,  and  at  once  be- 
gan farming,  which  was  his  vocation  tiiroughout 
life.  At  his  death,  which  occurred  in  1862,  he 
left  a  good  property. 

After  coming  to  America,  the  father  of  our  sub- 
ject was  married  to  Miss  Mary  Schlocher,  and  his 
widow  still  survives,  making  her  home  in  Chester. 
Paul,  of  this  sketch,  attended  school  in  Randolph 
Count}',  and  received  such  an  education  as  was 
given  to  the  boys  and  girls  of  that  day.  When  a 
lad  of  seventeen,  he  learned  the  trade  of  a  black- 
smith with  Henry  Koehns,  of  Chester,  for  whom 
he  worked  for  three  years.  Then  going  to  Ruck- 
wood,  J'oung  Irose  worked  at  his  trade  with  Rob- 
ert Emery  for  a  short  time,  then  made  his  way 
into  Jackson  County,  this  state.  After  two  months 
spent  there,  he  returned  to  this  county,  and  at 
Archie  Island  worked  for  four  years  as  a  black- 
smith. At  the  expiration  of  that  time  he  came  to 
Chester  and  opened  up  a  shop  for  himself,  continu- 
ing to  do  a  good  business  for  twenty -six  years. 
Being  afflicted  with  rheumatism,  he  closed  out  his 
business  and  purchased  a  farm  two  miles  east  of 
Chester,  where  he  is  still  living,  engaged  in  rais- 
ing grain  and  fine  grades  of  stock. 

October  22,  1868,  Paul  Irose  was  married  to 
Miss  Catherine  Murkufsky,  who,  like  himself,  was 
born  in  Poland,  and  who  was  brought  to  America  by 
her  parents  when  quite  young.  Her  father,  Henry 
Murkufsk}',  was  a  tailor,  and  met  his  death  in  the 
coal  mines  of  Penns^'lvania.  To  our  subject  and 
his  wife  have  been  born  eleven  children,  two  of 
whom  died  in  infancy.  Those  who  are  living  are, 
Maggie,  Lizzie,  Paul,  Katie,  Joseph,  Jessie,  Robert, 
Alice  and  Cora.  They  have  all  been  given  good 
educations,  and  the  three  eldest  are  prominent 
teachers  in  this  county. 

Although  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Irose  have  been  reared 
in  the  Catholic  faith,  they  are  not  closely  identi- 
fied with  the  church  now.     Mr.  Irose  was  in  early 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


365 


life  a  Democrat,  but  of  late  jears  has  voted  with 
tlie  Republican  pa^t3^  He  takes  a  great  interest  in 
the  educational  affairs  of  his  neighborhood,  and 
has  rendered  efficient  service  as  School  Director. 


D<'  ^'$1 


i^^  AVID  MlCONACHIE,  who  is  successfully 
engaged  in  farming  in  Randolph  County, 
claims  Ireland  as  the  land  of  his  birth, 
which  occurred  in  County  Antrim  in 
1838.  His  giandparents, David  and  Jennie  (Chest- 
nut) McConachie,  were  also  natives  of  County 
Antrim,  and  there  spent  their  entire  lives.  The 
family,  however,  is  of  Scotch  descent,  but  on  ac- 
count of  religious  persecution,  its  members  re- 
moved to  Ireland.  Tiie  grandfather,  who  was  a 
farmer,  was  a  member  of  the  Scotch  Seceder  Church. 
He  died  at  the  age  of  ninetj-four.  His  wife  was 
a  daughter  of  Samuel  and  Anna  (Leitreni)  Chest- 
nut, the  former  of  whom  was  an  officer  in  the  Brit- 
ish army.  The  latter  was  a  daugliter  of  the  Earl 
of  Leitrem. 

Robert  McConachie,  father  of  our  subject,  was 
born  in  Countv  Antrim  in  1810,  and  in  1830  mar- 
ried Jane,  daughter  or  John  and  Martha  (Steele) 
McConacliie.  They  became  the  parents  of  five 
children:  John,  Jane  and  Robert,  deceased,  and 
David  and  William,  of  this  county.  In  1858  the 
father  came  with  his  family  to  America,  and  lived 
in  the  Sparta  Precinct  until  his  death,  which  oc- 
curred in  1879.  He  was  a  farmer  and  stone-mason. 
In  politics  he  was  a  Republican.  He  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Covenanter  Church,  and  in  his  native 
land  served  as  Deacon. 

We  now  take  up  the  personal  history  of  our 
subject,  who  was  a  young  man  of  twenty-one 
years  when  he  came  to  the  United  States.  He  set- 
tled in  xsew  York  and  began  working  upon  a  farm. 
The  following  spring  he  joined  his  parents  in  this 
county  and  continued  with  them  until  1873, 
when  he  was  married.  In  1861  he  had  purchased 
eighty  acres  of  land,  which  he  still  owns.  In  1863 
he  enlisted  in  the  Union  army,  becoming  a  mem- 
ber of  Com |)any  K, Forty-second  Illinois  Infantry, 
in  which  he  served  one  hundred  days.  He  then 
re-enlisted  as  a  member  of  Company  K,  Fifth  Illi- 


nois Cavalry,  and  continued  in  the  service  until 
the  close  of  the  war,  when  he  was  honorably  dis- 
charged. He  took  part  in  the  Meridian  campaign 
and  also  in  a  number  of   important   engagements. 

In  August,  186.1,  Mr.  JMcConachie  returned 
home,  and  in  the  year  1873  married  Miss  Lu- 
cinda  Steele,  a  native  of  Randolph  County  and  a 
daughter  of  Bilen  and  Jvancj'  (Morrison)  Steele, 
the  fc>rmer  a  native  of  Ireland,  and  the  latter  of 
Illinois.  To  our  subject  and  his  wife  have  been 
born  four  children,  Robert  Henrj',Emma  B.,  David 
Rilen  and  Nancy  Jane.  The  family  is  one  of 
prominence  in  the  community,  and  its  members 
hold  an  enviable  position  in  social  circles. 

The  life  of  our  subject  has  been  a  successful  one, 
and  his  well  directed  afforts  have  received  their 
reward  in  the  comfortable  competence  which  he 
possesses.  He  owns  two  hundred  and  forty  acres  of 
valuable  land  and  has  ll,000  in  the  buiiding  and 
loan  association.  In  politics  he  is  a  supporter  of 
the  Republican  party,  and  he  has  been  honored 
with  some  local  offices  of  public  trust.  He  served 
for  twelve  ^-ears  as  School  Director,  was  Township 
Trustee  four  terms,  and  since  1865  has  been 
School  Trustee.  He  has  filled  these  positions  with 
credit  to  himself  and  satisfaction  to  his  constitu- 
ents, for  he  is  ever  true  and  faithful  to  confidence 
and  trust  reposed  in  him.  He  belongs  to  the  Grand 
Army  of  the  Republic,  of  which  he  is  Senior  Vice- 
Commander,  and  both  he  and  his  wife  hold  mem- 
bership with  the  United  Presb^'terian  Church. 


IjU.  ENRY  BUETTNER,  wlio  carries  on  general 
11/    jli   farming  on  section   36,  township  3,  range 

ili      JJl  1  I  o 

!iW^  10  west,  is  numbered  among  the  early  set- 
'f^j  tiers  of  Monroe  Countj-,  and  as  such  well 
deserves  representation  in  its  history.  He  was 
born  in  Germany  on  the  29th  of  July,  1837,  and 
is  a  son  of  Henry  and  Julia  Buettner,  who  were 
also  natives  of  the  same  countrj-.  The  father  was 
a  miller  bj-  trade  and  followed  that  occupation  in 
his  native  land.  In  1848  he  brought  his  family 
to  the  New  World  and  located  in  St.  Louis,  where 
he  worked  at  the  tailor's  trade.  He  afterward 
came   to  Monroe  Countj',  where   he  purchased  an 


366 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


eighty-acre  farm,  wliicli  he  cultivated  until  selling 
out  preparatory  to  his  removal  to  Kansas.  In  that 
state  be  purchased  a  large  farm  and  continued  its 
cultivation  until  his  death,  which  occurred  in 
Clark  County,  Kan.,  at  the  age  of  sixty-nine  years. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  Lutheran  Church,  and  in 
politics  was  a  supporter  of  the  Republican  party. 
His  wife  died  in  St.  Louis  at  the  age  of  thirty-five. 
This  worthy  couple  had  a  family  of  seven  chil- 
dren,six  of  whomarej'et  living.namel}-:  Caroline, 
Adeline,  Henry,  Herman,  Julia  and  Henrietta. 

Henry  Buettner  was  a  lad  of  eleven  years  when 
with  his  family  he  crossed  tlie  briny  deep  to  the 
New  World.  He  grew  to  maniiood  in  Monroe 
County,  and  its  public  schools  afforded  him  his 
educational  privileges.  Le  remained  with  his  fa- 
ther until  twent3'-four  years  of  age,  when  he 
started  out  to  make  his  own  way  in  the  world,  and 
as  a  companion  and  iielpmate  on  life's  journey  he 
chose  Miss  Elizabeth  Valentine,  a  native  of  Ger- 
many, who  with  her  parents  came  to  America 
when  a  maiden  of  ten  jears.  By  the  marriage  of 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Buettner  were  born  four  children, 
but  three  of  the  number  are  now  deceased.  The 
only  one  living  is  .John,  who  is  married  and  re- 
sides in  Monroe  County.  The  mother  died  at 
the  age  of  thirty-two  years,  in  the  faith  of  the  Lu- 
theran Church,  of  which  she  was  a  consistent  mem- 
ber. For  his  second  wife  Mr.  Buettner  married 
Mena  Hesterberg,  a  native  of  Germany.  She  w.is 
brought  by  her  parents  to  the  United  States  dur- 
ing her  infancy  and  was  reared  and  educated  in 
this  county.  By  this  union  were  born  six  children, 
but  four  of  the  number  are  now  deceased.  Sophia 
and  Julia  are  still  with  their  parents. 

Upon  his  first  marriage  Mr.  Buettner  purchased 
forty  acres  of  land  and  upon  that  farm  he  has 
since  resided,  although  lie  has  extended  its  boun- 
daries from  time  to  time  until  it  comprises  one 
hundred  and  twelve  acres  of  good  land,  which 
yields  to  the  owner  a  golden  tribute  in  return  for 
the  care  and  cultivation  he  bestows  upon  it.  In 
earlier  years  he  followed  threshing  in  connection 
with  his  farm  work,  and  as  the  result  of  his  indus- 
try and  perseverance  he  has  become  well-to-do. 
He  exercises  the  right  of  franchise  in  support  of 
the  Republican  party,  and  has  lield  several  school 


offices,  such  as  Director  and  Trustee.  Both  he 
and  his  wife  are  members  of  the  Lutheran  Church, 
and  in  social  circles  thev  hold  an  enviable  position. 
Mr.  Buettner  is  a  highly  respected  citizen,  who 
during  his  long  residence  in  this  community',  by  an 
honorable,  upright  life,  has  gained  the  confidence 
and  good  will  of  all  with  whom  he  lias  been 
brought  in  contact. 


^^ALENTINE  KERN,  who  owns  and  operates 
a  good  farm  of  two  hundred  and  forty 
acres  on  section  31,  township  3,  range  8 
west,  is  numbered  among  the  leading  agriculturists 
of  Monroe  County.  His  place  is  improved  with 
substantial  buildings  and  all  the  accessories  of  a 
model  farm.  It  is  neat  and  attractive  in  appear- 
ance, and  the  well  tilled  fields  indicate  to  the 
passer-by  the  careful  supervision  of  the  owner. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  Francis  Kern,  was 
born  in  the  province  of  Deburg,  Germany,  in 
1809,  and  tliere  wedded  Mary  Schroet.  It  was  in 
1840  that  he  crossed  the  briny  deep  to  the  New 
World.  He  spent  the  winter  in  St.  Louis,  and  the 
following  spring  came  to  Prairie  du  Long,  Monroe 
County,  and  located  a  mile  and  a-half  south  of 
Freedom.  After  a  short  time  he  settled  on  section 
31,  where  he  entered  eighty-four  acres  of  Govern- 
ment land,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  forest  hewed 
out  a  farm.  He  built  a  good  home  and  placed  the 
land  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation.  He  con- 
tinued the  operation  of  his  farm  until  his  death, 
which  occurred  in  1881.  In  the  family  were  only 
two  children,  who  are  now  living:  Valentine,  and 
John,  who  is  engaged  in  agricultural  pursuits  in 
Missouri.  The  father  was  one  of  the  first  German 
settlers  of  this  conimunit}',  and  was  an  honored 
and  highly  respected  citizen.  He  held  member- 
ship with  the  Catholic  Church. 

On  the  26th  of  August,  1841,  on  the  old  home 
farm,  occurred  the  birth  oi's'alentine  Kern.  He 
was  reared  in  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads,  at- 
tending the  district  schools  through  the  winter 
season,  and  aiding  in  the  labors  of  the  farm  dur- 
ing the  summer  months.  Thus  he  grew  to  man- 
hood, and   the  home  of  his  boyhood   is  still  his 


^  '"^  -4 


RE'>iDFilCE&   Ml  LL    OT    J,    M.  V^i  LL  I  AM5  ,  VFRGEN  N  E5  .    ILL. 


L-a 


•'^  i  j^ 


i 


l^h 


^^^c 


1  ^ 


J 


_.U 


RESIDENCE  OF    VALENTIN  E    K  E  RN  ,   5EC.  31.,  T.  3.  R  8.  MON  ROE    CO.,   ILL. 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


369 


place  of  residence.  In  the  year  1864,  Mr.  Kern 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Catherina  Pur- 
tle.  Tlie  lady  was  born  August  27,  1843,  and  is  a 
daughter  of  Patrick  Purtle,  one  of  the  earliest 
settlers  of  Monroe  County. 

By  the  union  of  this  worthy  couple  has  been  born 
a  family  of  six  children,  as  follows:  Valentine, 
who  was  born  April  20,  1865;  Mary  M.,  March  4, 
1868;  Henry,  March  12,  1870;  John,  September  3, 
1873;  Elizabeth,  April  14,  1877;  .and  Christian  J., 
March  1,  1884.  The  eldest  son  married  Maggie 
Steppig,  who  was  born  May  16,  1869,  and  they 
live  on  section  31,  township  3,  range  8.  Mary  is  the 
wife  of  George  Stadter,  a  resident  of  Monroe  Coun- 
ty. The  other  children  are  still  under  the  parental 
roof.  The  family  circle  yet  remains  unbroken  by 
the  hand  of  Death.  The  household  is  the  abode 
of  hospitality  and  good  cheer,  and  its  members 
rank  liigh  in  the  social  circles  in  which  they  move. 

Mr.  Kern  devotes  his  entire  time  and  attention 
U)  the  improvement  and  cultivation  of  his  farm, 
which  is  one  of  the  best  in  the  community,  and  his 
labois  are  rewarded  by  a  good  income.  He  has 
led  a  busy  and  useful  life,  yet  never  neglects  his 
public  duties.  He  takes  a  warm  interest  in  every- 
thing pertaining  to  the  welfare  of  the  community, 
and  is  a  valued  citizen.  In  politics,  he  is  a  Demo- 
crat. He  and  his  family  are  members  of  the  Cath- 
olic Church  of  Red  Bud. 


lllOHN  M.  WILLIAMS,  who  is  engaged  in 
milling  in  Vergennes,  occupies  a  prominent 
^^\  j  position  in  business  circles,  and  is  recognized 
^^fJ  as  one  of  the  leading  citizens  of  the  place. 
He  was  born  August  4,  1839,  in  Floyd  County, 
Ind.,  and  is  a  son  of  Samuel  and  Lavina  (I^ewis) 
Williams.  His  father  was  born  in  Clark  County, 
Ind.,  November  29,  1813,  and  followed  coopering 
and  agricultural  pursuits,  making  his  home  upon 
a  farm.  He  married  Miss  Lewis  in  Floyd  County, 
and  unto  them  were  born  the  following  children: 
Sylvania,  wife  of  Lorenzo  D.  Emery;  David, 
James,  Winfield  S.,  George  W.;  Thomas  J.,  now 
deceased;  Mary  Ann,  wife  of  Conrad  Baker;  and 
Samuel.     The  father  is  a  Democrat  in  his  political 


views  and  has  taken  a  prominent  part  in  local 
politics,  being  honored  with  a  number  of  official 
positions.  He  now  owns  two  large  farms  and  is 
well-to-do.  His  wife  died  at  the  age  of  thirty 
years. 

No  event  of  special  importance  occurred  during 
the  boyhood  and  youth  of  our  subject,  which 
were  quietly  passed  upon  the  home  farm.  At  the 
age  of  twenty-one,  in  1861,  he  came  to  Jackson 
County,  but  in  September  of  that  year  he  entered 
the  service  of  his  country  as  a  member  of  the  boys 
in  blue  of  Company  C,  Forty-ninth  Indiana  In- 
fantry, under  Col.  James  Keigwin.  He  served  for 
three  years  and  ten  months,  and  participated  in 
the  battles  of  Cumberland  Gap,  Big  Creek  Gap, 
Vicksburg,  Champion  Hills,  Port  Gibson,  Jackson, 
Miss.,  and  the  Red  River  expedition.  In  1864  he 
re-enlisted  and  was  elected  Captain  of  his  old 
company,  in  which  position  he  served  until  hon- 
orably discharged  at  the  close  of  the  war,  .Septem- 
ber 1.5,  1865.  He  was  a  faithful  officer,  and  was 
ever  found  at  his  post  of  duty,  valiantly  defend- 
ing the  Old  Flag  and  the  cause  it  represented. 

When  the  war  was  over,  Mr.  Williams  re- 
turned to  Floyd  County,  Ind.,  and  after  two 
years  removed  to  Daviess  County,  where  he  en- 
gaged in  farming.  In  the  county  of  his  nativit3% 
in  1867,  he  married  Miss  Martha,  daughter  of 
Jacob  Miller.  They  became  the  parents  of  one 
child,  Ollie,  who  was  born  April  26,  1868,  and  who 
mairied  E.  C.  Lovejoy.  They  reside  in  Vergennes, 
and  have  two  children,  Ida  and  Carl.  Mrs.  Will- 
iams died  in  1869,  and  the  following  year  our 
subject  wedded  Maiy  E.  Palmer.  Four  children 
grace  this  union:  William,  born  July  31,  1873; 
Carl,  May  31,  1875;  Cora,  June  13, 1877;  and  Ger- 
tie, March  26,  1879. 

For  twelve  years  Mr.  Williams  resided  in  Knox 
County,  111.,  and  then  came  to  Jackson  County  in 
1881.  Settling  in  De  Soto,  he  engaged  in  mer- 
chandising until  1884,  when  he  came  to  Vergennes, 
and  continued  in  the  same  line  of  business  until 
1886.  In  that  year  he  embarked  in  milling  in 
connection  with  Joshua  Palmer,  his  brotiier-in-law, 
and  together  they  own  and  operate  the  douring 
and  saw  mill  of  this  place.  The3'  do  a  large  busi- 
ness, which  is  constantly  increasing,  and  well  de- 


370 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOClRAPmCAL  RECORD. 


serve  the  liberal  patronage  wbieh  is  accorded  them. 
They  also  engage  in  grain  dealing. 

Since  1865,  Mr.  Williams  lias  been  connected 
witli  tiie  Odd  Fellows'  societj-,  and  has  Iield  the 
office  of  Secretary  of  the  lodge  and  other  official 
positions.  lie  votes  vvitli  the  Republican  parly, 
but  lias  never  souglit  or  desired  political  prefer- 
ment for  himself,  although  since  1885  he  lias  held 
the  office  of  Township  Clerk.  His  wife  is  a  member 
of  the  Methodist  Church,  and  both  are  prominent 
people  of  this  community.  They  occupy  an  en- 
viable position  in  social  circles  and  liave  the  warm 
regard  of  many  friends. 


r$;i&$:!g-sig-§sg-®si&$;;g-^g^!&^^sis_ 


?)HOMAS  LICKISS.  All  honor  is  due  to  tlie 
noble  pioneers  of  Illinois,  who  braved  the 
hardships  of  pioneer  life,  endured  man}- 
privations,  and  sacrificed  much  in  order  to  estab- 
lish homes  for  tliemselves  and  their  families.  It  is 
due  to  their  patient  and  persistent  labors  that  the 
growth  and  prosperit}'  of  the  state  were  laid  upon 
enduring  foundations.  Some  of  these  men  have 
passed  from  the  scenes  of  their  earllil}'  labors  and 
live  only  in  the  affectionate  remembrance  of  those 
who  recognize  their  indebtedness  to  them. 

'l"he  events  in  the  life  of  Thomas  Lickiss,  em- 
braced in  the  period  extending  from  his  birth  in 
England,  in  July,  1811,  to  his  death  in  Randolph 
County,  March  28,  1878,  may  be  brieQy  recorded 
as  follows:  He  was  reared  to  manhood  in  his  na- 
tive place,  and  was  a  j'oung  man  of  twenty-three 
years  when  in  1834  he  came  to  America,  remain- 
ing in  this  country  about  eleven  years.  Mean- 
time, he  visited  Mexico,  Canada  and  various  parts 
of  the  United  States.  He  then  returned  to  Eng- 
land, where  he  married  and  made  his  home  for 
four  years.  However,  he  was  not  content  to  re- 
main permanently  in  England,  and  accordingly 
we  find  him  in  1849  again  in  the  United  States. 
The  same  year  witnessed  his  arrival  in  SteeleviUe, 
when;  he  afterward  resided. 

Having  learned  the  trade  of  a  blacksmith  in 
England,  Mr.  Lickiss  opened  a  shop  at  SteeleviUe, 
and  followed  that  occupation  until  compelled  by 
disability  to  give  it  up.     He  then  embarked  in  the 


mercantile  business,  and  conducted  a  flourishing 
and  profitable  trade  until  the  time  of  his  death. 
In  1845,  he  married  Miss  Elizabeth  Denniss,  a  na- 
tive of  England,  whose  parents  lived  and  died  in 
that  country.  In  1879,  Jlrs.  Lickiss  married  John, 
the  eldest  brother  of  her  late  husband,  and  he  con- 
tinued the  mercantile  business  until  his  death, 
which  occurred  in  November,  1879.  Since  that 
time,  Mrs.  Lickiss  has  continued  the  business,  and 
notwithstanding  the  fact  that  she  is  neaiing  her 
seventy-fourth  birthday,  she  is  quite  active,  and 
gives  her  personal  supervision  to  the  management 
of  the  store.  She  has  never  had  any  children  of 
her  own,  but  has  reared  three,  Mar}^  A.  Ford,  an 
orphan,  who  married  John  Sanders,  and  now  re- 
sides in  California;  Maud  May  Williamson,  who 
is  still  with  her,  and  Fred  Williamson,  whom  she 
cared  for  from  the  time  of  his  mother's  death 
until  his  father's  second  marriage. 

Although  Thomas  Lickiss  was  a  quiet,  unassum- 
ing man,  the  people  among  whom  he  dwelt  held 
him  in  warm  regard,  as  they  always  found  in  him 
a  true  friend,  ever  considerate  and  pleasant  in  his 
manner,  and  they  had  a  high  opinion  of  his  per- 
sonal character,  knowing  him  to  be  a  man  of 
IM'inciple  and  sound  integrity.  In  his  religious 
preference  he.  with  liis  wife,  was  a  Presbyterian, 
which  has  been  the  faith  of  tliu  family  for  many 
generations. 


•5— ^=^>^^-<^ 


-5— 


>jp^|  LI  BECKLEY.  There  is  sometliing  about 
l^  the  life  of  a  prosperous  and  popular  man 
I*' — ^  very  pleasant  to  contemplate — something 
that  gives  encouragement  to  those  seeking  to  make 
for  themselves  desirable  positions  in  life.  Such  an 
example  is  shown  in  the  career  of  Eli  Becklc}',  who 
is  generally  conceded  to  deserve  unlimited  praise 
for  the  success  he  has  attained  and  for  the  strict 
integrity'  of  his  business  transactions.  He  is  one 
of  the  largest  land-owners  in  Randolph  County, 
being  the  possessor  of  seven  hundred  and  forty- 
five  broad  acres  located  in  township  4,  range  5, 
which  he  operated  until  1893,  when  he  moved  into 
the  village  of  Coulterville. 

A  native  of  Staflfordshire,  England,  our  subject 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


371 


was  born  October  25,  1827,  to  Daniel  and  Phoebe 
(Scliriven)  Beckley,  also  nativesof  England,  where 
they  lived  and  died,  the  father  aged  eighty-four 
years,  and  tlie  mother  when  two  years  younger. 
They  reared  a  family'  of  twelve  children,  nine  of 
whom  are  living,  but  only  two  make  their  home 
in  the  United  Stales,  our  subject  and  his  brother 
Joshua,  wlio  is  also  a  resident  of  this  county. 

Eli,  of  this  sketch,  was  educated  and  grew  to 
manhood  in  England,  and  wiicn  coming  to  Amer- 
ica, in  1854,  settled  in  Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  where  he 
embarked  in  business  as  a  brewer.  Remaining 
there  for  nearly  four  years,  he  came  to  this  state 
in  1857,  and  located  within  half  a  mile  of  his  pres- 
ent home,  which  is  on  section  4,  township  4,  range 
5.  He  leased  property  for  three  years  from  Alex- 
ander Dicke}',  but  after  living  upon  it  two  years, 
gave  up  the  lease  and  moved  to  a  finely  improved 
farm  of  one  hundred  and  forty-five  acres,  for  which 
he  paid  ^2,700.  It  now  includes  seven  hundred  and 
forty-flve  acres,  which,  under  his  careful  manage- 
ment, has  been  placed  under  excellent  cultivation, 
and  now  compares  favorably  with  any  other  estate 
in  the  county  in  point  of  tillage  and  imijrove- 
nient. 

Mr.  Beckley  has  crossed  the  Atlantic  twentj' 
times  in  behalf  of  his  stock-raising  interests,  in 
which  branch  of  farming  he  began  in  1860.  He 
now  imports  Clydesdale  and  Englishshire  horses, 
of  which  he  has  the  exclusive  trade  in  this  local- 
ity. He  is  a  stockholder  in  the  flouring  mill  at 
Coulterville,  owns  and  operates  the  Coulterville 
Creamery,  and  has  an  interest  in  another  establish- 
ment of  that  kind  near  Darmstadt,  St.  Clair  Coun- 
ty', this  state.  He  likewise  publishes  the  only  pa- 
per in  Coulterville,  and  is  looked  upon  as  one  of 
the  wealthy  and  influential  citizens  of  Randolph 
County. 

In  1854,  Mr.  Beckley  and  Miss  Mary  Kendrick, 
of  Worcestershire,  England,  were  united  in  mar- 
riage. The  lady  became  the  mother  of  six  chil- 
dren, and  departed  this  life  in  1889.  Her  children 
were,  William  Henry,  Mary,  Abraham  L.,  Caroline, 
Phoebe  Ann  and  Lillie  Ann.  Our  subject  was 
again  married  in  November,  1892,  the  lady  of  his 
choice  being  Sarah  Barber.  She  likewise  was  a  na- 
tive of  the  same  county  in  P>ngland,and  is  a  mem- 


ber of  the  Presbyterian  Church.  Mr.  Beckley  does 
all  that  he  can  to  advance  the  educational  inter- 
'ests  of  his  locality.  He  is  a  stanch  Republican  in 
polities,  and  possesses  those  pleasant  social  quali- 
ties which  have  made  for  him  a  host  of  warm 
friends,  who  delight  in  his  success. 


ATIIER  GERHARD  TOENNIES,  Assistant 
P.istor  of  St.  Andrew's  Catholic  Church  of 
Murphysboro,  was  born  in  Germantown, 
Clinton  County,  HI.,  November  12,  1864.  His 
grandfather,  Gerhard  Toennies,  w.is  born  in  Ger- 
many, and  was  a  weaver  by  trade.  In  1849,  he 
came  with  his  wife  and  three  sons  to  America. 
One  son  had  crossed  the  previous  3'ear,  locating  in 
Germantown.  The  grandparents  both  died  of 
cholera  on  the  trip  up  the  Mississippi  River.  He 
was  buried  on  the  banks  of  the  stream,  and  she 
was  laid  to  rest  in  St.  Louis. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  Herman  Toennies, 
was  born  in  Germany,  and  accompanied  his  par- 
ents to  the  New  World.  By  hard  labor,  he  at 
length  acquired  enough  capital  to  purchase  land, 
and  cleared  and  improved  a  farm  of  one  hundred 
and  sixty  acres.  He  is  now  living  a  retired  life 
in  Clinton  County,  at  the  age  of  sixty-three 
years.  In  1891,  he  paid  a  visit  to  his  old  home  in 
the  Fatherland.  His  wife,  who  bore  the  maiden 
name  of  Ann  M.  Koebbe.  was  born  in  German^', 
and  in  early  life  came  with  her  parents  to  the 
United  States.  She  died  September  9,  1874,  leav- 
ing a  family  of  three  sons  and  two  daughters. 

Father  Toennies,  whose  name  heads  this  sketch, 
was  reaied  upon  the  home  farm,  and  worked  early 
and  late,  aiding  in  the  development  of  the  land. 
He  then  studied  for  a  year  and  a-half  with  Father 
William  Cluse,  now  Vicar-General  of  the  diocese, 
later  located  in  Germantown,  and  in  1883  en- 
tered Teutopolis  College,  graduating  from  the 
classical  course.  In  1887,  he  became  a  student  in 
St.  Francis'  Seminary  in  Milwaukee,  pursuing  a 
course  in  philosophy  and  theology,  and  was  gradu- 
ated in  1891.  He  was  ordained  a  priest  at  Ger- 
mantown in  St.  Boniface  Church,  June  24,  1891, 
by  Bishop  Jansen,  of  the  Belleville  diocese,  and 


'il2 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


was  appointed  Assistant  Pastor  at  Murphysboro. 
On  tlie  13th  of  July  he  came  to  this  place,  where 
he  has  since  eainestly  labored.  He  is  also  Assist-' 
ant  Pastor  of  St.  Elizabeth's  Church,  St.  Ann's 
Church  at  Radville,  St.  Gregory's  Church  at  Grand 
Tower,  and  the  church  at  Cartersville.  In  1894  a 
house  of  worship  will  be  erected  at  the  last  named 
place. 

Father  Toeunies  has  established  a  Latin  class  in 
the  schools  at  this  place.  He  is  a  highly'  educated 
man,  and  is  indefatigable  in  his  efforts  to  advance 
the  interests  of  his  church. 


AVID  SCIIEIN,  the  popular  and  ellicient 
]\j  Postmaster  of  Berksville,  and  one  of  its 
leading  merchants,  is  a  native  of  Germany, 
his  birth  having  occurred  there  February 
6,  1850.  His  parents,  Andrew  and  Henrietta 
(Jacob.v)  Schein,  were  also  born  in  the  same  coun- 
try, and  were  there  educated.  The  father  was  a 
machinist  of  Kcmpen,  and  was  a  very  industrious 
and  hard  working  man.  Both  he  and  his  wife 
were  members  of  the  Hebrew  Church.  They  have 
now  departed  this  life,  the  father's  death  having 
occurred  at  the  age  of  seventy -seven  ^ears,  while 
his  wife  passed  away  at  the  age  of  seventy-four. 
They  were  the  parents  of  thirteen  children,  but 
only  three  are  living,  Joseph,  Salo  and  David. 

Our  subject  acquired  a  good  education  in  the 
public  schools  of  the  I'\athtrland.  In  1866,  at  the 
age  of  sixteen  3'ears,  he  came  with  his  brother, 
Salo,  to  this  country,  and  after  spending  about  a 
year  in  travel,  he  located  in  Berksville,  Monroe 
County,  where  he  has  since  made  his  home.  He  had 
had  some  business  experience  before  his  emigration 
to  the  New  World,  for  he  had  been  engaged  in 
clerking  in  the  Fatherland.  After  arriving  here, 
he  engaged  in  clerking  for  six  years,  and  was  a 
trusted  employe,  ever  faithful  to  the  interests  of 
those  for  whom  he  woiked.  In  this  wa}-,  through 
his  industry  and  economy,  he  acquired  some  capi- 
tal, which  in  1875  he  invested  in  a  business  of  his 
own.  Forming  a  partnership  with  Mr.  Ziebold, 
they  opened  a  general  store  in  Monroe  City,  and 
together  did  business  until   1877,  when   the    con- 


nection was  dissolved,  and  Mr.  Schein  opened  a 
store  of  his  own.  This  he  conducted  for  eleven 
years,  when  in  1888  he  sold  out  and  came  to 
Berksville,  opening  the  stoie  of  which  he  is  now 
proprietor. 

The  lady  who  bears  the  name  of  Mrs.  Schein 
was  in  her  maidenhood  Emma  Lorentz.  She 
was  born  in  Iowa,  but  the  greater  part  of  her  girl- 
hood was  speut  in  this  county,  where  she  acquired 
a  good  education.  She  is  a  member  of  the  Lutheran 
Church,  and  is  an  estimable  lady,  who  has  many 
fiiends  throughout  the  community.  B3'  their 
union  were  born  eleven  children,  Ida  (the  wife  of 
Peter  Schneider),  Nelson.  Henry,  Julius,  Heniietta, 
George,  Phelona,  and  four  who  died  in  infancy. 

In  his  political  views,  ilr.  Schein  is  a  stanch 
Democrat,  and  warmly  advocates  the  principles  of 
his  party.  lie  has  served  as  School  Director,  was 
Justice  of  the  Peace  for  several  years,  and  for  nine 
years  was  Postmaster  of  Monroe  City.  He  now 
holds  a  similar  position  in  Berksville,  and  is  a 
capable  and  efficient  officer.  He  is  a  member  of 
the  Ilarigari  Lodge,  and  holds  membership  with 
the  Lutheran  Church.  He  commenced  life  for 
himself  without  a  dollar,  but  he  is  an  excellent 
financier,  and  by  careful  attention  to  the  details 
of  his  business  and  l\v  well  directed  efforts,  he  has 
met  with  signal  success,  and  has  become  one  of 
the  substantial  citizens  of  the  community. 


€+^1 


ANIEL  j\I.  DOTY.  Though  several  years 
have  come  and  gone  since  this  gentleman 
passed  away,  his  memory  as  a  sincere 
friend  and  loj'al  citizen  is  still  as  fresh  in 
the  hearts  of  his  associates  as  in  the  days  gone  by 
and  will  be  perpetuated  in  the  affection  and  regard 
of  posterity.  During  the  entire  period  of  his  resi- 
dence in  Jackson  County  he  displayed  an  unceas- 
ing interest  in  the  welfare  of  his  fellow-citizens 
and  did  all  in  his  power  to  advance  their  material 
prosperity.  During  the  entire  period  of  his  resi- 
dence in  Jackson  Count}',  he  displayed  an  unceas- 
ing interest  in  the  welfare  of  his  fellow-citizens 
and  did  all  in  his  power  to  advance  their  material 
prosperity.     Especially  was  he   intimately  associ- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


373 


ated  with  the  history  of  Vergennes  Township, 
whicli  for  a  time  was  his  home,  and  in  which  he 
achieved  his  higliest  successes. 

A  native  of  Jackson  County,  111.,  our  subject 
was  born  here  .January  29,  1834,  and  was  a  son  of 
William  Doty,  of  whom  further  mention  is  made 
upon  another  page  of  this  volume.  In  his  youth 
he  received  such  advantnges  as  were  offered  by 
the  neighboring  schools,  but  his  education  was 
largely  secured  b^'  personal  investigation  and  pri- 
vate study.  From  childhood  days  he  was  inter- 
ested in  farming,  and  it  was  natural  that  upon 
choosing  a  life  occupation  he  selected  the  voca- 
tion of  an  agriculturist.  Succeeding  years  proved 
the  wisdom  of  his  choice. 

November  18,  1863,  Mr.  Doty  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Margaret  G.,  daughter  of 
Charles  and  Jane  (McMurray)  Blacklock,  all  na- 
tives of  Scotland,  and  early  settlers  of  Jackson 
County,  having  come  here  in  tlie  '50s.  She  is 
one  in  a  family  of  four  surviving  children,  the 
others  being  David  A.,  who  lives  in  Levan  Town- 
ship, Jackson  County;  Thomas,  a  resident  of  Keo- 
kuk, Iowa;  and  Robert  B.,  of  Somerset  Township. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Doty  became  the  parents  of  seven 
children,  four  of  whom  are  now  living,  viz.:  Charles 
M.,  James  T.,  Agnes  and  Robert  B. 

At  the  age  of  about  fifty  years,  before  the  en- 
ergy of  manhood  had  become  enervated  by  tlie  in- 
firmities of  old  age,  Mr.  Dot}'  was  called  from 
earth.  His  demise  occurred  June  26,  1884,  and 
was  mourned  not  only  by  his  immediate  relatives, 
but  also  by  the  people  throughout  tiie  county,  for 
he  was  a  kind  neighbor,  a  generous  and  self-sacri- 
ficing friend  and  capable  man.  While  he  had  not 
been  actively  identified  with  politics,  he  never- 
theless adhered  with  ardor  to  the  principles  of  the 
Democratic  partj',  and  never  lost  an  opportunity 
to  cast  his  ballot  for  the  nominees  of  that  political 
organization. 

So  successful  had  Mr.  Dot}'  been  in  his  agricult- 
ural pursuits  that  at  his  death  he  left  an  estate 
comprising  more  tlian  three  hundred  acres  of  land. 
Upon  this  homestead  his  widow  has  continued  to 
make  her  home,  superintending  the  management 
of  the  farm  with  such  skill  and  efficiency  that  its 
value  has  been  increased   by   the  addition  of  sub- 


stantial improvements.  In  her  religious  belief  she 
is  identified  with  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church, 
to  wliidi  she  contributes  systematically,  and  in 
the  work  of  which  she  is  activel}'  interested. 


LEXANDER  CRISLER,  whose  sketch  we 
now  have  the  pleasure  of  presenting,  is  a 
native  of  this  county,  and  was  born  in 
Rockwood  Frecinct  September  18,  1851. 
Here  he  grew  to  man 's  estate,  commencing  at  an 
early  age  to  cultivate  the  soil  and  to  learn  the 
principles  of  successful  farming.  His  education  was 
limited,  but  his  natural  ability  and  fondness  for 
knowledge  can  more  than  atone  for  the  lack  of 
what  is  commonly  called  "schooling."  Mr.  Cris- 
ler  is  now  occupying  a  fine  estate  on  section  36, 
township  7,  range  6.  where  he  devotes  his  attention 
to  cultivating  the  soil. 

The  i)arents  of  our  subject,  John  and  Mary 
(Hindman)  Crisler,  were  natives  of  Kentucky,  and 
came  to  this  county  previous  to  their  marriage, 
when  quite  young.  John  Crisler  was  a  blacksmith 
by  trade,  which  calling  he  followed  in  Rockwood 
until  his  decease,  which  occurred  in  1866.  Our 
subject  was  a  lad  of  fifteen  years  when  his  father 
died,  and  he  was  compelled  to  give  up  any  am- 
bition he  might  have  had  for  procuring  an  educa- 
tion, being  obliged  to  work  on  the  farm  and 
assist  in  the  support  of  his  mother.  The  latter  de- 
parted this  life  in  1876. 

Our  subject  began  to  break  land  on  his  own  ac- 
count on  reaching  his  majority,  and  has  ever  since 
been  engaged  as  a  general  farmer  and  stock-raiser. 
Ever3thing  about  his  estate  has  been  accomplish- 
ed by  arduous  toil,  and  is  now  under  a  fine  state 
of  cultivation.  He  was  married  in  1871  to  Miss 
Nancy  Lowr}-,  and  they  have  become  the  parents 
of  eight  children,  two  of  whom  are  deceased.  John, 
Clemie,  James,  Edgar  and  Byrdare  living  at  home, 
and  Willis  is  residing  with  an  aunt  in  Chester. 

Mrs.  Crisler  was  the  daughter  of  Hugh  and 
Sarah  Lowrj',  who  were  residents  of  this  count}- 
for  many  years;  the  father  came  from  Ireland,  and 
the  mother  is  a  native  of  Alabama.     Our  subject's 


374 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPinCAL  RECORD. 


wife  departed  this  life  May  16,  1886,  and  July  4, 
1888.  Mr.  Crisler  was  married  to  Margaret  Lowry, 
a  sister  of  his  first  wife.  To  them  has  been  born  a 
daugliter,  Sadie,  who  is  three  j-cais  old.  Mrs.  Cris- 
ler is  an  active  worker  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church. 

Mr.  Crisler,  until  a  few  j'ears  ago,  was  a  Liberal 
in  politics.  Now,  however,  he  casts  his  vote  for 
tlie  People's  party  candidates.  He  is  one  of  the 
most  public  spirited  and  progressive  men  in  this 
locality ,  and  socially  he  is  a  member  of  Springvale 
Tvodge  No.  922,  F.  ]M.  B.  A.,  and  is  now  Chairman 
of  the  County  Assembly'. 


//r^  JACOB  JOBB  IS  a  prominent  businei 
[|[  (— ^  of  Mae3-stown,  widely  and  favorably 
■^^^1    throughout  the  communitj',  and  it 


JACOB  JOBB  is  a  prominent  business  man 

known 
is  with 

pleasure  that  we  present  to  our  readers  this  record 
of  his  life.  A  native  of  Germany,  he  was  born 
June  24.  1844, to  Lewis  and  Maggie  (Heinefourth) 
Jobb,  who  were  also  natives  of  the  same  coun- 
try. They  were  the  parents  of  eight  children, 
but  only  two  of  the  number  are  yet  living,  Cevilla 
and  Jacob.  The  parents  were  both  reared  and  ed- 
ucated in  the  Fatherland,  and  Mr.  Jobb  was  a 
vcrj-  well  informed  man.  By  trade  he  was  a 
weaver.  In  1854  he  bade  adieu  to  friends  and 
countr}',  and  wi^h  his  family  crossed  the  broad 
ocean  to  America.  He  at  once  went  to  Missouri, 
and  purchasing  forty  acres  of  land  in  Cape  Girar- 
deau Count}',  there  carried  on  agricultural  pur- 
suits until  his  death,  which  occurred  at  the  age  of 
fifty-six  years.  His  wife  survived  him  some  time, 
and  her  last  days  were  spent  in  Maeystowu,  where 
she  departed  this  life  at  the  age  of  sixty-three.  The 
parents  were  both  members  of  the  Lutheran  Church 
and  were  highly  respected  people. 

Midst  play  and  work,  Mr.  Jobb  of  this  record 
spent  the  d.ays  of  his  boyhood  and  3'outh.  He 
was  only  ten  years  of  age  at  the  time  of  the 
emigration  to  the  New  World,  and  in  Missouri  he 
was  reared  and  educated.  He  became  familiar 
with  all  the  details  of  farm  life  and  aided  in  the 
labors  of  the  field  until  nineteen  years  of  age, 
when  he  began  learning  the  harness-maker's  trade, 


which  he  followed  for  a  period  of  seven  j-ears. 
In  1862  we  find  him  among  the  defenders  of  tiie 
country,  for  he  had  joined  the  boys  in  blue  of 
Companj'  F,  Twenty-ninth  Missouri  Infantry. 
He  served  for  nineteen  months,  and  was  tiien 
honorabl}'  discharged.  He  participated  in  the 
battles  of  Corinth  and  Nashville,  and  was  mustered 
out  at  Kingston,  Ga. 

Mr.  Jobb  at  once  returned  to  his  home,  and  for 
some  years  past  has  resided  in  Maeystown,  where 
he  is  engaged  in  business  as  a  harness  maker  and 
dealer.  He  has  followed  his  trade  througliout 
life,  and  now  receives  from  the  public  a  liberal 
patronage,  which  he  well  deserves,  for  he  carries  a 
full  and  complete  stock  and  earnestly  desires  to 
please  his  customers.  Straightforward  dealing  has 
ever  characterized  his  business  career  and  undoubt- 
ed I3"  has  been  an  important  factor  in  his  success. 
In  1868  Mr.  Jobb  married  Elizabeth  Aites,  who 
died  leaving  one  son,  Albert  In  1873,  Mr. 
Jobb  married  Gertrude  Dillenberger,  a  native  of 
Monroe  Count}',  and  a  highly  educated  and  re- 
fined lady.  Their  union  has  been  blessed  witli  a 
family  of  six  children,  of  whom  five  are  yet  living, 
and  are  still  under  the  parental  roof,  namely: 
Katie,  Jacob,  Lizzie,  George  and  Clara.  The  chil- 
dren have  been  provided  with  good  educational 
privileges,  and  are  thus  fitted  for  the  practical  and 
responsible  duties  of  life.  The  parents  are  both 
prominent  members  of  the  Lutheran  Church,  in 
wiiich  Mr.  Jobb  formerly  held  the  office  of  Treas- 
urer. In  politics  he  is  a  stalwart  Republican,  who 
warmly  advocates  the  principles  of  his  party. 
Socially,  he  is  connected  with  Maeystown  Lodge 
No.  3809,  K.  H.,  of  Maeystown.  A  man  of  ster- 
ling worth  and  strict  integrity,  lie  has  won  the  con- 
fidence and  high  regard  of  all  who  know  him. 


rj^gJK'  Si£  ^S  Sis' 


ENRY  E.  EBBRECHT.  The  simple  record 
of  an  honorable  life  is  the  best  monument 
that  can  be  reared  to  any  citizen,  and  we 
shall  therefore  not  attempt  to  enlarge 
upon  the  history  of  the  gentleman  above  named, 
who  was  one  of  Chester's  most  reputable  residents. 
He  was  called  from  this  life  in  the  prime  of  man- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


375 


hood,  February  11,  1893.  His  birth  occurred  No- 
vember 4,  1862,  in  this  city.  His  parents  were 
Henr3'  and  Carrie  (Schrader)  Ebbrecht,  natives  of 
Germany,  wlio  came  to  tiiis  country  when  quite 
young,  and  were  married  in  Chester.  Five  chil- 
dren were  born  to  this  couple,  all  d^-ing  in  in- 
fancy with  the  exception  of  our  subject,  who  was 
the  j'oungest  in  order  of  birth. 

Our  subject  received  a  fair  education,  attending 
the  Chester  schools  until  reaching  his  fourteenth 
year,  when  he  commenced  to  work  with  his  uncle, 
Ernest  Schrader,  learning  the  trade  of  a  barber, 
and  continuing  at  it  for  a  period  of  three  j^ears. 
"When  but  a  child  of  three  years  he  lost  his  mother 
by  death  and  was  reared  by  an  aunt,  Mrs.  Wolf, 
until  entering  the  above  business,  when  he  lived 
with  his  uncle.  After  leaving  his  uncle,  he  em- 
barked in  the  business  on  his  own  account  at 
Buena  Vista,  now  a  part  of  Chester,  and  by  his  dili- 
gence and  perseverance  soon  had  a  large  trade. 
In  1890  he  added  a  stock  of  jewelry,  which  in- 
creased his  business  greatly. 

August  12,  188.5,  Mr.  Ebbrecht  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Annie  Boeger,  a  daughter  of 
Fred  C.  and  Minnie  (Koelerl  Boeger.  Tlie  father 
came  to  the  United  .Stales  from  German}'  when 
but  eighteen  j'ears  old  and  followed  cabinet  mak- 
ing, continuing  thus  engaged  until  his  death, 
which  occurred  in  Chester  in  1887.  In  the  mean- 
time he  purchased  a  furniture  store,  which  at  the 
time  of  his  demise  was  the  leading  store  of  the 
kind  in  Chester.  His  good  wife,  who  came  to  this 
country  when  thirt}-  years  of  age,  was  here  mar- 
ried and  is  yet  living,  aged  fifty-nine  years.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Ebbrecht  bad  one  child,  Lillie.  She  was 
born  July  30,  1886,  and  is  now  a  student  at  the 
Lutiieran  school. 

•July  2,  1889,  the  good  wife  and  mother  died,  and 
September  27,  1892,  Mr.  Ebbrecht  was  married  to 
Emma  Boeger,  a  sister  of  his  first  wife.  Four 
months  after  this  event,  our  subject  was  called  to 
the  land  beyond,  mourned  and  respected  b}'  his 
many  friends  and  acquaintances.  In  politics  he  was 
a  Democrat,  working  for  his  party  whenever  oppor- 
tunity offered,  although  never  aspiring  to  public 
duties.  He  and  his  wife  were  devoted  members 
of  the   Lutheran   Church,  the  latter  still  being  an 


active  worker  in  that  denomination.  Mrs.  Eb- 
brecht for  awhile  carried  on  her  husband's  jewelry 
business  alone,  but  recently-  sold  it.  She  commands 
the  respect  of  all  with  whom  she  comes  in  contact. 

<X[^.^»^»^.^.^.»»^-^.^.^.^^.4.^^^•»»»^.4^^^••^♦:x> 

"ill  O  H  N  M.  C  R  I  S  L  E  R  was  for  many  years 
prominentl}'  identified  with  the  .agricultural 
interests  of  Randolph  County,  and  his  fine 
farm,  located  on  section  36,  township  6, 
range  7,  is  supplied  with  substantial  imi)rovenients, 
including  neat  and  commodious  buildings,  and  is 
in  every  respect  well  improved  and  well  managed. 
Our  subject  was  born  near  Chester,  this  county, 
.lanuar}-  6,  1823,  and  is  a  son  of  Silas  and  Mary 
(Shafer)  Crisler.  The  parents  were  natives  of 
Boone  County,  Ky.,  and  came  to  Illinois  after 
marriage,  remaining  here  the  rest  of  their  days. 
Our  subject  enjoyed  onl}'  limited  opportunities 
for  an  education,  but  studied  in  the  subscription 
schools  of  his  native  township.  Aiding  his  father 
in  the  care  of  the  home  farm  until  his  death,  he 
then  carried  it  on  alone.  When  he  was  twenty- 
nine  3-ears  old,  he  bought  land  of  his  own,  which 
he  carried  on  from  then  until  his  death,  which 
occurred  on  the  22d  of  December,  1885.  His  fine 
farm  was  made  up  of  two  hundred  and  twentj' 
acres,  which  is  a  well  improved  tract,  bearing  a 
complete  line  of  substantial  buildings.  The  fertile 
acreage  yields  various  grains  and  is  a  source  of  a 
sufficient  income  to  surround  the  family  with  the 
comforts  and  many  of  the  luxuries  of  life. 

On  the  22d  of  August,  1855,  John  M.  Crisler 
was  married  to  Eliza  (Dean)  Cowan,  a  daughter 
of  Obediali  and  Martha  (Van  Buren)  Dean,  natives 
of  Maine  and  New  York,  respeetivelj'.  To  our  sub- 
ject and  his  wife  four  children  were  born.  Cecelia, 
who  married  John  A.  Maxwell,  lives  in  this  coun- 
ty; Efiie  and  Inez  (twins)  are  next  in  order.  The 
former  was  struck  with  palsy  when  a  child  and  has 
been  a  cripple  eversinee.  Inez  is  the  wife  of  Joseph 
Harris  and  lives  near  Chester.  Gelo,  the  only  son,  is 
3'etat  home.  The  good  mother  is  a  member  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church  and  is  now  seventy-one  years 
of  age.  She  is  hale  and  heart}-  and  bids  fair  to  live 
for  many  j-ears.  She  was  the  widow  of  John  Cowan 


376 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


wlien  she  became  the  wife  of  our  subject,  and  by 
that  marriage  bore  her  husband  two  children: 
diaries  Dean,  who  married  Florence  Fowler,  and 
Sarah,  who  is  the  wife  of  Robert  McNabney. 

In  politics  Mr.  Crisler  was  always  in  favor  of 
the  Republican  platform.  He  was  a  quiet,  unas- 
suming man,  who  by  his  correct  mode  of  living 
gained  the  respect  of  all  with  whom  he  had  to  do. 
At  the  time  of  his  death  he  had  accumulated  a 
goodly  portion  of  this  world's  goods  and  was  en- 
abled to  leave  his  widow  and  children  a  comforta- 
ble home. 


^^  HARLES  VESPEH.  This  name  will  be  rec- 
if^,  ognized  by  many  of  our  readers  as  that  of 
^^>''  a  gentleman  who  has  been  a  resident  of 
Steeleville  for  more  than  twenty  j'ears,  and  who 
has  also  been  a  potent  factor  in  the  development 
of  the  interests  of  this  section  of  the  country.  A 
native  of  Germany,  Mr.  Vesper  was  born  October 
2,  1841.  and  is  the  eighth  in  order  of  birth  among 
nine  children  comprising  the  family  of  William 
and  Louisa  (Bergmann)  Vesper,  both  of  whom 
spent  their  entire  lives  in  Germany. 

In  the  excellent  schools  of  his  native  land,  the 
subject  of  this  sketch  received  a  practical  educa- 
tion, and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  years  commenced 
to  work  at  an  ore  furnace,  continuing  thus  en- 
gaged for  three  years.  Afterward  be  was  employ- 
ed in  a  coal  mine  until  1866,  when  he  left  his  na- 
tive countrj',  and  embarking  on  a  steamship  cross- 
ed the  ocean  to  America.  For  two  j'ears  after 
coming  to  the  United  States,  he  worked  in  the 
mines  in  Pennsylvania,  after  which  he  came  west 
to  Indiana  and  was  employed  in  the  mines  in 
Daviess  County  for  two  years. 

From  Indiana,  Mr.  Vesper  removed  to  Illinois, 
and  stayed  in  Murphysboro  until  1873,  when  he 
located  in  Steeleville,  and  has  since  been  a  resi- 
dent of  this  place.  For  ten  years  he  engaged  in  the 
retail  liquor  trade,  and  then  entered  the  mercantile 
business,  following  that  exclusively  for  four  jears. 
He  then  entered  the  mines  again,  and  still  con- 
tinues thus  engaged,  but  also  carries  on  a  profitable 
mercantile  trade. 

The  marriage  of  Mr.   Vesper  occurred   January 


28,  1868,  and  united  him  with  Miss  Caroline,  a 
daughter  of  Randell  and  Sarah  (Palmer)  Delk,  na- 
tives of  jS'ortli  and  South  Carolina,  respectively, 
who  came  to  Indiana  when  quite  j'oung  and  there 
continued  to  reside  until  his  death.  Of  tliis  union 
there  have  been  born  eight  children,  two  of  whom 
died  in  infancy.  Those  living  are, Christina,  who 
married  John  Gravener,  and  lives  in  Steeleville; 
Mary,  the  wife  of  John  Thomas,  a  resident  of 
Steeleville;  Emma,  Lydia,  Gracie  and  Carrie,  who 
are  at  home.  The  daughters  liave  all  received  ex- 
cellent educations  and  are  accomplished  and  popu- 
lar young  ladies. 

Since  coming  to  this  countrj',  Mr.  Vesper  has 
been  a  careful  student  of  its  political  institutions, 
and  as  a  result  of  his  investigations  and  observa- 
tions gives  to  the  Democratic  parly  his  steadfast 
support.  He  has  never  been  an  aspirant  for  office, 
preferring  to  devote  his  time  to  tiie  conduct  of 
his  business  and  the  discharge  of  his  duties  as  a 
private  citizen.  He  was  reared  in  the  faith  of 
the  Presbyterian  Church,  for  which  he  entertains 
a  preference.  Mrs.  Vesper  is  a  member  of  the 
Baptist  Cliurch,  and  is  active  in  the  work  of  that 
denomination. 


1^+^! 


1^^ 


Al^jIRD  W.  HINDMAN,  although  quite  young, 
IrS^  has  been  for  some  time  identified  with  the 
//?M)ll  agricultural  interests  of  Randolph  Countj', 
^&^  and  has  become  quite  well  known  as  an  en- 
terprising and  prosperous  man.  His  present  resi- 
dence is  on  section  34,  township  7,  range  6,  and 
his  estate  comprises  sixty  acres,  which  are  under 
excellent  tillage  and  bear  numerous  improvements. 
The  dwelling  and  accompanying  outbuildings  are 
well  built  and  are  sufflcientlj'  commodious  for  tlie 
purposes  for  which  they  are  designed,  and  include 
whatever  will  add  to  the  convenience  in  carrying 
on  a  first-class  farm. 

Bird  Ilindman  was  born  Februarj'  27,  1866,  five 
miles  east  of  Chester,  and  is  the  youngest  child 
born  to  James  H.  and  Sarah  (Johnson)  Hindnian. 
His  father,  who  was  also  a  native  of  this  countj', 
lived  here  during  his  entire  life,  and  was  one  of 
the  leading  agriculturists  of  this  section.     He  de- 


'Ol/t^ 


-tjs6 


■d.  i^^i^t^?^' 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


379 


parted  this  life  November  15,  1891,  and  was  pre- 
ceded to  the  better  land  by  his  good  wife,  who 
died  in  1889.  The  paternal  giandfather  of  our 
subject  was  Samuel  Hindnian,  who  came  from  Ire- 
land to  America  in  an  early  da}-,  and  lived  and 
died  in  Illinois. 

Our  subject  enjoyed  only  limited  opportunities 
for  obtaining  an  education,  studying  in  the  dis- 
trict schools  near  his  home.  Aiding  his  father  in 
the  care  of  his  farm,  and  energetically  sharing  the 
toil  during  the  seed  time  and  harvest,  he  gained  a 
thoroughly  practical  knowledge  of  the  pursuit  of 
agriculture,  and  was  well  fitted  to  carry  on  an 
estate  of  his  own.  He  remained  at  home,  aiding 
in  cultivating  the  home  farm,  until  reaching  his 
twenty-fifth  year,  since  which  time  he  has  been 
classed  among  the  leading  j'oung  farmers  of  this 
country. 

In  .July,  1891,  Mr.Hindman  and  Miss  Nancy  A., 
daughter  of  Stephen  and  Callie  (Watson)  Kenni- 
son  were  united  in  marri.age.  Their  union  has 
been  blessed  by  the  birth  of  a  daughter,  who  bears 
the  name  of  Bertha  May.  Mrs.  Hindman,  who  is 
a  most  estimable  lady,  is  a  member  of  the  Free 
Will  Baptist  Church.  Our  subject  is  a  stanch 
Democrat  in  politics,  and  is  at  the  present  time 
acceptably  filling  the  office  of  School  Director  in 
his  district. 

.  • 0^P — • 

AVID  STAINROOK  BOOTH,  M.  D.,  was 

for  many  j'ears  one  of  the  most  prominent 
physicians  of  Randolph  County,  and  at  his 
death  his  profession  was  deprived  of  one 
of  its  noblest  representatives,  and  the  citizenship 
of  the  community  suffered  a  sad  loss.  Dr.  Booth 
was  born  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  .June  30,  1828,  and 
departed  this  life  at  Belleville,  III.,  September  10, 
1892,  aged  sixty-four  years. 

Dr.  John  J.  Booth,  the  father  of  our  subject, 
was  born  and  educated  in  the  Quaker  City,  and 
there  practiced  medicine  until  1845,  when  he  re- 
moved to  Fredericktowu,  Mo.  Our  subject,  who 
was  at  that  time  attending  the  high  school  in 
Philadelphia,  remained  in  that  city,  and  after 
completing  his  studies,  was,  by  the  instruction  of 
his  father,  bound  as  an  apprentice  to  learn  the 
10 


drug  business.  During  the  last  3'ear  of  his  appren- 
ticeship he  attended  a  course  of  lectures  at  the 
Jefferson  Medical  College,  and  in  the  spring  of 
1849  joined  his  parents  in  Fredericktowu,  Mo. 
There  he  commenced  the  systematic  stud}'  of  med- 
icine under  the  tutelage  of  his  father,  and  attended 
the  St.  Louis  Medical  College  during  the  session 
of  1849-50.  The  following  two  years  he  taught 
school,  emploj'ing  the  leisure  moments  in  reading 
medicine.  In  1852  he  removed  to  southwestern 
Missouri,  and  in  Jasper  County  taught  school  and 
at  the  same  time  practiced  medicine. 

Dr.  Booth  later  removed  to  Newton  Count}', 
that  state,  and  on  a  petition  of  the  citizens  of 
McDonald  Count}',  they  guaranteeing  a  certain 
amount  of  practice,  he  went  to  Enterprise,  in  the 
above  county,  and  there  remained  until  the  out- 
break of  the  war.  During  the  winter  of  1859-60 
he  attended  the  St.  Louis  Medical  College,  from 
which  institution  he  was  graduated.  As  the  peo- 
ple in  Enterprise,  which  was  his  home  at  that  time, 
were  strongly  in  sympathy  with  the  south,  tiie 
Doctor,  who  was  a  stanch  Union  man,  was  made 
very  uncomfortable,  and  after  the  election  of  Lin- 
coln, in  1860,  he  desired  to  change  his  location,  but 
having  accumulated  considerable  property,  he  did 
not  like  to  lose  it,  so  he  remained  there  until  the 
Confederate  forces  occupied  the  country.  Having 
gained  a  wide  reputation  as  a  fine  surgeon,  he  re- 
ceived intimation  that  his  services  were  needed  and 
was  requested  to  accompany  the  rebels,  which  he 
found  best  to  do  quietly,  and  assisted  in  attending 
to  the  wounded  during  the  battle  of  Wilson's 
Creek.  After  that  conflict  he  returned  home  and 
at  once  made  preparation  for  leaving,  which  he 
did  on  horseback  after  night,  and  by  knowing  the 
lay  of  the  land,  he  was  able  to  keep  clear  of  the 
Confederate  army. 

After  reaching  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  Dr.  Booth  re- 
ceived such  a  cold  reception  from  his  old  ac- 
quaintances that  he  went  on  to  Philadelphia  and 
occupied  his  time  in  attending  lectures  at  the 
University  of  Pennsylvania.  He  passed  the  ex- 
amination, and  was  mnstered  into  the  service  of 
the  Union  army  as  Active  Assistant  Surgeon  of 
the  Mississippi  Marine  Brigade.  It  was  his  inten- 
tion to  work  his  way  back  to  Missouri  and  rescue 


380 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL    RECORD. 


his  family,  whom  he  had  been  compelled  to  leave 
behind.  While  in  that,  branch  of  the  service  he 
was  stationed  on  board  the  "Monarch,"  later  on 
the  "Switzerland,"  and  for  some  time  liad  charj^e 
of  the  bmall-pox  hospital.  At  the  time  the  "Queen 
of  the  West"  was  ordered  to  run  by  Vicksburg 
Dr.  Booth  was  assigned  to  dut}'  as  the  medical 
officer  on  that  vessel,  which  passed  Vicksburg  on 
the  morning  of  February  2,  1*^63.  He  was  later 
captured  on  the  Red  River,  on  the  evening  of  the 
14th  of  that  month,  his  lioat  having  run  aground 
on  a  sand  bar  opposite  Ft.  Taylor,  and  before  she 
could  be  released,  was  disabled  by  the  guns  of  the 
enemj'.  All  the  officers  and  most  of  the  crew  on 
board  escaped  on  cotton  bales  and  in  the  small 
boats  to  a  place  not  far  distant.  Soon  after  his  cap- 
ture there  was  an  exchange  of  prisoners,  and  the 
Doctor  and  the  men  who  were  with  him  were  sent 
to  New  Orleans,  thence  to  New  York,  and  from 
there  to  the  Philadelphia  Navy  Yard.  While  in 
the  latter  place,  he  employed  his  time  in  visiting 
the  hospitals,  and  in  August  he  was  ordered  to 
report  at  the  New  York  Navj-  Yard,  where  be  was 
given  charge  of  a  train  load  of  exchange  prisoners 
bound  for  St.  Louis. 

In  the  meantime  Dr.  Booth  iiad  not  been  able  to 
gain  any  definite  news  from  his  family,  who  were 
within  the  Confederate  lines.  Anxiety  on  their 
account  caused  him  to  resign  his  position  as  Sur- 
geon, which  was  accepted  the  following  October. 
While  waiting  in  St.  Louis,  endeavoring  to  get  an 
escort  from  the  nearest  point  of  Union  forces  to 
where  his  family  was  located,  a  vacancy  occurred 
in  the  hospital  at  Springfield,  Mo.,  and  he  was 
offered  the  position  by  the  medical  director  of  the 
department.  He  accepted,  as  it  took  him  within 
a  short  distance  of  his  family,  and  very  soon  after 
entering  on  his  duties  at  Springfield  he  secured  an 
escort  and  was  enabled  to  bring  his  family  into 
the  Union  lines,  after  having  been  separated  from 
them  for  more  than  two  years.  He  held  the  above 
position  until  July,  1864,  when  he  resigned,  and 
locating  in  Sparta,  this  county,  remained  in  active 
practice  here  until  September  1,  1889.  He  then 
removed  to  Belleville,  where  his  decease  occurred. 

January  27,  1850,  Dr.  David  S.  Booth  married 
Miss  Cynthia  Grounds,  and  to  them  were  born  the 


following  six  children:  Mary  (deceased),  Sarah, 
David,  Frances,  Josephine,  and  John  J.,  who  is  now 
dece.ised.  Mary  was  the  wife  of  James  E.  Jordan, 
and  at  her  decease  left  a  son,  Edward,  who  was 
reared  b3-  our  subject;  Sarah  married  Dr.  Jerome 
Thompson,  of  Morrisonville,  this  state;  David, is 
the  assistant  of  Dr.  C.  H.  Hughes,  who  holds  the 
chair  of  nervous  diseases  in  the  Barnes  Jledical 
College  of  St.  Louis.  He  is  a  graduate  of  the  St. 
Louis  Medical  College,  and  married  a  Jliss  West. 
Frances,  the  wife  of  William  Burnett,  makes  her 
home  in  Ottumwa,  Iowa.  Josephine  is  the  wife  of 
James  Sproul.  Jr.,  and  is  residing  in  Sparta. 

In  his  p^olitical  relations  Dr.  Booth  was  a  strong 
Republican,  and  socially  was  a  prominent  Ma- 
son and  Knight  Templar.  In  religious  affairs 
he  w.ns  an  active  member  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church.  He  was  a  man  of  exemplar}'  habits,  and  was 
so  thoroughly  devoted  to  his  chosen  calling  thiit 
few  knew  him  outside  of  his  professional  life.  He 
was  enthusiastic  in  everything  that  would  add  to 
his  knowledge  as  a  physician  and  promote  the 
science  of  medicine.  He  was  prominently  identi- 
fied with  the  Southern  Illinois  Medical  Associa- 
tion, of  which  he  had  been  President;  also  the 
Illinois  State  Medical  Society,  in  which  he  occu- 
pied the  same  position.  He  was  also  a  member  of 
the  American,  the  Mississippi  Valley  and  the  St. 
Clair  County  Associations. 


^'OlIN  P.  MtCLURKEN  is  a  bright,  intelli- 
gent young  writer,  who  is  making  the  Coul- 
,^^.  ,  terville  Republican  a  wide  awake  and  well 
"^^f  managed  newspaper.  He  was  born  in 
Washington  County,  111.,  and  is  the  son  of  William 
McClurken,  a  native  of  .South  Carolina,  where  his 
birth  occurred  in  1828.  The  father  accompanied 
his  parents  on  their  I'cmoval  to  this  state  in  1833, 
and  settled  in  Washington  County,  where  he  grew 
to  man's  estate,  and  where  his  father  was  the  owner 
of  a  large  tract  of  land. 

Miss  Mary  Cherry,  as  the  mother  of  our  subject 
was  known  in  maidenhood,  is  a  native  of  Randolph 
County,  and  the  daughter  of  the  late  George 
Cherry,  a  pioneer  of  this  swtiou.  Here  she  was  mar- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


381 


ried  to  William  McCliirken,  and  soon  afterward 
they  removed  to  Washington  County,  this  state, 
wiiere  they  were  residingat  the  time  of  the  father's 
decease,  in  the  fall  of  1861.  The  mother  is  still 
living  (1894)  and  has  attained  the  age  of  sixty- 
two.  Their  family  consists  of  two  living  children, 
our  subject  and  Maggie  E.,  Mrs.  James  Torrens,  of 
Washington  County.  The  parents  were  members 
of  the  Covenanter  Church,  in  which  body  the.y 
were  active  workers.  • 

Our  subject  was  born  September  26,  1854,  in 
this  state,  and  remained  upon  the  home  farm  until 
sixteen  years  of  age.  Then  with  his  mother  and 
sister  he  went  to  Colorado  with  the  St.  Louis  West- 
ern Colony,  of  which  their  pastor,  Rev.  A.  C.  Todd, 
was  President.  While  in  that  state  he  worked  in 
the  Evans'  Journal  ofJico.  After  a  sojourn  of  two 
years  in  the  west,  he  returned  home,  and  for  a  few 
years  gave  his  entire  time  and  attention  to  the 
completion  of  his  education,  attending  successively 
Geneva  College,  at  Northwood,  Ohio;  Monmouth 
College,  this  state;  the  Northern  Normal  and  the 
Valparaiso  Normal,  in  Indiana,  thus  fitting  himself 
to  occupy  any  position  in  life.  Afterward  he 
taught  school  for  five  years,  and  on  July  4,  1891, 
be  became  the  editor  and  manager  of  the  HejmbUcan, 
in  Coulterville,  which  he  is  conducting  very  suc- 
cessfully. The  paper  is  non-partisan  in  politics, 
and  since  Mr.  McClurken  has  had  charge  of  it,  the 
list  of  subscribers  has  been  largely  increased.  Our 
subject  is  a  member  of  the  Covenanter  Church,  and 
is  an  Elder  of  the  congregation  at  Oakdale,  and 
also  takes  an  active  part  in  Sunday-school  work. 


■^-  ag'  3ig  ae^6-^t^«»^!S^i^-S!S-g)g-3ig-3!S- 


QUIRE  WILLIAM  M.  WILSON,  a  promi- 
nent resident  of  Baldwin,  and  an  honored 
pioneer  of  Randolph  County,  was  born 
where  the  town  of  Baldwin  now  stands  in 
1841,  and  is  the  eldest  child  of  James  and  Jennie 
(McBride)  Wilson,  both  of  whom  were  natives  of 
this  county.  The  father  was  born  about  1820. 
and  was  a  son  of  George  and  Susanna  (Anderson) 
Wilson,  who  came  to  Illinois  from  the  Abbe3'ville 
District  in  South  Carolina.  The  grandmother  was 
a  native  of  Nova  Scotia,  and   they  were  nmong 


the  earliest  settlers  of  this  community.  The  fam- 
ily lived  for  some  time  in  the  old  fort,  which  was 
erected  for  protection  against  the  Indians  by  the 
old  settlers. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  acquired  his  educa- 
tion in  the  common  schools  and  afterward  turned 
his  attention  to  farming,  to  which  pursuit  he  had 
been  reared.  He  was  a  successful  agriculturist 
and  his  land  was  hiwhl^'  improved.  The  town  of 
Baldwin  was  established  on  part  of  his  father's 
farm,  and  Mr.  Wilson  then  embarked  in  merchan- 
dising at  that  place,  carrying  on  operations  along 
that  line  for  a  period  of  five  years. 

In  1864,  our  subject  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Ellen  Been,  and  to  them  has  been  born 
a  family  of  ten  children,  five  of  whom  are  yet  liv- 
ing: Leonard;  Jennie,  wifeof  M.  J.  Delanej';  Mag- 
gie; Martin  and  Ella.  The  family  are  all  faithful 
and  consistent  members  of  the  Presbyterian  Church 
and  take  an  active  part  in  its  work,  and  also  in 
charitable  and  benevolent  enterprises.  The  father 
and  sons  are  stanch  supporters  of  the  Democratic 
party. 

In  the  year  1873,  Mr.  Wilson  was  elected  Jus- 
tice of  the  Peace,  and  each  succeeding  re-election 
has  found  him  the  people's  choice  for  that  office. 
About  1869,  he  was  elected  Town  Treasurer,  and 
is  still  filling  that  position.  He  devotes  his  entire 
lime  and  attention  to  his  oflficial  duties,  and  his 
promptness  and  fidelity  have  not  only  caused  his 
long  retention  in  office,  but  have  won  him  the  high 
commendation  of  all  and  have  gained  him  the  con- 
fidence and  good  will  of  those  with  whom  he  has 
been  brought  in  contact.  Socially,  he  is  connected 
with  the  Odd  Pellows'  society.  He  is  a  man  of 
sterling  worth  and  strict  integrity,  and  a  well  spent 
life  has  won  him  universal  esteem. 

Warren  N.  Wilson,  a  brother  of  our  subject,  was 
born  on  the  present  site  of  the  town  of  Baldwin 
in  1857,  and  was  reared  to  manhood  in  the  coun- 
ty of  his  nativity.  In  fact,  he  has  known  no  other 
home.  His  early  education,  acquired  in  the  com- 
mon schools,  w.as  supplemented  by  a  course  in 
Shurtleff  College,  of  Upper  Alton,  which  heentered 
in  1871,  there  pursuing  his  studies  for  two  years. 
Later  he  took  up  the  stud^'  of  law,  and  after  a 
thorough  preparation  for  that  profession    he  was 


382 


PORTRAIT  AND  BUXtRAPH'CAL   RECORD. 


admitted  to  the  Bar  in  Chester,  in  1877,  and  has 
since  siiccessfullj  engaged  in  practice  in  the  courts 
of  tliis  county.  He  is  well  read  in  his  profession, 
and  is  rapidly  winning  his  way  to  the  front  rank 
among  leading  practitioners  of  this  part  of  the 
state.  He  is  a  supporter  of  the  principles  of  the 
Democracy,  and  for  six  yeai-s  he  ably  served  in  the 
office  of  Master  in  Chancery.  He  is  now  serving 
his  eighth  year  as  Judge  of  the  County  Court, 
having  been  elected  for  two  terms  of  four  years 
each. 

Warren  N.  Wilson  was  married  in  December, 
1878,  the  lady  of  his  choice  being  Miss  Helen 
Crittenden,  whose  fatlier  located  in  Chester  among 
the  early  settlers  of  the  county.  Both  our  subject 
and  his  wife  are  faithful  members  of  tiie  Presby- 
terian Church,  and  in  social  circles  they  rank  high, 
for  the  AVilson  family  is  numbered  among  the  old- 
est arid  best  families  of  tlie  county,  and  the  his- 
tory of  this  community-  would  be  incomplete  with- 
out mention  of  tiiem. 


£ ^••{••{••{•'^^•M-++i  — = 

\T  SAAC  MONTGOJIERY.  In  every  department 
Ijl  of  activity,  Steeleville  has  its  leading  em- 
iii  porium,  and  unquestionablj'  the  mercantile 
establishment  owned  and  managed  by  Mr.  Mont- 
gomery should  be  ranked  with  the  best  of  its  kind. 
Since  coming  to  this  place  in  1887.  he  has  identi- 
fied himself  closely  with  the  business  interests  of 
the  town  and  county,  and  is  universally  recognized 
as  a  man  of  superior  executive  ability  and  excel- 
lent judgment. 

A  native  of  Indiana.  Mr.  Montgomery  was  born 
in  Gibson  County,  February-  26,  182.3.  and  is  a  son 
of  Thomas  and  Catherine  (Teel)  Montgomery. 
The  maternal  ancestors  were  originally  from  Ten- 
nessee. The  grandfather  came  from  Perthshire, 
Scotland,  and  settled  in  Culpeper  Court  House, 
Ya.  He  took  part  with  the  Colonies  in  the  Revo- 
lutionary- War.  The  father  of  our  subject  was 
with  General  Harrison  in  the  War  of  1812,  in  the 
west  against  the  Indians.  He  was  born  in  Culpeper 
Court  House,  Va.,  removing  thence  to  the  north. 
and  in  an  early  day  settled  in  Indiana,  where  he 
continued  to  reside  until  death.     Having  located 


in  that  state  during  the  pioneer  days,  the  family 
experienced  all  the  hardships  and  privations  in- 
cident to  life  upon  the  frontier,  and  the  children 
enjoyed  limited  advantages,  their  time  being  de- 
voted to  the  labor  of  clearing  and  cultivating  the 
land. 

Amid  such  surroundings,  it  is  needless  to  sa}- 
that  the  subject  of  this  sketch  had  few  op|iortuni- 
ties  to  attend  school,  nor  did  he  enjoy  the  manj- 
other  advantages  which  the  girls  and  bo^ys  of  this 
generation  consider  a  necessity.  AVith  the  excep- 
tion of  three  months'  attendance  at  school,  his  time 
was  devoted  to  farm  work,  and  he  early  acquired 
familiarity  with  agricultural  pursuits.  His  father 
dying  when  he  was  a  youth  of  eighteen,  he  and 
his  brothei-s  afterward  took  charge  of  the  farm, 
which  they  operated  for  a  number  of  years. 

In  1845,  Mr.  Montgomery  disposed  of  his  inter- 
ests in  Gibson  County  and  removed  to  Franklin 
County,  111.,  and  purchasing  land  near  Benton,  en- 
gaged in  farming  there  for  a  period  of  thirty-five 
years.  During  that  time  he  accumulated  a  com- 
fortable fortune,  and  also  became  well  known  as  a 
man  of  integrity,  energy'  and  progressive  spirit. 
As  above  stated,  he  came  to  Steeleville  in  1887, 
and  embarked  in  the  mercantile  business,  in  which 
he  has  since  been  actively  engaged.  Though  now 
somewhat  advanced  in  \'ears,  his  mental  faculties 
are  as  keen  as  when  in  life's  prime,  and  his  health 
is  unimpaired. 

The  first  marriage  of  Mr.  Montgomery  occurred 
in  1845,  and  united  him  with  Mi>s  Elizabeth,  daugh- 
ter of  Jackson  Armstrong,  of  Gibson  County,  Ind. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Montgomery  became  the  parents  of 
twelve  children,  six  of  whom  died  in  infancy.  W. 
P.  married  Jliss  Eva  Naylor,  and  is  a  postal  clerk 
of  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad;  Louisa,  the  widow 
of  John  McCasland,  resides  in  Ashland,  Kan.; 
Henry  married  Bessie  Orsbonie,  and  resides  in  No 
Man's  Land;  Mary  is  the  wife  of  Simeon  AUmon, 
and  resides  at  Benton,  111.;  and  Joiin  is  now  a 
student  in  Ewing  College.  October  23,  1887,  Mi-s. 
Elizabeth  Montgomery  passed  away. 

August  21.  1888,  Mr.  Montgomery  married  Mrs. 
Annie  (Brashear)  Courtney,  the  daughter  of  John 
W.  and  Mary  G.  (.Spencer)  Brashear,  of  Pennsyl- 
vania.    In    their  religious  connections,  Mr.  and 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRArHICAL  RECORD. 


383 


Mrs.  Montgomery  are  members  of  the  Missionary 
Baptist  Church.  In  national  affairs  he  is  a  Repub- 
lican, but  in  local  matters  he  is  conservative,  vot- 
ing for  the  candidate  whom  he  deems  best  quali- 
fied for  the  position,  irrespective  of  political  ties. 
During  the  late  war  he  enlisted,  in  October,  1862, 
as  a  member  of  Company  F,  Fifteenth  Illinois  Cav- 
alry, and  was  in  active  service  for  three  years,  be- 
ing mustered  out  at  Helena,  Ark.,  in  1865.  Alike 
in  times  of  peace  and  war,  he  has  been  faithful  to 
his  duties  as  a  citizen,  and  has  contributed  to  the 
advancement  of  all  public-spirited  measures. 

ACOB  KP'.LLER,  M.  D.,  who  was  engaged  in 
the  practice  of  medicine  in  Steeleville  for 
many  years,  and  was  one  of  its  leading  cit- 

'f)  izens,  was  born  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  1842. 
His  father  and  motlier  both  died  in  that  cit3-  dur- 
ing the  cholera  epidemic  of  1849,  which  also  car- 
ried off  eight  children  of  tlie  family,  leaving 
-Tacob  an  orphan  when  only  seven  j^ears  of  age. 
He  was  reared  by  an  uncle  in  his  native  city, 
and  after  attending  the  common  schools,  was  grad- 
uated from  Wasiiington  University  of  St.  Louis, 
and  from  the  Missouri  Medical  College  of  St. 
Louis.  He  had  determined  to  make  the  practice 
of  medicine  his  life  work,  and  to  this  end  pursued 
a  tliorough  course  of  study. 

During  the  late  war,  Dr.  Keller  served  as  surgeon 
in  the  Sixth  Missouii  Infantry,  and  at  the  close  of 
that  struggle,  when  his  aid  was  no  longer  needed, 
he  took  up  his  residence  in  Cliester,  111.  Previous 
to  this  time  he  had  gone  to  Kansas  City,  Mo., 
wliere  he  edited  a  medical  journal  for  some  time, 
and  then  removed  to  Chester,  wliere  he  continued 
in  the  practice  of  his  profession  until  tlie  death  of 
his  wife. 

The  Doctor  first  married  Hattie  T.  Williamson, 
of  Pleasant  Hill,  Mo.,  and  by  their  union  were 
born  two  cliildren,  Robert  G.  and  Mamie,  both  of 
whom  are  yet  living  in  Pleasant  Hill.  In  October, 
1874,  Dr.  Keller  was  again  married,  his  second 
union  being  with  Mary  Glore,  a  daughter  of  Jep- 
llia  and  Margaret  (Crisler)  Glore,  the  former  born 
in  Kentucky,    and  the  latter  near  Kaskaskia,  III. 


Four  cliildren  grace  the  second  marriage,  all  of 
whom  are  yet  living,  namely:  Alargaret  Lulu, 
Jacob,  Hattie  Belle  and  Cinderella. 

After  the  death  of  his  first  wife  Dr.  Keller  made 
a  trip  to  Europe  and  visited  the  colleges  and  med- 
ical schools  on  the  continent,  thus  adding  greatly 
to  liis  knowledge  of  medical  science  and  to  his 
ability  for  work  along  that  lin«.  After  his  return 
to  his  native  land  he  again  spent  a  shdi't  time  in 
Chester,  and  then  removed  to  Steeleville,  where  he 
continued  to  reside  until  called  to  the  home  be- 
yond. He  was  very  successful  in  the  practice  of 
his  profession,  and  was  regarded  as  one  of  the 
leading  pli^-sicians  and  surgeons  of  southern  Illi- 
nois, winning  a  most  enviable  reputation  among 
his  professional  brethren  and  among  the  people  at 
large.  Socially  he  was  u  Roj'al  Arch  Mason,  and 
was  also  connected  with  the  Grand  Army  of  the 
Republic.  In  politics  he  was  a  stanch  supporter 
of  Republican  principles,  and  was  a  progressive 
citizen,  who  gave  his  support  and  hearty  co-opera- 
tion to  every  enterprise  calculated  to  prove  of 
public  benefit.  He  died  May  21,  188,5,  respected 
by  all  who  knew  him.  His  wife,  a  most  estimable 
lad}',  is  living  with  her  four  children  at  their  beau- 
tiful home  in  Steeleville.  In  1883  the  Doctor 
took  atrip  through  Florida  and  South  America. 


kEWIS  O.  McDonald.  On  section  18, 
township  6,  range  7,  Randoli)h  County, 
lies  a  pleasant,  finely  tilled  and  well  im- 
proved farm,  which  was  the  property  of  our  sub- 
ject. He  was  born  neai-  Preston,  this  country.  May 
6,  1857,  to  Thomas  M.  and  Mary  (Thompson)  Mc- 
Donald, aiso  natives  of  this  county,  who  are  still 
residing  here.  The  primary  education  of  young 
Lewis  was  obtained  in  the  common  and  district 
schools  near  his  home,  but  he  later  supplemented  it 
by  an  attendance  at  the  school  at  Carbondale, 
111^  Subsequently  he  gave  his  undivided  atten- 
tion to  the  pursuit  of  agriculture  until  his  death, 
which  sad  event  occurred  December  5.  1892,  when 
the  community  was  deprived  of  one  of  Its  most 
honored  and  respected  citizens.  He  was  a  very 
successful    farmer,    one    who    pursued    the    most 


384 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  ^RECORD. 


approved  methods  in  the  raanageraent  of   his  es- 
tate of  sixty-eight  acres. 

Miss  Jane  Jones  became  tlie  wife  of  our  subject 
March  21,  1878.  Mrs.  McDonald  was  a  native  of 
this  county,  and  by  lier  marriage  bore  her  hus' 
band  four  children:  Clara  S.  and  Charles  T.,  who 
died  at  the  same  time  as  their  beloved  father; 
Lulu  B.  and  William  O.,  who  are  still  living.  The 
good  wife  and  mother  passed  to  the  land  of  rest 
February  28, 1885, and  May  18, 1890.  Mr.  McDonald 
was  married  to  Minnie  W.,  daughter  of  Samuel  H. 
and  Mary  E.  (Wiley)  Thompson,  also  natives  of 
this  count}-.  The  father  is  still  living  in  Chester, 
but  the  mother  died  in  1880.  To  this  second 
union  of  our  subject  one  child,  Clay  Hill,  was 
born,  who  is  now  living  with  his  mother.  She  is 
making  her  home  at  Ellis  Grove  and  is  a  consist- 
ent member  of  the  Baptist  Church,  as  was  her 
husband.  Mr.  McDonald  was  a  leading  member 
of  the  Farmers'  Alliance  at  Ellis  Grove,  and  was 
ever  a  stanch  supporter  of  the  Republican  plat- 
form. 

_:=^#r^^ '  . 

W  AMES  M.  TEMPLE,  one  of  the  most  intelli- 
gent and  popular  farmers  of  Randolph 
^j^^i  County,  resides  in  township  5,  range  6.  He 
^5^^  is  a  son  of  Robert  Temple,  who  was  born  in 
Allegheny  Count}-,  Pa., in  1813.  His  father,  John 
Temple,  was  a  native  of  Scotland,  and  during  the 
Revolutionary  War  came  to  America  as  a  British 
officer,  but  later  he  left  that  service  and  joined  the 
Colonial  ami}'.  After  the  war  he  located  in  Alle- 
gheny County,  Pa.,  where  he  followed  farming  un- 
til his  deatii,  although  he  was  a  w-eaver  by  trade. 
He  belonged  to  the  Covenanter  Church. 

Robert  Temple  continued  in  his  native  county 
until  1855,  when  he  emigrated  to  Randolph  Coun- 
t}'.  111.,  and  settled  three  miles  southwest  of  Sparta. 
Later  he  removed  to  the  farm  upon  which  our 
subject  now  resides,  and  continued  its  cultivation 
until  his  death.  He  inairied  Rebecca  Gregor}-,  a 
native  of  Pennsylvania,  whose  parents  were  born 
in  Ireland.  To  them  weie  born  nine  children: 
William,  who  wedded  Mary  CaslidoUar,  a  mechanic 
of  Houston,  111.;  Elizabeth,  wife  of  Andrew  Mc- 
Lean, a  farmer  of  this  county,  by  whom  she  has  six 


children;  Martha,   who  became  the  wife  of  James 

McLean,  and  after  his  death  married  William 
Gregg,  of  Nebiaska,  bj'  whom  she  has  two  children; 
Samuel,  a  furniture  dealer  of  .Missouri,  who  mar- 
ried Julia  Sappiugton;  John,  who  married  Amanda 
AYallace,  and  died  leaving  three  children;  James, 
of  this  sketch;  Robert,  deceased;  Joseph  M..  a  mer- 
chant of  RoUa,  Mo.,  who  married  Fanny  Whittum, 
bj-  whom  he  has  seven  children,  and  Charles  E., 
also  of  RoUa,  Mo.  The  father  of  this  family  was 
a  Democrat  in  early  life,  but  afterward  became  a 
Republican,  and  took  a  ver}-  active  interest  in  polit- 
ical affairs.  He  held  membership  with  the  United 
Presbyterian  Chuich,  in  which  lie  served  as  Trus- 
tee, and  lived  an  honorable,  upright  life,  which 
won  him  the  confidence  and  regard  of  all.  His 
wife,  a  most  estimable  lad}-,  passed  away  in    1872. 

James  M.  Temple  was  boi-n  in  Allegheny  Coun- 
ty, Pa.,  October  31,  1840,  and  there  made  his  home 
until  1855.  He  continued  under  the  parental  ruof 
until  1863,  when  he  went  to  the  front  in  defense 
of  the  Union,  as  a  member  of  Company  K,  One 
Hundred  and  Forty -second  Illinois  Infantry,  serv- 
ing under  Captain  Cliilds  and  Colonal  Anchony. 
of  Chicago.  In  that  city  he  was  discharged  De- 
cember 15,  1864.  Immediately  afterward  he  re- 
turned home,  where  he  remained  for  a  year,  and 
then  spent  three  years  and  a-half  in  driving  a 
stage  between  Sparta  and  St.  Louis.  At  the  expir- 
ation of  that  period  he  purchased  his  present  farm, 
which  comprises  one  hundred  and  twenty-six  and 
a-half  acres  of  good  land. 

The  marriage  of  Mr.  Temple  and  Rosanna  Sap- 
piugton, a  native  of  Madison  County,  111.,  was 
celebrated  August  31,  1869.  She  is  a  daughter  of 
Anderson  and  Fannie  (Pipkin)  Sappington,  the 
former  a  native  of  Missouri,  and  the  latter  of  Ten- 
nessee. Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Temple  have  been 
born  seven  children:  Robert  A.,  who  married  Ada 
Moore,  by  whom  he  has  a  daughter.  Lula  E.;  Lillie 
A.,  wife  of  Lyman  Morrison;  Jessie  M.,  Rosalie, 
P.  Roscoe,  Bertha  D.  and  Daisy  W. 

Mr.  Temple  started  out  in  life  empty-handed, 
but  is  now  in  comfortable  circumstances,  and  in 
addition  to  his  farm  he  owns  an  interest  in  a 
creamery.  His  success  is  well  deserved,  for  it  is  the 
reward  of  his  own  labor.     He  has  served  as  Presi- 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


385 


dent  of  the  Mutual  Insurance  Company.  In  poli- 
tics he  is  an  independent  Pi-ohibitionist,  and  was 
the  candidate  for  State  Senator  on  that  ticket.  So- 
cially, he  is  connected  with  tlie  Grand  Army  of 
the  Republic.  Himself,  wife  and  four  children 
liold  membership  with  the  United  Presliyterian 
Churcli  of  Sparta.  For  twenty-one  years  he  served 
as  an  Elder  in  the  United  Presbyterian  Church, 
and  has  ever  been  a  leading  and  faithful  worker 
for  religious  causes.  He  was  true  to  liis  country 
in  her  hour  of  peril,  and  his  fidelity  and  faithful- 
ness are  alike  shown  in  times  of  peace  by  his  ear- 
nest efforts  to  promote  tiie  public  welfare. 


'\TJ  OHN  MUDD  was  for  many  years  a  promi- 
nent and  highly  respected  citizen  of  Ran- 
dolph Count}',  and  when  he  passed  away, 
the  following  words  were  spoken  of  him  at 
the  funeral  service.  "Mr.  Mudd  was  one  of  those 
old  pioneer  citizens  of  Randulph  County'  whose 
number  is  growing  painfully  less,  as  the  cold,  piti- 
less hand  of  death  plucks  them,  one  bj'  one,  from 
the  seclusion  of  the  life  they  have  chosen  after 
the  life  wliich  developed  our  civilization  and  the 
religion  which  tlieir  posterity  practice.  No  better, 
nobler  old  gentleman  has  gone  to  the  realms  of 
shade,  and  no  truer  Catholic  and  broad-hearted 
philanthropist,  tlian  he  who  sleeps  beneath  the 
humble  mound  in  the  cemeter_y  where  rests  so 
many  of  old  Randolph's  noble  dead.  Born  in 
Kentucky,  he  was  a  genuine  American,  and  was  a 
true  and  tried  Christian.  He  had  the  satisfaction, 
which  is  so  gratifying  to  the  aged,  of  seeing  his 
family  filling  honorable  positions  in  society  and 
the  business  walks  of  life.  Having  lived  far  past 
his  three-score  years  and  ten,  he  was  an  exemplifi- 
cation of  the  promise  of  the  Almigiity,  'Honor 
thy  father  and  thy  mother  that  thy  days  may  be 
long  in  the  laud  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall 
give  to  thee.'  " 

Mr.  Mudd  was  born  in  Slielby  County,  H-y.,  in 
February,  1802,  and  when  but  seventeen  years  of 
age  came  to  Randolph  County,  locating  in  the 
neighborhood  of  Prairie  du  Rocher.  Returning 
to  his  native  state,  he  married  Mary  Brewer,  and 


then  brought  his  bride  to  his  new  home.  They 
became  the  parents  of  six  children:  Vincent,  who 
is  married  and  with  his  family  resides  near  the  old 
homestead;  Harrison,  who  died  leaving  four  chil- 
dren; F.  Celine,  who  died  leaving  three  children; 
Sophia,  wife  of  James  Daily,  of  Monroe  County; 
William  T.;  and  John  E.,  who  is  engaged  in  farm- 
ing near  Red  Bud. 

After  coming  to  Randolph  Count}',  Mr.  Mudd 
worked  by  the  month,  but  by  economy  and  indus- 
try he  soon  secured  enough  capital  to  purchase  a 
small  farm.  To  this  lie  added  from  time  to  time, 
until  at  his  death  he  owned  a  valuable  farm  of 
two  hundred  acres.  He  was  an  unusually  active 
man,  and  his  success  was  well  deserved.  He  was 
long  a  prominent  worker  in  the  Catholic  Church, 
and  in  politics  was  an  uncompromising  Democrat, 
but  would  never  accept  public  office,  ('liarital)le 
and  benevolent,  he  gave  so  freely  that  his  liberal- 
ity was  almost  a  fault.  His  death  occurred  in 
April,  1883,  at  the  .age  of  eightj'-one.  His  wife 
survived  him  until  July,  1893,  when  she  too 
passed  away  at  the  age  of  eighty-one.  An  active 
Christian  woman,  like  her  husl)and  she  held  mem- 
bership with  the  Catholic  Church. 

William  T.  Mudd  was  born  in  this  county,  Sep- 
tember 14,  1843,  and  was  educated  in  the  common 
schools.  In  the  spring  of  1861  he  went  to  Colo- 
rado, where  he  spent  about  four  years  on  account 
of  ill-health.  In  1864  he  returned,  and  the  fol- 
lowing 3'ear  was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss 
Ella,  daughter  of  James  Roscow,  one  of  the  pio- 
neers of  this  county,  who  died  in  July,  1»79,  at 
the  age  of  sixty -seven  years,  leaving  a  family  of 
six  children,  four  of  whom  are  yet  living.  His 
wife  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Maria  Palmer  and 
was  a  native  of  England.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Mudd 
have  one  son,  John  T.,  who  works  in  his  father's 
store.  He  married  TiUie  Havermann,  and  they 
have  one  child,  Roscoe. 

William  T.  Mudd  and  his  family  are  all  mem- 
bers of  and  active  workers  in  the  Catholic  Church. 
In  politics  he  is  a  Democrat.  He  came  to  Red 
Bud  about  1868,  and  worked  in  mercantile  stores 
for  others  until  1883,  when  he  began  business  for 
himself.  Five  years  later  he  sold  out  and  formed 
a  partnership  with   Mr.  McQuillan,  under  the  firm 


386 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


name  of  Mudd  &  McQuillan,  and  the  partnership 
Las  since  continued.  They  deal  in  general  merchan- 
dise, and  also  in  farm  imi)lements,  and  are  doing  a 
good  business. 

^-        .   ^■^♦♦♦♦♦•S"}--  -  -         ^ 

<^UGUST  WILHKLMS,  wiio  resides  on  see- 
'Wl    \\     *'^"   ^''  township   3,   range  8  west,  and 

I  II  there  carries  on  general  farming  and 
^jfl  stock-raising,  is  one  of  the  worthy-  citizens 

that  Germany  has  furnished  to  Monroe  County. 
He  was  born  in  Hanover  October  15,  1841,  and  is 
a  son  of  Henry  and  Christina  Wilhelms.  In  bis 
native  land  the  father  followed  weaving.  In 
1845  he  came  to  the  United  States,  with  the  in- 
teuion  of  settling  in  Texas,  but  stopping  at  Alex- 
andria, La.,  thence  turned  his  course  northward, 
and  came  to  Monroe  County  in  the  spring  of  1846. 
On  section  27,  township  3,  range  8  west,  he  bought 
forty  acres  of  land  and  entered  an  eighty-acre 
tract  of  woodland,  which  by  hard  work  he  con- 
verted into  fertile  Qelds.  Upon  the  old  home- 
stead he  lived  until  his  death,  which  occurred 
May  18,  1854.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Evangel- 
ical Church,  and  served  as  a  Director  of  the  church 
in  his  native  land. 

Surviving  Henry  Wilhelms  were  his  widow  and 
six  children,  of  whom  we  note  the  following: 
Henry  was  born  May  1,  1831,  and  died  Novem- 
ber 9,  1876.  Caroline,  who  was  born  in  1834, 
married  Fred  Wagener,  who,  with  their  three  chil- 
dren, August,  Amelia  and  Lena,  are  still  living; 
she  died  May  18,  1868.  Frederick  was  born  in 
1838,  and  died  September  15,  1864.  August,  the 
subject  of  this  sketch,  is  the  next  in  order  of  birth. 
Charles,  whose  birth  occurred  in  1843,  passed  away 
January-  15,  1866.  Louisa  was  born  March  5, 
1851,  and  died  February  13,1867.  The  widow 
is  still  living  (1894)  on  the  old  homestead  with 
her  son,  and  has  attained  the  advanced  age  of 
eighty-four  years. 

After  the  death  of  his  father,  our  subject 
remained  with  his  mother  until  he  was  old 
enough  to  work  out  as  a  farm  laborer.  Soon, 
however,  he  drifted  to  the  city,  where  he  worked 
at  various  occupations  in  order  to  obtain  the 
money  for  an  education.     In  1861,  wlien  the  war 


broke  out,  he  was  found  among  the  bo\'s  in  blue, 
lie  enlisted  August  27,  1861,  and  was  mustered 
out  November  4,  1865,  at  Nashville,  Tenn.  He 
was  a  member  of  Company  M,  Seventh  Illinois 
Cavalry, and  participated  in  the  operations  against 
New  JLadrid.  Island  No.  10,  Corinth,  and  in  the 
battles  of  luka,  Corinth,  Port  Hudson  and  Nash- 
vil'e,  and  the  Giierson  raid,  in  which  eight  hun- 
dred miles  were  traversed  in  seventeen  days.  On 
the  26tli  of  December,  1863,  at  Somerville,  in  an 
engagement  with  Forrest's  cavalr3',  he  was  taken 
prisoner,  but  through  a  daring  effort  and  good 
"running  gears"  he  managed  to  get  away  from  his 
enemies.  Altogether  he  was  in  sixty  skirmishes 
and  engagements.  During  the  last  two  years  he 
served  as  Orderly  .Sergeant  in  his  company.  True 
to  the  Old  Flag  and  the  cause  which  it  represented, 
he  stood  by  his  colors  until  the  desired  end  was 
attained  and  the  Union  saved,  after  which  he 
came  back  to  his  mother  and  commenced  work  on 
the  old  homestead. 

June  13,  1867,  our  subject  married  Miss  Eliza- 
beth Von  Schreeb,  daughter  of  Adolph  and  Bar- 
bara (Welsh)  Von  Schreeb.  Her  father,  who  was 
born  in  tlie  province  of  Mecklenburg,  German^', 
joined  the  Dutch  army  at  the  age  of  fifteen  years 
and  went  to  the  East  Indies,  from  which  place  he 
sailed  on  a  ship  for  China.  During  the  voyage  he 
was  thrown  overboard  by  a  gale,  but  by  means  of 
a  plank  his  life  was  saved.  On  reaching  China,  he 
was  sick  with  yellow  fever,  and  was  taken  on 
shore  and  placed  under  a  shade  tree,  where  he  was 
found  by  a  Chinese  couple,  who  were  mourning 
the  loss  of  their  only  son.  They  adopted  him  as 
their  child,  and  with  them  he  remained  for  five 
years.  Then,  embarking  on  a  ship,  he  returned 
to  his  native  land,  where  he  had  long  been  counted 
with  the  dead. 

In  1834  Mr.  Von  Schreeb  emigrated  to  the 
United  States  and  engaged  in  boating  on  the 
Mississippi  River  until  1836,  when  he  came  to 
Monroe  County  and  entered  eighty  acres  on  sec- 
tion 22,  township  3,  range  8  west.  There  he  cleared 
a  farm  and  made  a  good  home,  which  continued  to 
be  his  place  of  abode  through  life.  He  here  mar- 
ried Clara  Waldmann,  by  whom -he  had  three  chil- 
dren, two  djing  in  infancy.     A  son,  Ernest  Will- 


WW 


«i    ,  i4k"^ 


rtTW- )' 


RESIDENCE     OF      TRANK     M  AT  N  E  Y  ,  5EC.  25.,T.  6  .,R.  7.,  RANDOLPH    CO.,  ILL. 


riif 


^ 


'.w  ^ 


fe»^A^^^^  ■^.--«s^v.^.^r^^iV3;g-^a.s^---^,:..^"s~»--fe^a^^4i^^tis^^^  ..  --:  .g^ '..-e.^ 


;^5#^ii^ 


RESIDENCE  OF  AUGU5T    WILHELM5    ,  SEC.2Z.,  T.  5.  R.  8  .,  MO  i  I  KO      LOJLL. 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Sd9 


iam,  is  living  in  Ottawa,  La  Salle  Count}',  111. 
In  1847  Mis.  Clara  Von  Schreob  died,  and  during 
the  following  year  Mr.  Von  Sclireeb  married  Bar- 
bara Welsh,  their  union  being  severed  b}'  his 
death  .lanuary  22,  1849.  One  child  was  born  of 
this  marriage,  Elizabeth,  whose  birth  occurred  May 
25,  1849.  Mr.  Von  Sehreeb  was  one  of  the  earli- 
est settlers  of  this  community,  and  was  an  honored 
pioneer.  He  helped  to  haul  the  logs  for  the  build- 
ing of  the  old  Evangelical  Church  in  this  township, 
and  was  one  of  the  faithful  members  of  tliat  re- 
ligious organization. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Willielins  were  born  fourteen 
children,  ten  of  whom  are  yet  living:  Hellena,  wife 
of  Philip  Hecke,  of  this  community;  Mary  W.,  at 
home;  Edward  W.,  August  E.,  Elizabeth  C,  Albert 
J.,  Anna  JL,  Frank  E.,  Adaline  M.  and  Adolpli 
H.  Louisa,  Henry,  Josephine  and  S3-lvester  died 
in  cliildhood.  The  famil}'  has  a  pleasant  home  on 
a  fine  farm  of  three  hundred  and  fort}'  acres.  Of 
this  two  hundred  acres  are  under  a  high  state  of 
cultivation,  and  the  neat  and  thrifty  appearance 
of  the  place  indicates  the  enterprise  and  careful 
supervision  of  the  owner. 

In  his  political  views,  Mr.  WiUielms  is  a  Kepuli- 
lican.  For  the  long  period  of  twenty-one  years  he 
served  as  School  Director,  and  for  three  years 
was  Road  Commissioner.  He  is  a  prominent 
worker  in  the  Grand  Army  of  the  Republic,  and  is 
now  Commander  of  Henry  Nicholson  Post  No. 
457,  G.  A.  R.,  of  Red  Bud.  He  also  belongs  to  the 
Farmers'  Mutual  Benefit  Association,  and  is  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Evangelical  Church.  He  served  as  one 
of  its  Directors  for  a  number  of  years,  and  is 
numbered  among  its  faithful  workers.  Since  1846 
he  has  lived  upon  his  present  farm  and  is  one  of 
the  honored  pioneers  of  the  county. 

l(S),  ^iMjjk         .(sj 

^/'RANK   MATNEY.     As  a  representative  of 

P^  the  progressive  and  successful  farmers  and 
stock-raisers  of  Randolph  County,  especial 
mention  belongs  to  the  subject  of  this  sketch,  who 
conducts  general  agricultural   operations  on  sec- 


tion 25,  township  6,  range  7.  Through  the  exer- 
cise of  careful  management  in  the  conduct  of  his 
business  affairs,  he  has  become  the  owner  of  one 
hundred  and  twenty  acres,  wliich  he  has  placed 
under  excellent  cultivation. 

The  father  and  mother  of  our  subject  bore  the 
names  of  Sylvester  and  Rlioda  (Hill)  Matney,  and 
were  natives  of  North  Carolina,  whence  they  re- 
moved to  this  state,  and  spent  their  last  days  in 
Marion  County.  There  was  born  to  them  a  fam- 
ily of  two  children,  of  whom  our  subject  was  the 
elder,  the  date  of  his  birth  being  August  6,  1846. 
Losing  his  parents  when  quite  young,  our  subject 
caine  to  this  county  when  twelve  years  old,  and 
lived  with  Charles  Sanders,  near  Chester.  He  re- 
ceived his  education  in  tlie  common  schools  in  the 
neighborhood,  and  worked  on  the  farm  for  Mr. 
Sanders  for  his  board  and  clothing. 

When  seventeen  years  old,  in  1863,  young  Mat- 
ney enlisted  in  the  Union  army,  in  Company  I, 
Tenth  Illinois  Infantry,  and  proved  a  gallant  sol- 
dier, remaining  in  the  service  until  the  close  of 
hostilities.  He  was  a  participant  in  twenty-seven 
battles,  among  which  were  some  of  the  most  famous 
of  the  war.  May  30,  1865,  he  was  mustered  out, 
and  was  honorably  discharged  at  McDougal  Hos- 
pital, near  New  York  City.  He  was  wounded  at 
Bentonville,  N.  C,  and  remained  in  the  hospital  a 
short  time. 

After  leaving  the  army,  Mr.  Matney  purchased 
a  farm,  and  has  since  actively  engaged  in  his 
i  chosen  vocation,  raising  the  various  kinds  of  grain 
I  and  blooded  stock.  He  is  very  popular  wherever 
known,  and  makes  a  friend  of  every  man  he  meets. 
One  of  his  most  prominent  qualities  is  his  sterling 
business  cliaracter.  In  his  work  he  is  methodical, 
and  his  sagacity  in  business  matters  has  won  him 
the   admiration  of  all  with  whom  he  has  dealings. 

March  11,  1869,  Mr.  Matney  married  Miss  Feli- 
city Montroy,  and  by  their  union  four  children 
were  born.  Two  of  these  died  in  infancy,  aud 
the  remaining  two,  who  reside  with  their  par- 
ents, bear  the  names  of  Caroline  and  Mary  Jane. 
Mrs.  Matney  is  a  daughter  of  B.  and  Julia  Montroy, 
and  is  of  French  descent.  Our  subject  is  a  member 
of  Adair  Post,G.  A.  R.,  at  New  Palestine.  In  poli- 
tics a  Republican,  he  is  interested  in  county,  state 


S90 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


ftnri  national  issues.  He  is  a  liberal-spirited  man, 
and  is  ever  ready  to  aid  in  all  matters  of  local  en- 
terprise, although  not  an  aspirant  to  public  office. 


JOSEPH  PATTON,  who  is  engaged  in  farm- 
ing and  stock-raising  in   Randolph  County, 
is  the  ninth  in  order  of  birth  in  a  family  of 
, ^      ten    cliildien,  and    was  born   September   8, 

1815,  in  Steuben ville,  .Jefiferson  County,  Ohio.  His 
grandfather,  Joseph  Patton.  was  a  native  of  Ire- 
land, and  upon  emigrating  to  America,  settled  in 
Faj-ette  County,  Pa.  His  son  Thomas,  the  father 
of  our  subject,  was  born  on  the  Emerald  Isle  in 
1768,  and  at  the  age  of  three  was  brought  to 
America.  He  witnessed  many  incidents  of  the 
Revolutionary  War,  and  these  made  an  indelible 
impression  upon  his  mind.  While  in  Steuhenville, 
he  sei'vod  as  Associate  Judge,  and  was  Clerk  of  the 
Common  Pleas  Court  for  seven  years.  In  1818,  he 
removed  to  thevicinitj'  of  Cadez,  Ohio,  where  he 
made  his  home  for  fouileen  years,  engaged  in 
farming  and  teaching.  In  politics  he  was  a  Demo- 
crat, and  was  an  Elder  in  the  Associate  Reformed  j 
Ciiurch.  He  died  February  28,  1832,  at  the  age 
of  sixty-three,  and  the  following  obituarj-  was 
written  by  Ruv.  John  McCartliur,  of  Cadez,  Ohio  : 
"The  deceased  was  for  many  years  a  resident  of 
Harrison  and  .Tefferson  Counties,  and  held  a  suc- 
cession of  civil  offices,  among  which  ma\-  be  named 
those  of  Associate  Judge  and  Cleik  of  the  Courts 
of  the  latter  count}-,  and  that  of  the  eldership 
in  the  Associate  Reformed  Congregation  in  this 
place,  and  has  left  a  widowed  partner,  several  chil- 
dren and  a  numerous  circle  of  friends.  His  mind 
was  of  large  original  capacity',  vigorous,  discrim- 
inating, comprehensive,  amplified  and  adorned 
with  a  rich  furniture  of  knowledge,  both  useful 
and  entertaining.  Piercing  with  more  than  com- 
mon readiness  through  the  thin  veil  of  names  to 
things,  it  refused  to  receive  doctrines  or  to  adopt 
customs  supported  by  no  other  plea  than  that  of 
prescription.  But  though  independent,  it  was  free 
from  any  air  of  lomance,  and  practical  rather  than 
theoretical  in  its  pursuits.  His  opinions  were 
formed    after  a  severe  scrutiny  of  the  evidences 


upon  wliich  they  were  based,  and  consequentlj'  re- 
tained with  a  firm  grasp,  though  not  with  that  ob- 
stinacj'  which  will  not  stoop  to  doubt  its  own 
infallibility.  A  playful,  lively,  varied  wit,  an 
habitual  cheerfulness,  and  affable  and  unassuming 
disposition,  abundant  controveisial  resources,  ren- 
dered him  a  pleasing  and  instructive  companion. 

"As  the  head  of  a  family  he  was  a  husband  of 
'truth-tried  love,'  and  a  father  doubly  dear,  be- 
cause he  softened  parental  authority-  with  the 
charms  of  friendship.  Age  secured  him  voluntary 
respect,  but  did  not  invest  him  with  a  morosen'ess 
which  repels  the  approaches  of  youth  and  inter- 
dicts familiarity.  Religion  shed  a  mild  but  steads- 
radiance  over  his  character.  It  was  unostentatious 
and  humble,  teaching  its  subject  to  say  of  himself, 
'I  am  an  unprofitable  servant,'  and  of  the  Divine 
Rideemer,  -He  is  all  in  all.'  He  had  not  yet  num- 
bered his  three-score  and  ten  years  of  health,  al- 
most uninterrupted,  until  the  short  and  painful  ill- 
ness which  terminated  in  his  dissolution,  left  his 
bodily  powers  strong  and  the  force  of  his  mind 
uninvaded  until  a  few  da^ys  before  his  expiration. 
He  bore  his  illness  with  Christian  fortitude,  and 
from  its  commencement  anticipated  and  looked 
forward  with  composure  to  his  change.  'Mark  the 
perfect  man  and  behold  the  upright,  for  the  end 
of  that  man  is  peace.' 

The  mother  of  our  subject  was  in  her  maiden- 
hood Jane  Parkhill,  daughterof  David  and  Martha 
(Morrow)  Parkhill,  and  a  sister  of  the  wife  of 
Governor  Morrow,  of  Ohio.  The  Parkhill  family 
is  of  Irish  descent.  Mrs.  Patton  moved  to  Ran- 
dolph Count}-,  111.,  where  she  lived  for  nine  years, 
and  died  in  1855,  in  her  eighty-fourth  year.  By 
her  marriage  she  had  ten  children:  Joseph  and 
David,  both  deceased;  Elizabeth,  deceased  wife  of 
James  McCullough;  James,  a  farmer;  Sarah,  Mrs. 
William  Miller;  John,  a  carpenter;  Joshua  D.,  an 
attorney;  Maria,  formerly  the  wife  of  Rev.  H. 
Stevenson;  Joseph,  of  this  sketch;  and  Esther, 
who  died  in  infancy.  All  are  now  deceased  with 
the  exception  of  our  subject. 

Mr.  Patton,  whose  name  heads  this  record,  re- 
mained with  his  parents  until  after  the  death  of 
his  father.  His  educational  privileges  were  lim- 
ited, and   early  in    life  he  became  inured  to  hard 


l>ORTItArr  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  EECORD. 


391 


laboi*.     In  l84l  he  made  a  permanent  location  in 

Randolph  County,  111.,  and  in  1845  purchased  of 
'Squire  McCoruiick  his  present  home,  upon  wiiich 
he  has  since  resided.  In  1846  he  married  Marga- 
ret Kingston,  who  was  born  in  Ohio  in  1828,  and 
came  to  Illinois  in  1843.  She  is  a  daugliter  of 
Christopher  and  Marj-  (Stephenson)  Kingston. 
For  twenty -one  years  she  has  been  an  invalid,  but 
has  borne  her  sufferings  witli  Christian  fortitude. 

To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Patton  were  born  eleven  chil- 
dren: Sarah  Jane,  wife  of  W.  M.  K.  Lyons,  by 
whom  siie  lias  four  cliildren;  Elizabeth,  deceased; 
Jlary,  wife  of  Dr.  .1.  T.  Matthews,  of  Omaha,  Neb., 
by  whom  she  lias  four  sons;  Margaret,  who  mar- 
ried A.  D.Fulton  and  has  two  children;  .Tames  A., 
a  minister  of  the  Covenanter  Church,  residing  in 
Evans,  Colo.;  Thomas,  pastor  of  the  old  Cove- 
nanter Church  in  East  Coldeu ham,  N.  Y.;  Adeline, 
wife  of  J.  II.  Peters,  a  farmer  of  Perry  County,  by 
whom  slie  has  one  child;  William  C,  who  man- 
ages the  home  farm,  is  married  and  has  two  chil- 
dren; Flora  Maria,  at  home;  Christopher  and  Eliza, 
both  deceased. 

At  the  early  age  of  sixteen  years  Mr.  Patton 
was  thrown  upon  his  own  resources,  and  the  care 
of  his  mother  and  three  sisters  also  devolved  upon 
him.  His  life  has  been  a  busj'and  useful  one,  and 
as  the  result  of  his  untiring  efforts  he  is  now  the 
owner  of  one  hundred  acres  of  valuable  land.  He 
is  a  Prohibitionist.  Religiously  he  is  a  member  of 
the  Covenanter  Church  of  Sparta,  in  which  he  has 
been  Elder  for  forty-four  years,  and  was  Clerk  of 
the  session  for  forty-three  jears.  He  has  lived  in 
harmony  with  his  professions  and  is  ever  found 
upon  the  side  of  right,  doing  what  he  can  to  ele- 
vate and  benefit  humanity. 


fs==-^RANCIS   SCHIFFERDECKER,  one  of  the 

PI  early  settlers  of  southwestern  Illinois,  now 
living  in  Red  Bud  Precinct,  is  a  native  of 
Baden.  Germany.  He  was  born  in  1829  and  is  a 
son  of  Joseph  and  Teresa  (Bopp)  Schifferdecker, 
both  of  whom  were  also  natives  of  Baden.  In 
1833,  when  our  subject  was  a  lad  of  four  summers, 
they  crossed   the  Atlantic  to  America,  landing  in 


Baltimore,  Md.  Their  first  location  was  in  York 
County,  Pa.,  and  they  lived  in  the  Keystone  State 
and  in  Maryland  for  seven  years.  In  1840  they 
cast  in  their  lot  with  the  earl}-  settlers  of  Monroe 
County,  111.,  settling  eight  miles  south  of  Water- 
loo, where  tliej-  reared  their  famil3-  of  six  children. 
Catherine  and  Mary  both  died  in  Monroe  County, 
leaving  families.  Our  subject  is  the  next  younger. 
Teresa  died  in  Monroe  County,  leaving  a  husband 
and  a  family  of  children  to  mourn  her  loss.  George 
is  now  a  well-to-do  farmer  of  Carroll  County,  Mo. 
Barbara  is  the  wife  of  Otto  Wagner,  of  Randolph 
County.  The  father  of  this  family  became  one  of 
the  leading  citizens  of  Monroe  County,  and  before 
his  death  accumulated  a  valuable  pioperty.  He 
passed  away  at  the  age  of  fifty -seven.  Both  he 
and  his  wife  were  active  members  of  the  Catholic 
Church  and  reared  their  family  in  that  faith. 

Francis  Schifferdecker  spent  the  days  of  liisbo}'- 
hood  and  youth  upon  the  old  homestead,  and 
when  a  3'oung  man  started  out  in  life  for  himself, 
following  the  pursuit  to  which  he  was  reared.  He 
purchased  a  farm  of  two  hundred  and  forty  acres  in 
Monroe  Count^sand  as  a  companion  and  helpmate 
on  life's  journe3-  chose  Miss  L.,  daughter  of  Lenliart 
Wagner,  of  St.  Clair  County.  Their  union  was  cele- 
brated in  1855,  and  upon  the  farm  which  the  hus- 
band had  purchased  the^-  began  their  domestic  life, 
making  it  their  home  until  1864,  when  he  removed 
to  Burksville  and  engaged  in  meichandising  until 
1866,  when  they  removed  to  the  farm  upon  which 
our  subject  is  now  living.  In  1868  the  wife  died, 
leaving  a  family  of  seven  small  children,  as  fol- 
lows: George,  who  was  married  in  1893  to  Miss 
Anna  Burgmann;  Otto,  deceased;  Catherine,  wife 
of  Joseph  Siegfried,  of  Randolph  County;  A.Eliz- 
abeth, wife  of  Richaid  Pittmaun,  of  Carroll  Coun- 
ty, Mo.;  Lidwien,  wife  of  Frank  Keres,  of  Randolph 
County;  Joseph  and  John.  Mr.  Schifferdecker  has 
been  a  second  time  married,  this  union  being  with 
Lidwien  La  Forge,  b}^  whom  he  has  eight  children: 
Frank;  Matilda,  wife  of  Dr.  Mever,  of  Evansville; 
Henry,  Mary,  Teresa,  Ellen,  Clarence  and  Walter. 

The  farm  on  which  Mr.  Schifferdecker  resides 
comprises  one  hundred  and  sixty-three  acres  of 
highly  improved  land.  He  at  one  time  owned 
over  twelve   hundred  acres,  but  has  given  to  his 


392 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


children  considerable  amounts.  He  and  his  fam- 
ily are  all  members  of  the  Catholic  Church,  and  in 
politics  lie  is  a  stanch  Democrat.  For  some  time 
he  has  been  oflicially  connected  with  tiie  schools 
of  this  community,  and  the  cause  of  education 
tinds  in  liim  a  warm  friend.  He  is  recognized  as 
one  of  the  progressive  citizens  of  the  county  and 
is  trul}'  a  self-made  man,  for  what  he  has  accom- 
plished is  the  result  of  his  own  efforts,  and  the 
prosperity  which  he  now  enj03s  is  the  reward  of 
untiring  labor. 

ylLLIAM  H.  MATLACK,  the  well  known 
editor  and  proprietor  of  the  Chester  Trib- 
une, one  of  the  leading  papers  of  the 
count}',  has  exercised  a  markeil  influence  in  the 
affairs  of  this  section  of  Illinois,  not  only  profes- 
sionally, but  as  a  progressive,  public-spirited  citi- 
zen, and  is  always  to  the  front  in  guarding  and 
advancing  its  dearest  interests  materially,  socially' 
and  morally.  Mr.  Matlack  is  a  native  of  Mis- 
souri, and  was  born  in  St.  Louis  December  3,  1844. 
He  is  a  son  of  William  L.  and  Harriet  A.  (Mc- 
Kown)  Matlack.  The  father  was  born  of  Quaker 
parents,  in  Moorestown,  N.  J.,  and  came  west  in 
1836.  The  motlier  was  boin  in  Vincennes,  Ind., 
and  went  to  Missouri  with  her  father's  family  in 
1835.  They  were  married  in  Quincy,  111.,  in  1838, 
and  resided  for  many  years  in  the  city  of  Ches- 
ter, where  they  ranked  among  its  best  residenta. 
The  mother  of  our  subject  is  the  daughter  of  Capt. 
James  B.  McKown,  of  Scotch  descent,  and  a  sol- 
dier in  the  War  of  1812.  She  is  still  living  in 
Chester,  but  liis  father  died  in    1879. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  the  eldest  son  in 
his  parents'  family  of  five  children,  and  was  given 
a  good  education  in  the  public  schools  of  St.  Louis. 
When  leaving  Missouri,  in  1858,  he  came  to  this 
county,  and  took  up  his  abode  near  Steeleville, 
whence  he  later  went  to  Spartn,  and  in  that  place 
still  continued  his  studies,  attending  its  public 
schools.  When  eighteen  years  of  age  he  returned 
to  St.  Louis  and  became  a  member  of  the  St.  Louis 
Fire  Department,  with  which  he  remained  five 
years.     In  1866  he  again  came  to  this  county,  this 


time  making  Chester  his  destination,  and  was  ap- 
l>oiiited  Deputy  Sheriff  under  .John  R.  Shannon. 
This  office  he  continued  to  fill  during  the  term  of 
Mr.  Shannon.  Later,  Mr.  Shannon  having  been 
elected  County  Clerk,  oursubject  entered  his  office 
as  a  clerk,  performing  the  duties  devolving  upon 
him  in  a  most  satisfactory  m.Tiiner. 

In  1869,  Mr.  Matlack  was  appointed  City  Mar- 
shal by  the  Hon.  J.  B.  Holmes,  Mayor  of  the  city, 
which  office  he  resigned  to  accept  the  position  of 
sjjecial  traveling  agent  for  Cochrane  &  Brown, 
general  agents  for  the  Howe  Machine  Company, 
with  headquarters  at  St.  Louis.  Mo.  After  being 
thus  engaged  for  two  j'ears,  Mr.  Matlack  acce[)ted 
a  similar  position  with  the  Singer  Manufacturing 
Company  of  St.  Louis,  with  which  he  remained, 
for  four  years,  and  later  was  a  special  agent  for  the 
Wheeler  A  Wilson  and  Domestic  .'^ewing  Machine 
Companies. 

Returning  to  this  city  in  1878,  oursubject  en- 
tered the  service  of  the  state  as  an  officer  of  the 
Southern  Illinois  Penitentiary  on  its  establishment 
here,  remaining  for  two  and  a-half  j'ears.  At  the  end 
of  that  time  he  became  Cashier  in  John  H.  Hood  & 
Co.'s  Bank  at  this  place,  with  whom  he  remained 
for  eighteen  months.  Then  going  to  Belleville, 
111.,  he  accepted  the  position  of  book-keeper  with 
the  Fairbanks  Sewing  Machine  Company,  with 
whicii  he  was  engaged  for  a  like  period,  when  he 
became  connected  with  the  Belleville  News,  and 
later  with  the  Belleville  Adcocaie.  At  the  close  of 
the  Thirty -seventh  session  of  the  Illinois  Legisla- 
ture, during  which  Mr.  Matlack  was  one  of  the  en- 
rolling and  engrossing  clerks,  he  returned  to  Ches- 
ter, and  soon  afterward  w.as  elected  Justice  of  the 
Peace.  In  the  spring  of  the  following  year  he  was 
appointed  by  the  Hon.  William  Scluichert,  then 
Mayor  of  the  citj',  as  its  ftlaishal,  and  upon  the 
I  expiration  of  his  term  was  re-appointed  to  the 
same  position  by  the  Hon.  James  J.  Morrison. 

When  returning  to  private  life,  Mr.  Matlack  be- 
came connected  with  the  Western  Boot  &  Shoe 
Manufacturing  Company  in  the  Southern  Illinois 
Penitentiary.  He  continued  to  act  in  the  capacity 
of  book-keeper  and  cashier  with  that  firm  until 
their  removal  from  the  place  two  years  later, 
when   he    went    to    Albuquerque,    N.    Mex.,   and 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


393 


worked  on  the  Albuquerque  Democrat  as  one  of  its 
staff  until  his  return  to  Chester  in  1890.  At  tliat 
time  he  became  Secretary  of  the  first  session  of  the 
Southern  Illinois  Chautauqua  Asserablj',  and  in 
March,  1892,  was  made  Secretar^^  of  the  Jackson 
Pipe  Organ  Company.  Tliis  position  he  resigned 
a  few  montlis  later,  and  in  company*  with  John  T. 
McBride,  purchased  the  Chester  Tribune.  In  March, 
1893,  lie  purchased  Captain  McBride's  interest,  and 
has  since  had  sole  management,  taking  personal 
charge  of  the  local  and  editorial  department.  It 
is  a  six-column  quarto  in  size  and  Democratic  in 
politics.  It  is  a  sound  family  paper,  well  supjilicd 
with  solid  and  useful  information,  and  one  of  its 
interesting  features  is  the  correspondence  from 
various  localities  in  the  county. 

M  AND  STREICHER  is  one  of  the  self-made 
l@74Jj|  men  of  Randolph  Count}-,  who  through  en- 
II)  terprise,  industry',  good  management  and 
careful  attention  to  all  the  details  of  busi- 
ness has  won  prosperity.  He  is  now  engaged  in  the 
furniture  and  undertaking  business.  A  nativeof  Ba- 
den, Germany,  he  continued  in  that  country-  until 
fourteen  years  of  age,when  he  came  to  America  with 
his  parents.  George  and  Elizabetii  (Schweininger) 
Streicher,  both  of  whom  were  born  in  southern  Ger- 
many. The  mother  is  still  living,  at  the  age  of 
eighty-one  years,  and  makes  her  home  in  St.  Louis. 
Tiie  family  numbered  five  children,  as  follows: 
Eva,  now  the  widow  of  George  Decker,  and  a  res- 
ident of  St.  Louis;  Leopold,  who  is  engaged  in 
business  in  New  York  Citj-;  Olivia,  widow  of  Peter 
J.  Sciimidt,  and  a  resident  of  Chicago;  Amand,  of 
tills  sketch;  and  Amelia,  wife  of  A.  Sclilinker. 

Our  subject  spent  his  early  boyhood  days  in  the 
Fatherland,  and  then  crossed  thebriu^'  deep,  as  be- 
fore stated.  It  was  in  1859  that  he  became  a  res- 
ident of  St.  Louis,  where  the  succeeding  seven 
years  of  his  life  were  passed.  Having  then  at- 
tained to  mature  years,  he  removed  to  Belleville, 
111.,  where  he  worked  at  his  trade  of  chair-making, 
being  emplo3'ed  in  one  house  for  a  period  of  ten 
years.  During  five  years  of  that  time  he  was  fore- 
man of   the   factory.     On  the  expiration   of  that 


period  he  embarked  in  the  business  for  himself  in 
Belleville,  where  he  carried  on  operations  until 
1879,  when  he  sold  out  and  came  to  Red  Bud. 
wliere  he  has  since  made  his  home. 

Mr.  .Streicher  was  married  in  Belleville,  in  1869, 
to  Theresa  Junker,  and  unto  them  were  born  four 
children,  two  of  wiiom  are  still  living,  C.  J.  and 
Lizzie  K.  The  mother  of  this  family  was  called 
to  the  home  bejond,  and  our  subject  afterward 
wedded  Louisa,  daughter  of  William  Frick,  who 
came  to  the  United  States  in  1833.  They  have 
become  the  parents  of  five  children,  two  sons  and 
three  daughters,  namely;  Ida,  Caroline  A.,  Oscar 
W.,  Vilas  and  Clara  M. 

Mr.  Streicher  came  to  Red  Bud  in  limited  cir- 
cumstances and  embarked  in  business  as  a  furni- 
ture dealer  and  undertaker.  He  began  operations 
on  a  small  scale,  but  has  steadily  increased  his  fa- 
cilities to  meet  the  growing  demand,  and  now 
probably  carries  the  largest  stock  of  any  merchant 
in  his  line  in  the  count}'.  His  success  is  the  result 
of  earnest  and  zealous  effort  and  is  the  just  reward 
of  his  enterprise  and  industry. 

In  his  political  views  Mr.  .Streicher  is  a  Demo- 
crat, and  on  August  24,  188.5,  was  made  Postmas- 
ter of  Red  Bud,  which  position  he  held  for  three 
}-ears  and  eight  months,  giving  universal  satisfac- 
tion. He  carried  on  the  office  in  connection  with 
his  business.  .Socially  our  subject  is  a  member  of 
the  Masonic  fraternity,  and  his  wife  holds  member- 
ship with  the  Evangelical  Church. 


'^-- 


^-f 


\|^/RANK  MEHRER  was  called  from  this  life 
ll-W|gj;  in  the  city  of  New  Orleans  in  May,  1878. 
jts  He  was  the  son  of  Francis  and  Christina 
(Lehman)  Mehrer,  natives  of  Bavaria,  Germaliy. 
They  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1833,  lo- 
cating in  New  Orleans,  and  later  came  to  Ran- 
dolph County.  They  passed  their  last  days  on 
their  farm,  the  father  dying  in  February.  1867, 
and  the  mother  in  March,  1876. 

In  1860.  Miss  Johanna  Mueller  became  the  wife 
of  our  subject.  Mrs.  Mehrer  is  the  daughter  of 
Peter  D.  and  Johanna  (Broch)  Mueller,  natives  of 
Germany.     They  were  born  in  1800  and  1816,  re- 


394 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


spectively.  Their  daughter,  the  wife  of  our  sub- 
ject, was  born  in  Germany-  January  30,  1837,  and 
is  the  eldest  in  a  family  of  seven  children  born  to 
them,  and  in  tiie  model  schools  of  her  native  home 
gained  a  good  education,  which  has  served  her 
well  throughout  life.  Three  years  previous  to  the 
decease  of  her  husband,  she  established  a  millinery 
and  notion  trade,  and  b}'  her  sagacitj'  and  perse- 
verance increased  the  business,  so  tiiat  in  January 
of  1893  she  was  enabled  to  retire  from  the  enter- 
prise to  a  lovely  and  comfortable  suburban  home. 
She  is  a  lady  of  intelligence  and  worth,  and  is  a 
valued  member  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  ever 
ready  to  assist  iu  religious  work  or  benevolent  en- 
terprises in  her  vicinity.  By  her  marriage,  Mrs. 
Mehrer  became  the  mother  of  two  daughters,  one 
of  whom  died  in  infancj*.  Bertha  became  the 
wife  of  Ingliam  Sykes  in  1886,  and  makes  her 
home  with  her  mother.  She  has  had  born  to  her 
two  children,  who  bear  the  names  of  Johanna  and 
George,  both  of  whom  are  bright  children. 


+= 


--■^ 


^/ESSE    M.  WRIGHT,  who  is  living  on   sec- 
tion 15,  Vergennes  Township,  Jackson  Coun- 
,  ty,  where  he  devotes  his  time  and  attention 

^^f/  to  agricultural  pursuits,  was  born  in  Breck- 
cnridge  County,  K}-.,  April  7,  1839.  His  father, 
David  AVright,  was  born  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  and  dur- 
ing tlie  greater  part  of  his  life  followed  school- 
teaching.  To  some  extent  he  also  engaged  in 
farming.  He  removed  from  Norfolk  when  a  young 
man,  in  order  to  acquire  the  means  wliereb}-  he 
could  pay  bis  tuition  in  school.  He  was  indus- 
trious, enterprising  and  ambitious,  and  his  life  was 
well  spent.  He  died  of  Asiatic  cholera  in  1850. 
His  wife,  who  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Elizabeth 
Jacobs,  was  a  daughter  of  Harrison  Jacobs,  a  Rev- 
olutionary soldier.  Tlie  paternal  grandfather  was 
a  large  slaveholder  in  Virginia,  as  was  Mr.  Jacobs. 
Both  of  them  offered  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wright  slaves, 
but  thej-  refused  to  accept  them,  for  they  believed 
strongly  in  Abolition  principles.  Both  were  prom- 
inent and  active  members  of  the  Methodist  Church, 
and  in  politics  he  was  a  Henry  Clay  Whig.  He  was  a 


ver}'  popular  and  successful  teacher,  and  had  the 
respect  and  confidence  of  all  who  knew  him.  His 
wife  passed  away  in  Kentucky  in  1890. 

In  the  AVright  family  were  the  following  chil- 
dren: John,  Tahitlia;  Ann,  wife  of  David  Schny- 
der;  Francis,  who  died  at  liie  age  of  twenty  five; 
Sarah,  wife  of  James  Goff;  Martha,  wife  of  Charles 
Walters;  Catherine,  wife  of  Jackson  Johnson; 
Elizabeth,  wife  of  Charles  Barnett;  Jane,  wife  of 
Walter  AVelsh;  and  David,  who  was  murdered  in 
Hawesvilie,  Ky.,  in  1892. 

After  tlie  deatii  of  his  father,  our  subject  re- 
mained upon  the  home  farm  and  took  care  of  his 
mother  and  the  family.  He  worked  hard,  and 
with  his  earnings  he  educated  his  three  sisters, 
Catherine,  Elizabeth  and  Jane.  In  1861  he  came  to 
Illinois,  but  continued  to  assist  his  mother  and  her 
family.  He  went  to  work  as  a  tobacconist  in  Ra- 
leigh, where  his  elder  brother,  John,  was  estab- 
lished in  business,  and  there  continued  for  nine 
years. 

On  the  12th  of  July,  1866,  Mr.  Wright  wedded 
Mary  C.  Johnson,  and  their  union  has  been  blessed 
with  the  following  children:  lona  A.,  born  August 
13,  1867;  Ella  May,  November  18,  1869;  Mary  A., 
born  January  9,  1871,  and  died  in  infancy;  Thomas 
D.  A.,  born  December  26,  1874;  William  H.,  Janu- 
ary 26,  1877;  Jesse  M.  J.,  December  5,  1880; 
Harry  E.,  March  9,  1888;  and  Charles  H.,  October 
24,  1892.  The  eldest  daughter  is  now  the  wife  of 
Rufus  Wiseley.  of  Murphysboro. 

A  year  after  his  marriage,  Mr.  Wright  removed 
with  his  fainil_v  to  DuQuoin,  where  he  followed 
cigar-making  and  coopering  until  the  spring  of 
1878,  when  he  came  to  the  farm  on  which  he  now 
resides.  It  is  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation  and 
well  improved;  it  is  one  hundred  acres  in  extent, 
and  has  upon  it  a  comfortable  and  commodious 
residence  and  all  other  modern  accessories  and 
conveniences.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wright  are  promi- 
nent members  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church, 
in  which  he  serves  as  Trustee  and  Assistant  Super- 
intendent of  the  Sunday-school.  In  politics  he 
was  formerly  a  Republican,  but  is  now  independ- 
ent, supporting  the  man  whom  he  thinks  best  qual- 
ified for  the  office.  He  is  regarded  as  one  of  the 
influential  citizens  of   his   neighborhood,   and   is 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


395 


highly  respected  by  his  many  friends  and  acquain- 
tances in  the  eommunitj-. 

Mrs.  Wright  is  a  daughter  of  Thomas  N.  .John- 
son, who  was  born  near  Lebanon,  St.  Clair  County, 
111.,  July  7,  1816,  and  was  a  son  of  Malcolm  and 
Rebecca  .Jolinson.  His  father  was  born  in  Ireland, 
.January  12,  1777,  and  wiien  a  small  boy  came 
with  his  parents  to  America,  locating  in  Kentucky. 
After  his  marriage  lie  emigrated  to  St.  Clair  Coun- 
ty', 111.,  which  was  then  an  almost  unbroken  wil- 
derness, in  which  the  Indians  were  far  more  nu- 
merous than  the  white  settlers.  He  worked  in  the 
fields  with  his  rifle  strapped  to  liis  back,  in  order 
to  be  ready  for  any  hostile  attacks  from  the  In- 
dians. He  had  a  large  family'.  Margaret,  born 
September  12,  1808,  married  Charles  McDonald 
January  21,  1835;  James  was  born  November 
10,  1809,  and  married  Nancy  N.  Bonus  March  31, 
1833;  George,  born  February  18,  1811,  died  Octo- 
ber 29,  1823;  AVilliam,  who  was  born  Ma}-  17, 
1815,  wedded  Mary  L.  Holt  November  13,  1834; 
Theophilus  M.,  born  January  25,  1814,  married 
Elizabeth  I.  Chapman  May  25,  1838;  Thomas  N. 
married  Harriett  T.  Peoples  December  10,  1840; 
John  AV.,  born  February  5,  1819,  married  Ann 
Smith  August  3,  1850;  Jesse  H.,  born  August 
20,  1820,  married  Cornelia  S.  Butcher  April  25, 
1847;  Lavina  was  born  January  19,  1824;  Mary, 
born  August  24,  1825,  became  the  wife  of  A.  B. 
Sharp  November  7,  1844;  Sarah  N.,  born  April  10, 
1827,  became  the  wife  of  Alex  Chesiiey  Jul}'  4, 
1847;  and  Hugh,  born  January  25,  1829,  com- 
pletes the  family.  Among  the  sons  were  four 
Methodist  ministers,  and  the  parents  and  children 
were  all  members  of  that  church.  The  father  died 
April  2,  1841,  and  his  wife  passed  away  Septem- 
ber 12,  1858. 

Thomas  N.  Johnson  was  reared  on  the  homo 
farm,  and  completed  his  education  in  McKendree 
College.  For  several  years  he  engaged  in  black- 
smithing  and  farming,  and  then  entered  the  work 
of  the  ministr}'.  in  which  he  was  actively  engaged 
from  1853  until  1877,  when,  on  account  of  failing 
health,  he  was  superanuated,  still  he  continued  his 
labors  as  far  as  able.  He  preached  fortj'-seven 
hundred  and  thirty  sermons  and  took  twent3'-two 
hundred  and  fifty   persons  into  the  church.     He 


died  December  8,  1891,  at  the  home  of  his  daugh- 
ter, Mrs.  Wright.  His  wife,  who  was  born  No- 
vember 8,  1817,  died  November  21,  1883.  Their 
children  were:  Martha  J.,  born  April  30,  1842; 
■John  D.,  April  13,  1844;  Mary  C,  July  7,  1848; 
Laura  E.,  August  31,  1852;  and  Lavina  E.,  No- 
vember 25,  1854.  The  father  of  this  family 
was  one  of  the  most  energetic  men,  and  never 
allowed  Any  obstacle  to  turn  him  from  the  path 
of  duty.  In  disposition  he  was  gentle,  kind, 
sympathetic  and  generous,  and  never  neglected  an 
opportunity  to  do  good.  Surely  the  world  is  bet- 
ter for  his  having  lived. 


=-W"t"!-*'M-+= 


li  ACOB  M.  TINDALL.  This  gentleman  is 
the  son  of  an  honored  pioneer  of  Randolph 
,j^^,  :  County,  and  has  spent  his  entire  life  within 
^5^^  its  bounds.  It  can  therefore  he  justlj'  said 
of  him  that  he  has  grown  up  with  the  country, 
and  his  life  in  a  great  measure  corresponds  with 
the  development  that  has  gone  on  about  him.  He 
is  now  pleasantly  located  on  section  22,  township 
7,  range  6,  with  such  surroundings  that  he  can  en- 
joy all  the  comforts  of  life. 

Mr.  Tindall  was  born  in  Rockwood  Precinct, 
July  19,  1859,  and  is  the  third  cliild  in  order  of 
birth  in  a  family  of  nine  children  born  to  John 
D.  and  Amanda  (Barnes)  Tindall.  The  father, 
who  was  a  native  of  Delaware,  was  taken  by  his 
parents  to  Indiana  when  four  years  old,  and  after 
a  residence  there  of  a  like  period,  came  with  him 
to  this  count}'.  He  received  his  education  in  the 
schools  near  Rockwood,  and  employed  his  leisure 
time  in  aiding  his  father  to  carry  on  the  farm. 
He  is  well  known  as  an  honest,  intelligent  and  re- 
liable citizen,  and  was  an  ordained  minister  of  the 
Baptist  Church.  He  always  voted  the  Democratic 
ticket  politically,  and  served  very  efficiently  as  a 
School  Director  for  many  j'ears.  His  death  oc- 
curred May  28,  1887.  The  lady  who  shared  his 
trials  and  successes  is  still  living.  Her  parents 
were  natives  of  North  Carolina,  and  on  coming  to 
this  state  in  an  early  da}-,  here  made  a  permanent 
location. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  received  his  primary 
education  in   the  district  schools  near  his  home, 


396 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD 


and  in  1881  entered  tlie  Illinois  Normal  School  at 
Carbondale,  where  he  prosecuted  his  studies  in 
the  higher  branches.  After  attending  this  school 
he  taiiglit  in  Randolph  Count}'  for  three  years, 
and  during  tiiat  time  also  carried  on  farming  in 
connection  with  teaching.  lie  has  since,  however, 
given  his  entire  attention  to  cultivating  liis  land, 
and  now  owns  one  of  the  best  estates  in  township  7. 
In  May,  1888,  Mr.  Tindall  and  Miss  Chloe, 
daughter  of  George  and  Catherine  (Spears)  Tope, 
were  united  in  marriage.  Their  union  was  blessed 
by  the  birth  of  four  children,  one  of  whom  died 
in  infancy.  Those  living  are  Eva,  Harry  D.  and 
Carrie;  the  two  latter  are  twins.  After  weighing 
the  merits  of  political  questions,  Mr.  Tindall  iden- 
tified himself  with  the  Republican  party.  He  has 
been  spoken  of  prominently  for  County  Treasurer, 
and  on  another  occasion  as  Circuit  Clerk.  So- 
cially, he  is  an  Odd  Fellow,  belonging  to  Chester 
Lodge  No.  71. 


i>-^<m^ 


jr_^  UGH  WILSON,  Sk.  Randolph  County  is 
Ifjl'  the  home  of  many  intelligent  and  prosper- 
!£f^'  ous  farmers,  who  from  a  small  beginning 
i^)  have  won  a  competence,  securing  a  goodly 
amount  of  land  and  surrounding  themselves  with 
all  the  comforts  and  conveniences  which  heart 
can  wish.  Among  this  number  may  be  men- 
tioned Hugh  Wilson,  who,  in  addition  to  his  repu- 
tation as  an  agriculturist,  is  well  known  as  a 
man  of  much  intelligence,  honorable  ancestr}''  and 
Christian  character.  He  is  at  present  residing  on 
section  21,  township  4,  range  5,  where  he  has  a 
fine  estate  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  acres. 

Hugh  Wilson,  the  father  of  our  subject,  was 
born  in  Aj'rshire,  Scotland,  and  was  killed  in  1822, 
while  descending  into  a  coal  mine.  He,  in  turn, 
was  the  son  of  a  gentleman  who  also  bore  the 
name  of  Hugh,  and  was  likewise  a  native  of  the 
above  county  in  Scotland,  where  he  died  in  his 
seventy -seventh  year.  Our  subject's  mother,  who 
was  also  a  native  of  Ayrshire,  was  the  daughter  of 
James  Humphrey,  who  reared  a  large  family  and 
died  in  his  native  land,  Scotland. 

The  parents  of  our  subject  were  married  and 
spent  their  entire  lives  in   their  native   country. 


They  were  members  of  the  Covenanter  Church. 
Our  subject,  who  was  their  only  child,  was  born 
in  1822  in  Ayrehire,  where  he  received  a  good 
education.  When  a  small  boy  he  began  to  work 
in  the  coal  mines,  which  business  he  followed  until 
twenty  years  of  age,  and  then,  in  1842,  he  en- 
tered the  British  arm^',  becoming  a  member  of 
Companj'  4,  Ninety-first  Highlanders.  The  first 
six  months  of  his  life  as  a  soldier  were  spent 
in  drilling  in  England,  and  January  6,  1844, 
he  sailed  as  a  part  of  the  Guard  of  Honor  to  Sir 
Paragrin  Maitland  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope, 
South  Africa,  and  with  his  company  reached  their 
destination  March  17.  Marching  to  the  frontier, 
they  joined  their  regiment,  which  was  doing  duty 
against  the  Caffres,  and  was  engaged  there  for  a 
period  of  nine  years  and  two  months.  During  that 
time  he  participated  in  many  skirmishes  under 
Col.  Colin  Campbell.  The  Commander-in-Chief, 
however,  was  Colonel  Somerset. 

In  1853  Mr.  Wilson  was  discharged  from  the 
army  on  account  of  disabilit}',  after  having  served 
eleven  years  and  three  months.  In  1846,  while 
engaged  in  a  fight  with  some  Caffres,  he  was  se- 
verely wounded  in  the  head  with  a  "knob  carry," 
an  offensive  and  defensive  weapon  in  the  hands 
of  a  Caffre.  After  his  discharge  our  subject  re- 
turned to  his  old  home  in  Scotland,  where  he 
again  entered  the  mines,  and  followed  that  occu- 
pation until  1857,  when  he  decided  to  try  his  for- 
tune in  America.  Coming  hither,  he  made  his 
waj'  directly  to  Randolph  County  and  purch.ased 
a  farm,  on  which  he  made  his  home  for  five  \'ears. 

The  present  estate  of  our  subject,  upon  which 
he  has  resided  for  the  past  thirty-  years,  was  a 
wild  tract  of  land  when  it  came  into  his  posses- 
sion, and  the  only  imi)rovement  which  it  bore  was 
a  log  house.  Now  it  is  supplied  with  well  built 
farm  structures,  neat  fences,  and  everything  about 
the  place  is  conclusive  proof  of  the  skill  and  en- 
ergy of  him  under  whose  management  this  state 
of  things  was  obtained. 

Prior  to  leaving  his  native  land,  Mr.  Wilson 
was  married,  in  1853,  to  Miss  Margaret  Hutton, 
who  was  born  in  Ayrshire  in  1820.  By  her  union 
with  our  subject  she  became  the  mother  of  three 
children,  of  whom  Hugh  and  Andrew  S.  are  the 


CL-^t^'i>^7^ 


{^^^<i^'i^l--i^-<S-'yif^ 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RfXORD. 


399 


only  ones  living.  Mrs.  Wilson  departed  this  life  in 
January,  1892,  beloved  by  all  who  knew  ber.  Mr. 
"Wilson  has  alwaj's  been  actively  interested  in  the 
schools  of  the  neighborhood,  and  is  a  reliable  citi- 
zen, an  intelligent  man,  and  one  whose  life  wins 
respect  from  those  about  him. 


W.  ESSICK,  M.  D.,  has  since  1885  engaged 
''     in  the  practice  of  medicine   in   Mur[)h3's- 


Sfysfl  boro,  and  has  been  eminently  successful  in 
his  profession,  winning  a  high  reputation,  which 
Las  placed  him  in  the  lead  among  the  medical 
practitioners  of  southern  Illinois.  He  well  deserves 
representation  in  the  history  of  his  adopted  countj', 
and  with  pleasure  we  present  his  record  to  our 
readers.  He  was  born  near  Duncannon,  Perry 
County,  Pa.,  October  16,  1854.  The  family  was 
originally  of  German  descent.  Many  years  ago  the 
uame  was  spelled  Essig.  and  its  meaning  was  vin- 
egar. The  grandfather,  John  Essick,  was  born  in 
Chester  Count}-,  Pa.,  followed  farming  in  Dauphin 
County,  and  later  near  Liverpool,  on  the  Susque- 
hanna River.  He  served  as  First  Lieutenant  in 
the  War  of  1812,  and  afterward  received  a  pension 
for  his  services.  He  died  at  the  advanced  age  of 
ninety-nine. 

Rev.  John  Essick,  the  Doctor's  father,  was  born 
in  Dauphin  County.  He  was  reared  on  a  farm,  for 
some  years  carried  on  farming  in  Perry  County, 
Pa.,  and  in  1868  removed  to  Richland  County,  III. 
He  there  carried  on  agricultural  pursuits  for  a 
time,  but  subsequently  engaged  in  missionar}'  work 
as  a  local  minister  of  the  United  Brethren  Church. 
His  work  was  always  performed  witliout  financial 
remuneration.  He  died  on  his  farm  in  1882,  at  the 
age  of  sixty-eight  years.  When  he  removed  to  his 
farm  it  was  an  unbroken  tract  of  land,  but  he  at 
once  began  its  development.  There  were  no 
churches  near,  and  wiihin  six  months  he  had  or- 
ganized a  church  and  Sunday-school.  Now  within 
site  of  the  old  home  two  churches  stand.  His  wife, 
who  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Julia  A.  Smith,  was 
born  in  Snyder  County,  Pa.,  and  was  a  daughter 
of  Jacob  Smith,  a  native  of  Dauphin  County,  Pa. 
He  was  a  distiller  and  an  extensive  farmer,  Mrs.  Es- 
11 


sick  spent  her  last  days  in  the  Doctor's  home,  pass- 
ing away  in  1884.  In  the  family  were  four  chil- 
dren, but  only  two  are  now  living,  the  brother 
being  Samuel  T.,  a  farmer  near  Pomona. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  came  with  his  parents 
to  Illinois,  and  was  reared  on  a  farm  in  Richland 
Count}^  until  1869.  He  then  engaged  in  driving 
a  stage  for  two  years  between  Carmi  and  Grayville, 
also  carrying  the  mail.  He  made  three  trips  each 
week.  On  one  night  an  attempt  was  made  to  rob 
him,  but  he  escaped  and  saved  the  mail  and  express. 
Subsequently  he  purchased  forty  acres  adjoining 
the  old  home  farm,  which  he  operated  for  two 
years.  In  1875  he  entered  the  normal  school  of 
Carbondale,  where  the  succeeding  three  jears  of 
his  life  were  passed.  He  has  also  taught  school  to 
some  extent.  In  1876  he  began  reading  medicine 
under  Dr.  R.  P.  Lightfoot,  of  Carbondale,  and  in 
1878  took  a  summer  course  of  lectures  in  the  med- 
ical college  at  Nashville,  Tenn.  Returning,  he 
passed  the  examination  before  the  State  Board,  and 
at  once  began  practice  in  Pomona,  where  he  con- 
tinued until  the  autumn  of  1881,  when  he  again 
went  to  Nashville.  The  following  spring  he  was 
graduated  with  the  degree  of  M.  D.,  and  received 
the  first  prize  facnlt}-  medal,  valued  at  *50.  He  at 
once  resumed  practice  in  Pomona. 

On  the  5th  of  June,  1883,  Dr.  Essick  wedded 
!Miss  Mattie  E.  Reeves,  who  was  born  in  this  coun- 
ty. They  have  one  son,  Rajmond  B.  In  June, 
1885,  the  Doctor  was  appointed  on  the  Board  of 
Pension  Examiners  by  President  Cleveland.  The 
following  3ear,  however,  he  came  to  Murphysboro, 
where  he  has  since  engaged  in  practice  with  a 
marked  degree  of  success.  For  the  past  five  j-ears 
he  has  been  surgeon  for  the  Mobile  &  Ohio  Rail- 
road, and  is  the  consulting  surgeon  and  ph3sician 
for  the  Gastside  Coal  Companj'.  He  belongs  to 
the  Southern  Illinois  Medical  Association,  the 
Slate  Medical  Association,  and  the  National  As- 
sociation of  Railway  Surgeons.  He  ever  keeps 
abreast  with  the  discoveries  and  theories  concerning 
his  profession,  and  his  large  practice  is  well  merited 
bj-  his  ability.  In  1890  he  took  a  post-graduate 
course  at  the  St.  Louis  Medical  College. 

The  Doctor  is  the  owner  of  two  hundred  and 
eighty  acres  of  laud  in  Kinkaid  Township.     When 


400 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


it  came  into  his  possession  it  was  covered  with 
timber,  but  he  cleared  the  tract,  has  planted  it  in 
fruit,  and  now  lias  the  largest  fruit  farm  in  the 
county.  SociRlh",  he  is  a  member  of  the  Knights 
of  Pythias  and  the  Uniformed  Rank.  In  December, 
1893,  he  was  elected  surgeon  of  the  Sixth  Regi- 
ment, K.  P.,  for  a  term  of  four  years.  While  liv- 
ing in  Pomona  he  served  as  a  member  of  the  Board 
of  Trustees.  For  two  years  he  has  been  a  member 
of  the  Board  of  Education,  and  was  elected  its 
President  almost  unanimoush',  there  being  only 
six  opposing  votes.  In  politics  he  was  formerly  a 
Democrat,  but  is  now  a  stalwart  Republican. 


j  N^ROF.  H.  W.  EVEREST,  Regent  of  the  South- 

Jll  ern  Illinois  State  Normal  University-  of  Car- 

■^    bondale,  and   one    of    the    most    prominent 

1  \  ministers  of  the  Christian  Church,  is  a  native 
of  Nortli  Hudson,  Essex  County,  N.  Y.,  where  bis 
birth  occurred  May  10,  1831.  His  father,  W.  B. 
Everest,  was  a  native  of  Vermont,  and  came  of  an 
old  New  England  family.  He  served  as  a  soldier 
in  the  War  of  1812.  He  married  Lydia  Smith,  a 
native  of  New  Hampshire,  and  a  daughter  of  Ben- 
jamin Smith,  who  also  was  descended  from  an 
early  New  England  family.  Their  marriage  was 
celebrated  in  the  Empire  State,  and  they  made 
their  home  in  Essex  County  until  1851,  when  they 
removed  to  northern  Ohio,  and  thence  to  Ionia, 
Mich.  The  father  died  at  the  age  of  ninety-two, 
and  his  wife  when  ninety  years  of  age.  He  was  a 
farmer  and  mechanic.  With  the  Methodist  Church 
he  held  membership,  while  his  wife  belonged  to 
the  Christian  Church.  They  were  the  parents  of 
nine  children,  six  of  whom  are  yet  living:  H.  W., 
of  this  sketch;  Mrs.  Clara  Spaulding.  of  Ionia, 
Mich.;  Jane,  Frederick,  Stephen  and  Charles  H., 
who  are  also  living  in  Ionia. 

Professor  Everest  remained  upon  the  home  farm 
until  eighteen  3'ears  of  age,  giving  his  father  the 
benefit  of  his  services.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he 
began  leaching  in  the  common  schools  of  his  native 
state,  and  when  a  young  man  of  seventeen  he  at- 
tended school  at  Crown  Point,  N.  Y.  The  follow- 
ing year  he  was  a  student  in  Chester  Academj',  of 


Geauga  County,  Ohio;  later  he  attended  Hiram  Col- 
lege, and  in  1861  was  graduated  from  Oberlin  Col- 
lege, after  completing  the  classical  course.  While 
at  Chester  and  Hiram  Colleges,  he  was  associated 
with  President  Garfield.  His  life  work  has  been 
that  of  teaching,  and  he  has  occupied  some  promi- 
nent positions.  For  a  time  he  was  President  of 
Hiram  College,  as  the  successor  of  General  Garfield. 
In  1864,  he  was  elected  President  of  Eureka  (111.) 
College,  and  filled  that  position  until  1872.  In 
1877,  he  was  again  called  to  its  Presidency,  and 
there  continued  until  1881,  when  he  became  Presi- 
dent of  Butler  University  of  Indianapolis,  Ind., 
of  which  he  remained  in  charge  until  1887.  He 
then  became  Chancellor  of  Garfield  Universitj',  of 
Wichita,  Kan.  He  was  also  a  Professor  in  the 
Kentucky  University,  at  Lexington,  and  is  now  at 
the  head  of  the  Southern  Illinois  .State  Normal 
University,  lender  his  leadership  manj"  men  of  fame 
have  pursued  their  studies,  and  his  guiding  hand 
has  aided  in  directing  the  lives  of  men  who  have 
become  prominent  in  various  walks  of  life. 

In  1857,  Professor  Everest  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Sarah  A.  Harrison,  of  Painesvilie, 
Ohio,  who  was  born  in  1833,  and  was  a  daughter  of 
William  Harrison,  an  Englishman.  To  her  hus- 
band she  ever  proved  a  faithful  companion  and 
helpmate,  and  by  her  encouragement  and  sympathy 
aided  him  greatly  in  his  life  work.  She  was  called 
to  the  home  be_vond  October  20,  1892.  Three  sons 
were  born  to  them:  Claude  H.,  who  married  Miss 
Martha  Pettit,  by  whom  he  has  three  children,  and 
resides  in  Hutchinson,  Kan.;  Jean  H.,  a  lawyer  of 
Oklahoma,  who  married  Missl>ditli  Kirkbride,  who 
died  leaving  four  sons;  and  Herbert  H.,  who  wedded 
Miss  Josie  Brook.  He  is  now  studying  law.  The 
sons  are  all  university  graduates,  and  are  members 
of  the  Christian  Chui'ch. 

Mr.  Everest  h.as  been  a  minister  of  the  church 
for  forty  3'ears,  and  has  occasionally  served  as 
pastor,  but  the  greater  part  of  his  time  has  been 
devoted  to  teaching  and  to  lecturing.  Besides  his 
duties  as  Regent,  he  occu[)ies  the  chair  of  psvchol- 
ogy  and  ethics  in  the  Southern  Illinois  Normal 
University.  He  received  the  degree  of  A.  B.  and 
A.  M.  from  Oberlin  College,  and  that  of  LL.  D. 
was  conferred  upon  him  by  Eureka  College.     He  is 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


401 


a  read3'  and  fluent  writer,  and  has  contributed  much 
to  different  papers  and  periodicals.  He  is  also  the 
author  of  a  work  on  Christian  evidence  called  the 
"Divine^Demonstration."  He  delivered  an  address 
before  the  World's  Congress  of  Religions  held  in 
Chicago  in  1893.  It  was  the  opening  address  and 
was  upon  the  subject  of  "The  First  Century  of  the 
Ciiurch. 

• ^^)^P • 

'jf?  AFAYP:TTE  WARXOCK,  justice  of  the 
ll  (©  Peace  of  Jlonroe  County,  and  a  prominent 
jj^^  citizen  of  Columbia,  was  born  in  Vandalia, 
Fayette  County,  111.,  March  12,  1824,  and  is  a  son 
of  Judge  John  Warnock,  who  was  the  first  Terri- 
torial Judge  for  the  southern  district  of  the  state. 
He  was  born  and  leared  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  and 
was  a  son  of  Joseph  Warnock,  who  served  under 
General  Marion  in  the  Revolutionary  War.  The 
Judge  studied  law  under  Governor  Bennett,  of 
South  Carolina,  and  through  the  influence  of  that 
gentleman  was  appointed  Territorial  Judge.  In 
Harrisonville,  Monroe  County,  he  married  Miss 
Jane,  daughter  of  John  McClure,  who  was  one  of 
Washington's  Life  Guards  in  the  struggle  for  In- 
dependence. Mr.  Warnock  continued  to  serve  as 
Judge  until  the  state  was  admitted  to  the  Union, 
in  1818,  and  was  Postmaster  of  Vandalia  when 
that  citj'  was  state  capital.  About  1828  he  re- 
moved to  St.  Clair  County,  where  he  purchased 
land,  but  after  a  short  time  he  bought  a  farm  be- 
tween Columbia  and  Waterloo,  where  he  made  his 
home  for  some  years.  Subsequent!}',  lie  removed 
to  Texas.  In  politics  he  was  a  Whig.  His  death 
occurred  in  December,  1858.  After  the  death  of 
his  first  wife,  he  was  again  married,  in  Arkansas. 
B}'  the  former  union  there  were  ten  children,  eight 
of  whom  grew  to  mature  years,  but  onl}'  three 
are  now  living:  William  C,  a  farmer  of  Iowa; 
MaiT  Catherine,  widow  of  William  Herse^-,  and  a 
resident  of  Monroe  County;  and  Lafayette,  of 
this  sketch. 

'Squire  AVarnock  was  engaged  in  McKendree 
College,  of  Lebanon,  and  then  returned  to  the 
home  farm,  upon  which  he  had  been  reared. 
About  four  years  later  he  went  to  Jamestown, 
Wis.,  where  he  engaged  in  general  jnerchiindising 


and  also  served  as  Postmaster  for  two  3'ears.  On  the 

expiration  of  that  period  he  took  up  his  residence 
in  Waterloo,  111.,  where  he  engaged  in  general 
merchandising  for  six  years,  when  in  1854  he  again 
came  to  Columbia.  Here  he  followed  the  same 
pursuit  for  two  years,  after  which  he  purchased 
the  Columbia  Star  Mills,  and  in  connection  with 
John  H.  Wilson  operated  the  same  until  1867, 
when  they  sold  out  to  Ilcnry  Huch.  Since  that 
time  he  has  devoted  his  attention  to  looking  after 
his  real-estate  interests. 

Mr.  Warnock  was  married  February'  7,  1849,  to 
Lucinda  Moore,  daughter  of  James  B.  Moore. 
His  father  was  EInoch  Moore,  who  was  the  fii-st 
white  American  child  born  in  the  state  of  Illinois. 
In  1781,  James  Moore,  father  of  Enoch,  came  from 
Virginia  and  settled  in  Monroe  County,  near 
Waterloo,  where  both  he  and  his  son  spent  their 
entire  lives.  James  Moore  lived  to  an  advanced  age 
in  this  locality,  and  then  removed  to  Jersey  Coun- 
ty, 111.  His  last  da3^s  were  spent  in  Brighton. 
Mrs.  Warnock  was  born  in  Monroe  County-,  March 
13,  1826.  To  our  subject  and  his  wife  were  born 
ten  children,  eight  of  whom  are  yet  living:  James 
W.,  a  stock  dealer  of  Columbia;  W.  H.,  a  real- 
estate  and  loan  dealer  of  Butler,  Mo.;  Samuel  F^, 
Cashier  of  the  Fust  National  Bank  in  Butler,  Mo.; 
W.  M.,  one  of  the  most  prominent  and  successful 
attorneys  of  the  state;  Emma  A.,  wife  of  Dr.  M. 
G.  Nixon,  a  practicing  physician,  druggist  and 
Postmaster  of  Columbia;  Nellie  M.,  wife  of  Z.  J. 
AVilliams,  a  general  merchant  of  Butler,  Mo.;  Min- 
nie M.  and  Lucj'  Jane,  who  complete  the  familj-. 
W.  M.,  who  graduated  from  the  Union  College  of 
Law,  in  Chicago,  began  practice  at  the  age  of 
twenty  years,  locating  in  Edwardsville,  111.  The 
children  have  all  received  good  educational  ad- 
vantages. 

Since  the  dissolution  of  the  Whig  party,  Mr. 
Warnock  has  been  a  supporter  of  the  Democracj'. 
He  has  served  .as  Justice  of  the  Peace  and  Notary 
Public  for  twenty  j'ears,  and  is  one  of  the  Le.vee 
Commissioners  of  Monroe  County.  His  faithful- 
ness to  public  duty  is  indicated  bj'  his  long  con- 
tinued service.  He  owns  about  five  hundred 
acres  of  land  in  the  county  and  has  a  residence 
and  thirteen  lots  in  Brighton,  111.,  besides  his  fine 


402 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


home  and  two  acres  of  land  in  Columbia.  Socially', 
he  is  connected  with  the  Odd  Fellows'  societj' 
and  the  Masonic  fraternity.  He  and  his  wife  are 
consistent  members  of  the  Metliodist  E^piscopal 
Church  South.  He  took  a  prominent  part  in  its 
organization,  has  served  as  Trustee  and  Steward, 
and  for  twenty-six  years  was  Superintendent  of 
the  Sunday-school.  His  life  has  been  straightfor- 
ward and  honorable  in  every  particular,  and  his 
uprightness  has  won  for  him  the  confidence  and 
high  regard  of  the  entire  community.  He  comes 
from  a  prominent  family,  and  is  himself  one  of 
the  leading  citizens  of  this  part  of  the  state. 


/^i\  ARMADUKK  E.  EMERSON.  There  is 
I  IV  no  greater  pleasure  for  the  hand  and  mind 
Ij  IAS  of  the  historian  or  biographer  to  perform 
^  thau  to  record  the  life  and  achievements 

of  a  man  who  began  life's  battles  under  adverse 
circumstances,  and  who,  through  his  own  unaided 
efforts,  has  secured  tlie  general  acknowledgment 
of  being  an  honest  man  and  worth}'  citizen.  Such 
a  man  is  Mr.  Emerson,  who  occupies  the  I'esponsi- 
ble  position  of  foreman  in  the  mammoth  mills  of 
the  H.  C.  Cole  Barrel  Works,  of  Chester. 

Our  subject  has  alwa3-s  been  a  resident  of  this 
count}',  having  been  born  in  Chester  March  14, 1847. 
He  is  the  sixth  child  in  order  of  birth  in  the  family 
of  Amos  and  Mary  (Walker)  Emerson,  the  former 
a  native  of  Portland,  Me.  The  father  of  our  sub- 
ject left  home  at  the  early  age  of  sixteen,  and 
going  to  Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  joined  the  army  and 
served  as  a  soldier  during  the  Black  Hawk  War. 
After  that  conflict  he  located  in  Edwardsville,  this 
state,  thence  he  moved  to  Chester,  where  lie  spent 
the  rest  of  his  days,  following  his  trade  of  a 
cooper.  His  decease  occurred  in  1860.  The  Em- 
erson family  originally  came  from  p]ngland,  while 
on  his  mother's  side  our  subject  is  of  Irish  descent. 

The  maternal  grandfather  of  our  subject,  Jackson 
Walker,  came  to  America  in  an  eai'ly  day,  and 
made  his  home  in  Florence,  Ala.,  where  Mrs.  Em- 
erson was  born,  and  later  the  family  moved  to 
New  Orleans,  where  she  first  met  her  husband,  the 
father  of  our  subject.     Marmaduke  received  his  ed- 


ucation in  the  schools  of  Chester,  and  when  old 
enough  learned  the  trade  of  a  cooper.  He  was  a 
lad  of  tvvelve  years  when  his  father  died,  and  at 
that  early  age  he  began  the  struggle  of  life  on  his 
own  account. 

Mr.  Emerson  worked  as  a  journeyman  cooper 
througii  various  sections  of  Indiana,  Missouri  and 
Illinois,  and  in  1876  he  entered  the  shop  of  H.  C. 
Cole  &  Co.,  where  he  began  work.  He  was  very 
industrious  and  conscientious  in  his  labors,  and 
two  years  after  beginning  work  with  the  company 
his  efforts  were  rewarded,  he  being  made  foreman 
of  the  cooi)er  shop.  Wherever  he  goes,  Mr.  Em- 
erson wins  friends,  and  he  holds  a  deservedly  high 
reputation  throughout  the  city  and  amiing  his  fel- 
low-workmen. 

In  1876  our  subject  was  married  to  Miss  Mary  .1., 
daughter  of  D.  S.  and  V.  (Montroy)  Lybarger,  of 
Chester.  Their  union  has  been  blessed  by  the  birth 
of  four  children:  Gladys  Olivia,  Ralph  Waldo, 
Clyde  Vivian  and  Earl  Marmaduke.  The  last 
named  is  now  deceased,  passing  away  when  three 
years  of  age.  Mrs.  P^merson  is  a  devoted  member  of 
the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  and  with  her  hus- 
band and  famil}' occupies  a  high  place  in  the  home 
community. 

Our  subject  is  wide  awake  and  progressive,  and 
takes  quite  an  interest  in  political  affairs,  Voting 
with  the  Democratic  party.  •  He  has  held  the  office 
of  Justice  of  the  Peace,  and  represented  the  first 
ward  in  the  City  Council  for  many  terms.  He  is 
known  as  a  public-spirited  citizen,  aiding  gener- 
ously in  all  matters  of  mutual  welfare.  Socially', 
Mr.  Emerson  is  a  charter  member  of  Chester  Lodge 
No.  57,  I.  O.  O.  F.,  and  in  that  order  has  filled 
nearlv  all  the  chairs. 


ATHPvS  KALMER  is  a  worthy  representa- 
tive of  the  agricultu lists  of  Monroe  Coun- 
ty. He  resides  on  section  28,  townslii|) 
3,  range  9,  where  he  has  made  his  home 
for  many  years.  He  was  born  in  Germany,  July 
25,  1822,  and  is  the  second  in  a  family  of  three 
sons,  whose  parents  were  Casper  and  Mary  (Kre- 
ger)  Kalraer.  His  brothers  were  Henry  and  Frank. 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


403 


Casper  Kalnier  was  reared  and  educated  in  Ger- 
inanj',  and  for  some  j-ears  lie  had  to  support  his 
father,  which  lie  did  by  working  at  the  carpenter's 
trade.  After  iiis  father's  death  he  wedded  Miss 
Kreger,  who  was  also  a  native  of  Germany,  and  in 
1842  he  emigrated  with  his  family  to  America, 
landing  in  New  Orleans.  He  then  took  passage  on 
the  steamer  "General  Pratt,"  but  while  coming  up 
the  Mississippi  the  vessel  took  fire,  at  Vicksburg. 
They  then  boarded  another  vessel,  whicli  was  sunk 
at  Cairo,  and  from  that  place  to  Waterloo  the}' 
completed  the  journey  on  foot.  Mr.  Kalmer  con- 
tinued to  follow  carpentering  until  his  death, 
which  resulted  from  an  accident  that  occurred  in 
Columbia.  He  was  run  over  by  a  load  of  lumber 
and  instantly  killed,  and  his  remains  were  laid  to 
rest  in  Waterloo.  In  polities,  he  was  a  Democrat, 
and  both  he  and  his  wife  were  members  of  the 
Catholic  Church.  She  too  met  with  death  by  ac- 
cident. They  were  highly  respected  people,  who 
had  many  friends  througiiout  the  community  in 
which  they  made  their  home. 

We  now  take  up  the  personal  history  of  Mathes 
Kalmer,  who  in  the  schools  of  his  native  land  ac- 
quired his  education.  He  accompanied  his  parents 
to  America,  and  remained  with  them  until  eighteen 
years  of  age,  when  he  started  out  in  life  for  himself. 
He  learned  the  blacksmith's  trade  in  Berksville,and 
afterwards  followed  tiiat  pursuit  in  St.  Louis.  Sub- 
sequently he  carried  on  blacksmithing  in  Waterloo 
for  several  3ears,  and  while  thus  engaged  he  met 
with  an  accident  which  resulted  in  the  loss  of  his 
right  eye.  This  exempted  him  from  service  in  the 
army.  He  then  purchased  the  farm  on  which  he 
now  lives  and  has  since  made  it  his  home. 

In  1852  Mr.  Kalmer  was  mairied  to  Miss  Cathe- 
rine Kleier,  a  native  of  Germany,  who  after  her 
parents'  death  came  to  the  United  States  with  her 
sister.  After  a  brief  illness  she  was  called  to  her 
final  rest,  ab,out  1879,and  her  remains  were  interred 
in  Waterloo  Cemetery.  She  had  many  friends  in 
the  community,  who  sincerely  mourned  her  loss. 
In  the  family  were  eight  children,  of  whom  three 
died  in  infancy.  Elizabeth  is  now  the  wife  of 
Henry  Vogel,  a  fanner  residing  in  Glasgow,  by 
whom  she  had  seven  children.  Maiy  Ann  is  the 
wife  of  John  Forabaugli  and  has  a  famil}'  of  three 


children.  Caroline  married  Frank  Hempe,  a  farmer 
of  Oregon,  and  they  have  three  children.  Katie 
is  the  wife  of  Frank  Ritter,  who  operates  the  old 
homestead,  and  they  had  two  children,  but  one  died 
in  infancy.  Christina,  the  youngest  memberof  the 
family,  married  Martin  Canon. 

Mr.  Kalmer  endeavored  to  give  liis  children 
educations  which  would  fit  them  for  the  prac- 
tical and  responsible  duties  of  life.  As  a  citi- 
zen he  is  public-spirited  and  progressive, and  man- 
fests  a  commendable  interest  in  everything  per- 
taining to  the  welfare  of  the  community.  The 
greater  part  of  his  time  and  attention,  however,  is 
given  to  his  farming  interests.  He  has  carried  on 
agricultural  pursuits  throughout  his  life  and  is 
now  the  owner  of  a  good  farm  of  two  hundred  acres 
as  the    result    of   his  industry  and    well    directed 


efforts. 


^#( 


felLLIAM    BROWN.     There    is    somethinc 


about  tiie  life  of  a  prosperous  and  popular 
^^  young  man  very  pleasant  to  contemplate — 
something  that  gives  encouragement  to  those 
seeking  to  make  for  Cliemselves  desirable  positions 
in  life.  Such  an  example  is  given  in  the  life  of 
William  Brown,  who  is  a  native  born  citizen  of 
Randolph  County, and  who  is  now  numbered  among 
the  intelligent  farmers  of  township  7,  range  6. 
By  his  careful  management  his  farm  has  been 
placed  under  excellent  cultivation  and  is  now  a 
neat  and  well  ordered  property,  comparing  favora- 
bly with  any  farm  in  the  neighborhood  in  point 
of  tillage  and  improvement. 

Our  subject  is  the  son  of  Lemuel  M.  Brown,  and 
was  born  in  Chester,  this  county,  June  4,  1855. 
His  father  was  born  in  Kentucky,  and  there  made 
his  home  until  reaching  his  twenty-second  year, 
when,  in  1840,  he  came  to  Chester.  He  was  a  farmer 
by  occupation,  and  pursued  his  calling  here  until 
1871,  when  he  went  to  Springfield,  Mo.  He  was 
ranked  among  the  well-to-do  farmers  of  Greene 
County  until  his  decease,  which  occurred  in 
April,  1892.  The  lady  to  whom  he  was  married, 
and  who  became  the  mother  of  our  subject,  was 
known  in    her  maidenhood  as  Rebecca  Ann  Rust. 

William,  of  this  sketch,  was  the  second  child  in 


404 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


order  of  birlh  of  his  parents'  familj'  of  three  chil- 
dren. His  mother  dying  in  1862,  when  he  was  a  lad 
of  seven  years,  he  remained  at  home  with  his  father 
Until  reaching  liis  fifteenth  year-,  when  the  father 
removed  to  Missouri.  Our  subject  later  joined 
him  there-,  remaining  only  a  short  time,  liowever, 
and  in  1873  went  to  Indiana,  where  he  was  em- 
ployed on  the  public  works  for  two  years.  At  the 
expiration  of  that  time  returning  to  his  old  home 
near  Cliester,  he  began  farming  pursuits  on  his 
own  account,  and  has  ever  since  made  tiiat  his  life 
work. 

Miss  Mary,  daughter  of  .Jolm  and  Maria  Bright, 
of  this  county,  and  oursubjoct  were  married  Decem- 
ber 18,  1880.  Mrs.  Brown  lias  liecorae  tlie  mothei- 
of  six  children:  Mabel,  Anna,  Bessie,  Willie,  Lemuel 
and  Hazel.  In  his  political  relations  our  subject 
always  votes  with  the  Democratic  party,  and  in 
this  community  where  he  has  so  long  made  liis 
home  he  is  both  widely  and  favorably  known,  and 
in  the  history  of  his  native  county  he  well  de- 
serves representation. 


^ 


(i\  MLLIAM  C.  DAVLS,  .1r.,  one  of  the  promi- 
\rJ/j  nent  and  highly-  respected  citizens  of 
\»/sf/  Perry  County',  who  is  now  living  on  sec- 
tion 20,  township  6,  range  4,  has  the  honor  of  be- 
ing a  native  of  Illinois,  for  his  birth  occurred  in 
Jackson  County,  on  the  22d  of  April,  1852.  His 
parents  were  William  C.  and  Mary  A.  (Cross) 
Davis.  His  father  was  a  native  of  Nashville,  Tenn., 
and  came  to  Illinois  when  a  lad  of  eight  summers 
with  his  brothers  and  sisters,  who  settled  in  Jack- 
son County.  When  he  had  attained  to  a  sufficient 
age  he  entered  two  hundred  acres  of  land,  going 
to  Kaskaskia  foi  that  purpose.  From  that  time  he 
has  made  his  own  way  in  the  world,  dependent 
entirely  upon  his  own  resources.  As  his  financial 
resources  have  increased,  he  has  added  to  his  pos- 
sessions from  time  to  time  until  he  now  owns  one 
thousand  acres.  He  was  twice  married,  and  by  his 
first  wife  bad  three  children,  two  of  whom  are  yet 
living,  Willis  and  William  C,  while  George  M.  is 


deceased.  In  1854  he  married  Elizabeth,  daugh- 
ter of  Abel  Braugiiton,  of  Randolph  County,  and 
liiey  became  the  parents  of  eight  children,  all  of 
whom  still  survive,  namely:  Martha  J.,  Emma, 
Maurice  C,  Murraj-  H.,  Henry,  Eliza,  Amanda  and 
Lena. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  reared  to  man- 
hood on  his  father's  farm  and  earlj'  became  famil- 
iar with  farm  work  in  all  its  details.  In  the  com- 
mon scliools  he  conned  his  lessons  during  his  early 
years,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty-one  attended  the 
normal  school  for  one  term.  He  then  embarked 
in  teaching,  which  profession  he  followed  for  six 
jears  in  connection  with  farming. 

On  the  6th  of  December,  1875,  Mr.  Davis  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Edna  Irwin,  daugh- 
ter of  Jacob  Irwin,  a  well  known  farmer  of  Jack- 
son County,  111.  Thej'  became  the  parents  of  four 
children,  two  of  whom  are  j-et  living,  Delia,  born 
on  the  22d  of  June,  1885,  and  Carrie  M.,  born 
on  the  10th  of  September,  1893.  Lillie  and  Anna 
are  now  deceased. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  died  in  May,  1854. 
AVith  her  husband  she  was  returning  from  a  visit 
to  Chester,  111.,  and  they  were  compelled  to  cross 
a  creek  wliich  had  been  greatly  swollen  by  the 
late  rains.  As  they  drove  upon  the  bridge  it  was 
swept  away,  and  they  were  precipitated  into  the 
rushing  torrent.  Mrs.  Davis  was  carried  down  the 
stream  and  drowned.  Mr.  Davis  only  saved  him- 
self by  his  expert  swimming. 

Our  subject  has  resided  upon  his  present  farm 
since  April  17,  1876.  It  comprised  one  hundred 
and  sixty  acres  of  timber  land,  but  it  is  now  four 
hundred  acres  in  extent  and  the  greater  part  of  it 
is  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation  and  well  im- 
proved. He  erected  a  handsome  and  commodious 
residence,  one  of  the  finest  in  tiie  count}-,  and  it 
stands  as  a  monument  to  his  thrift  and  enterprise. 
It  is  located  on  the  Campbell  Hill  road  and  com- 
mands a  fine  view  of  the  surrounding  country. 
Well  tilled  fields  and  other  improvements  also  at- 
test the  careful  supervision  of  the  owner. 

In  politics  Mr.  Davis  it  a  Democrat,  and  served 
as  County  Commissioner  from  1883  until  1887. 
In  his  social  relations  he  is  a  Mason.  He  is  re- 
garded b}'  his  neighbors  as  a  thrifty  and  progress- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


405 


ive  man.  He  takes  a  warm  interest  in  tiie  affairs 
of  the  county  and  is  a  valued  citizen,  wlio  well 
deserves  representation  in  tiiis  volume.  Mr.  Davis 
is  also  engaged  in  the  lumber  business  at  Percy  in 
addition  to  farming. 


^•5"5"M-L- 


3*-}"i"{-^^ -i-***" 


y^  HAKLKJS  1..  llh;illvAMi',  a  prosperous 
'1(^1  eral  agriculturist,  residing  on  one  ol 
^^^  best  farms  in   township    7,  range    6, 


HARLE8  L.  IIEITKAMP,  a  prosperous  gen- 

of  the 
Ran- 
dolph County,  has  since  1855  been  identified  with 
the  advancementof  his  jjreseut  home  interests,  and, 
widely  known,  is  highly  esteemed  for  his  business 
ability  and  sterling  integrity  of  character. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  Prussia  .June  27,  1834, 
and  IS  the  third  child  born  to  Frederick  William 
and  Fredericka  (Kaldavier)  Ileitkamp.  The  par- 
ents were  likewise  natives  of  Prussia,  and  on  emi- 
grating to  America,  in  1857,  made  their  wa^'  to  the 
Prairie  State.  The}-  followed  farming  in  Randolph 
County  until  their  decease,  the  father  dying  in 
1876,  and  the  mother  preceding  him  to  the  better 
land  by  five  years. 

Charles,  of  this  sketch,  attended  school  in  his  na- 
tive country,  and  when  old  enough  to  do  so,  was 
employed  at  various  kinds  of  work,  and  for  four 
years  engaged  to  work  in  a  brick  yard.  After 
reaching  his  twenty-third  year,  he  entered  the 
Prussian  army  and  served  his  country  for  three 
3'ears  and  three  months.  A  short  time  after  his 
discharge,  he  came  to  America,  whither  his  parents 
had  preceded  him  three  years. 

After  landing  in  the  New  World,  Mr.  Heitkamp 
spent  three  months  in  New  Orleans,  then  made  his 
waj'  up  the  Mississippi  River  Lo  Chester,  this  state, 
and  has  since  that  time  been  a  resident  of  Ran- 
dolph County.  He  has  been  a  very  hard  working 
man,  industrious  and  economical,  and  as  the  result 
of  his  labors,  now  has  a  comfortable  estate,  which 
yields  him  a  good  income. 

In  all  matters  of  importance  Mr.  Ileitkamp  main- 
tains a  deep  interest,  and  in  1891  was  appointed 
by  the  Mayor  of  Chester  as  Cemetery  Superintend- 
ent. He  is  also  the  present  .Superintendent  of 
the  County  Farm,  and  has  been  the  incumbent  of 
that  position  for  the  past  five  jears.     His  life  has 


been  distinguished  by  his  unfailing  kindness,  and 
he  has  thus  endeared  himself  to  a  multitude  of 
friends,  and  has  won  tlie  high  regard  of  all  his  fel- 
low-townsmen. 

In  1860,  our  subject  and  Miss  Henrietta  Drex- 
hage  were  united  in  marriage.  Mrs.  Heitkamp 
was  also  born  in  Prussia,  where  her  parents  lived 
and  died.  By  her  marriage  she  has  become  the 
mother  of  ten  children,  the  eldest  of  whom,  Mary, 
became  the  wife  of.  Herman  Oetting.  During  a 
severe  \vindstorm,  on  the  night  of  November  16, 
1892,  a  large  tree  was  blown  across  the  house,  kill- 
ing Mrs.  Oetting  and  her  two  children.  The  hus- 
band escaped  injury.  The  second  child  of  our 
subject,  Amelia,  is  at  home,  while  Annie,  who  is 
the  wife  of  C.  Mueller,  lives  in  Chester.  Caroline 
married  M.  Lochhead,  a  successful  farmer  in  this 
county.  Wilhelmina  and  Yetta  are  married  and 
reside  in  St.  Louis.  Louisa  was  accidentally  killed 
by  a  runaway  team,  and  Margaret,  Emma  and 
Louis  are  all  at  home. 

Our  subject  and  his  entire  famil}-  are  members 
of  the  German  Lutheran  Church.  In  politics  he 
is  one  of  the  ardent  advocates  of  the  Democratic 
party,  and  keeps  himself  intelligently  posted  on 
local  and  national  issues. 


+= 


rnln 


'^,(  BRAM  G.GORDON  is  well  known  in  pub- 
lic and   private  life  as  a  citizen  of  high 


repute  in  Chester.  Me  was  born  near 
Stceleville,  this  count>-,  November  6,  1849, 
and  is  a  son  of  Henry  S.  and  Nancy  (Gooding) 
Gordon.  The  father  was  born  in  Missouri  in 
1818,  and  followed  the  occupation  of  a  farmer. 
He  at  the  same  time  was  a  minister  of  the  Baptist 
Church  and  did  good  work  as  a  preacher  during 
his  active  life. 

The  paternal  grandfather  of  our  subject,  George 
Gordon,  was  a  native  of  Pennsylvania  and  of 
Scotch  descent,  his  ancestors  settling  in  this  coun- 
try- prior  to  the  Revolutionary  War.  Abram  G. 
was  the  sixth  in  order  of  birth  of  the  large  family 
of  ten  children  born  to  his  parents,  nine  of  whom 
are    still    living.     He    received    a    good  common- 


406 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


school  education  in  his  native  place,  and  later, 
when  entering  McKendiee  College,  in  St.  Clair 
County,  111.,  there  carried  on  ills  studies  for  three 
years,  graduating  in  1871. 

Having  decided  to  follow  llie  profession  of  a 
lawyer,  lie  began  reading  law  in  the  office  of  H.  H. 
Horner,  who  at  the  time  of  his  attending  McKen- 
dree  College  was  one  of  the  professors  in  that  in- 
stitution. He  was  admitted  to  the  Bar  from  St. 
Clair  Count}-  in  1871,  and  immediately  com- 
menced the  practice  of  his  profession.  In  1873  he 
came  to  Chester,  and  has  worked  perseveringly  and 
faithfully  in  his  profession.  He  is  now  enjoying 
the  fruits  of  that  industry,  being  regarded  as  one 
of  the  substantial  men  of  the  county. 

November  6,  1872,  Abrara  G.  Gordon  and  Miss 
Clara  J.  Short  were  united  in  marriage.  The  lady, 
who  was  the  daughter  of  R.  J.  Short,  was  born  in 
Percy,  this  county,  and  by  this  union  has  become 
the  mother  of  three  children,  Eugene  R.,  Clarice 
E.  and  Florence.  Socially  our  subject  is  a  mem- 
ber of  Chester  Lodge  No.  57,  I.  O.  O.  F.,  and  is 
also  a  member  of  the  Knights  of  Honor  and  the 
Legion  of  Honor.  AVith  his  wife  he  is  a  consistent 
member  of  the  Baptist  Church. 

Mr.  Gordon  has  ever  borne  a  prominent  part  in 
the  upbuilding  and  development  of  this  section, 
and  is  at  present  .Secretary  of  the  Chester  I  mprove- 
ment  Company,  Chester  Hotel  Company-  and  Ches- 
ter Electric  Light  Companj'.  In  addition  to  the 
practice  of  his  profession  he  personally  superin- 
tends the  operations  of  several  fine  farms  of  which 
he  is  the  owner. 


J'OSHUA  TYLER,  who  carries  on  general 
farming  on  section  3,  Sand  Ridge  Township, 
Jackson  Count}-,  is  a  native  of  the  Green 
Mountain  State.  He  was  born  in  Windham 
County,  December  4,  1811,  and  is  the  eldest  of  a 
famil}'  of  eight  children,  whose  parents  were  .loshua 
and  Lois  (Bacon)  T^-ler.  Both  were  natives  of 
New  Hampshire,  but  many  "years  ago  moved  to 
Pennsylvania,  where  their  last  days  were  spent. 
The  family  was  founded  in  Virginia  at  a  very  early 
day  in  the  history  of  this  country. 

In   the  county  of  his  nativity,  our  subject  was 


reared  to  manhood,  his  boyhood  and  \-outh  being 
p.assed  in  attendance  at  the  district  schools  of  the 
neighborhood  and  in  work  in  the  fields.  He 
accompanied  his  parents  on  their  removal  to 
Pennsylvania,  and  remained  with  them  for  two 
years,  after  which  he  started  out  in  life  for  him- 
self. He  came  to  the  west,  for  he  believed  that 
better  privileges  were  here  afforded  than  in  tiie 
older  and  more  thickly  settled  states  of  the 
east.  For  a  time  he  worked  on  steamboats  on  the 
Mississippi  and  Missouri  Rivers,  and  his  lot  was 
not  alwaj's  an  easy  one.  He  made  some  extensive 
trips  through  the  west  and  thus  became  well  ac- 
quainted with  the  countiy. 

In  1840,  in  Illinois,  ISIr.  Tyler  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Martha  Jane  Morgan,  a  native 
of  this  state.  They  located  on  Cox'  Prairie, 
where  the  wife  died,  leaving  five  children,  two  of 
whom  are  now  living,  Mrs.  Hannah  Bain,  who  is 
married  and  had  seven  children;  and  George,  who 
is  married  and  has  three  children.  They  both  re- 
side in  Sand  Ridge  Township.  For  his  second 
wife  Mr.  Tj'ler  chose  Mrs.  Nancy  (Worthen)  Cri- 
ley,  who  died  in  1860.  They  were  the  parents  of  six 
children,  four  of  whom  are  yet  living:  James, 
Daniel,  RoHin  and  Mrs.  Laura  Hawkins.  They 
are  all  married  and  have  become  heads  of  families. 
Mr.  T3'ler  was  again  married,  in  1863,  when  Mrs. 
Esther  Marshall  became  his  wife.  She  is  a  daughter 
of  Jesse  and  Anna  (Priest)  Wilson,  both  of  whom 
were  natives  of  North  Carolina.  Her  fatlier  died 
at  the  age  of  ninety-two,  and  her  mother  when 
sixty-five  years  of  age.  They  had  six  children,  of 
whom  two  are  living:  Mrs.  Eliza  Whitson,  and  Mrs. 
Tyler,  who  was  born  December  18,  1830,  in  John- 
son Count}',  N.  C.  She  was  reared  in  East  Tennes- 
see, and  removed  to  Warren  County,  that  state, 
where  she  became  the  wife  of  Thomas  Marshall,  a 
native  of  Tennessee.  In  1860,  they  came  to  Illi- 
nois, and  located  in  Murphysboro  Township,  Jack- 
son County.  Mr.  Marshall  died  in  1863,  leaving 
four  children:  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Way  man,  who  has 
one  child;  Mrs.  Ellen  Haliday,  who  has  four  chil- 
dren; Mrs.  Belzora  Wayraan,  who  has  four  chil- 
dren; and  Wylie,  who  has  two  children.  Two 
children  were  born  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Tyler:  Eva, 
now  the  wife  of  Albert  Imhoff,  of  Murphysboro,  by 


4;^4M^ 


^^^-^^y^^^^^T/ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPIDCAL   RECORD 


409 


whoinslie  has  three  children;  and  Martha  Lavisa. 
Mr.  Tyler  had  two  sons  in  the  late  war,  George  and 
Joshua.  The  latter  was  shot  at  the  battle  of  Mis- 
sion Ridge,  and  death  resulted  from  his  wound. 

In  his  political  views,  our  subject  has  always 
been  a  Democrat,  and  has  served  as  Scliool  Direc- 
tor and  Township  Trustee.  He  holds  membership 
with  the  Baptist  Church,  and  his  wife  is  an  active 
worker  and  faithful  member  of  the  Methodist 
Episcopal  Church.  His  farm  comprises  one  hun- 
dred and  three  acres  of  land,  and  the  neat  and 
thrifty  appearance  of  the  place  indicates  the  care- 
ful supervision  of  the  owner. 


*^. 


^ 


■Vf?  AMES  C.  THOMPSON,  who  is  now  living  a 
retired  life  in  Campbell  Hill,  was  born  near 
^  St.  Charles,  Mo.,  on  the  7th  of  July,  1820, 
\\^|^  and  comes  of  a  family  of  Irish  origin.  His 
grandfather  was  Robert  Thompson.  His  father, 
William  Thompson,  was  born  in  North  Carolina, 
August  8,  1791,  and  served  as  a  soldier  in  the  War 
of  1812,  under  General  Harrison,  participating  in 
the  battle  of  Tippecanoe.  In  Kentucky  he  mar- 
ried Jane  Tomson,  who  was  born  in  North  Caro- 
lina in  1797,  and  was  a  daughter  of  William  Tom- 
son,  also  a  native  of  North  Carolina,  and  one  of 
the  heroes  of  the  Revolution.  The  maternal  great- 
grandfather of  our  subject  was  killed  by  the  Tories 
during  the  War  for  Independence.  He  came  of  a 
family  of  Scotch  lineage. 

William  and  Jane  Thompson  were  married  in 
Kentucky,  .and  for  some  time  resided  in  Living- 
ston County.  From  1815  until  1821  they  resided 
in  St.  Charles,  Mo.,  and  then  returned  to  Ken- 
tuckj',  where  their  last  days  were  spent.  The  fa- 
ther was  an  agriculturist,  and  owned  one  of  the 
model  farms  of  that  state.  His  death  occurred 
September  8,  1871,  and  his  wife  passed  away  Jan- 
uary 29,  1872.  He  left  a  property  valued  at  ^20,- 
000,  but  his  estate  had  been  greatly  diminislied 
during  the  war.  Mr.  Thompson  was  a  strong  sup- 
porter of  the  Union.  Both  he  and  his  wife  were 
members  of  the  Covenanter  Presbyterian  Church. 
Of  their  fourteen  children,  only  three  are  now  liv- 


ing: Mrs.  Nancy  Davis,  who  is  living  in  William- 
son County,  at  the  age  of  seventy-eight;  James  C; 
and  Dr.  Pinckney  Thompson,  of  Henderson,  Ky. 

Upon  his  father's  farm  J.  C.  Thompson  spent 
the  days  of  his  boyhood  and  youth,  and  acquired 
his  education  in  an  academy  of  Salem,  Ky.  In 
1841  he  left  the  parental  roof,  and  coming  to  Illi- 
nois, engaged  in  teaching  school  in  Williamson 
County  for  ten  months.  He  married  January  20, 
1842,  Mrs.  Cynthia  Bradley,  daughter  of  Thomas 
Trammel,  a  native  of  Virginia,  who  emigrated  to 
Williamson  County  in  a  very  early  day.  The  lady 
was  there  born  April  21,  1824.  The  young  couple 
began  their  domestic  life  on  a  farm  south  of 
Marion  Township,  but  after  three  years  removed 
to  Degognia  Township,  where  they  spent  eleven 
years.  Their  next  home  was  in  Kinkaid  Town- 
ship, where  Mr.  Thompson  cleared  a  farm,  upon 
which  he  spent  seven  3'ears.  A  similar  period  was 
spent  in  Carbondale  Township,  and  later  he  im- 
proved a  fine  farm  in  Bradley  Township.  He  af- 
terward lived  with  his  children  until  1883,  since 
which  time  he  has  made  his  home  in  Campbell  Hill. 

In  the  Thompson  family  were  twelve  children, 
eight  of  whom  are  now  living:  Harriet,  wife  of 
Willis  Grain,  by  whom  she  has  three  children; 
Mary,  wife  of  John  W.  Jones,  b^'  whom  she  has  six 
children;  James  P.,  who  married  Rachel  Parker, 
and  has  six  children;  Robert  C,  who  wedded  Julia 
Miracle;  Sarah  C,  wife  of  Dr.  Peter  McMillan; 
Jane,  wife  of  Theodore  Gillespie,  by  whom  she  lias 
five  children;  Edwin,  who  is  a  sailor;  and  Willie 
J.,  of  Murphysboro,  who  married  Chloe  Johnson, 
and  has  one  child.  The  mother  of  this  family  died 
May  31,  1881. 

On  the  5th  of  June,  1884,  Mr.  Thompson  wedded 
Mrs.  Rebecca  Jones,  daughter  of  Samuel  and  Jane 
(Boyd)  Jones,  both  of  whom  were  natives  of  Scot- 
land. The  father  died  in  that  land,  after  which 
the  mother  came  to  America,  and  lived  with  Mrs. 
Thompson  until  her  death  in  1863.  Mrs.  Thomp- 
son was  the  seventh  in  a  family  of  nine  children, 
seven  of  whom  are  yet  living,  and  was  born  Feb- 
ruary' 14,  1836,  in  County  Down,  Ireland.  There 
she  remained  until  nineteen  years  of  age,  when  she 
crossed  the  Atlantic,  and  located  in  Jackson  Coun- 
ty,   111.,    where  she  married  John   Brown.     They 


4l0 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


had  five  children:  Samuel  and  Edwin,  of  Jackson 
County;  Robert,  of  Los  Angeles,  Cal.;  Wallace, 
of  San  Antonio,  Tex.;  and  Jennie,  wife  of  William 
Hunter,  of  Degognia  Township.  Mr.  Brown  was 
accidenlly  killed  in  1853,  and  his  widow  afterward 
married  John  Jones,  a  native  of  Pennsylvania. 
Four  children  were  born  to  them,  but  Paul,  of  St. 
Louis,  is  the  only  one  now  living.  Mr.  Jones  de- 
parted this  life  January  10,  187.5. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thompson  are  leading  members  of 
the  Presbyterian  Church,  and  he  belongs  to  the 
Masonic  fraternity  and  Odd  Fellows'  society. 
Throughout  life  he  has  been  a  warm  advocate  of 
the  Democracy,  and  frequently  attends  the  conven- 
tions of  his  party.  For  twenty-five  years  he  has 
served  as  Justice  of  the  Peace,  was  Supervisor  of 
Bradlej'  Township,  and  served  as  County  Sheiiff 
two  terms,  from  1864  to  1866,  and  from  1868  to 
1870.  He  is  a  man  of  sterling  worth,  and  a  well 
spent  life  justly  entitles  him  to  the  liigh  regard  in 
which  he  is  held. 


JAMES  A.  SMITH,  a  well  known  iesident  of 
township  7,  range  6,  Randolph  County,  and 
a  veteran  of  the  late  war,  in  which  he  did 
good  service  for  his  adopted  country-,  was 
born  in  Renfrewshire,  Scotland,  March  2,5,  1843. 
His  father,  Francis,  was  born  iu  the  same  shire  in 
1801,  but  in  1848  came  to  the  United  States,  lo- 
cating in  Randolph  County,  one-half  mile  from 
where  our  subject  now  resides.  He  was  a  calico 
printer  b3''  occupation  in  his  native  country,  but 
after  coming  to  this  county  engaged  as  a  farmer. 
He  died  in  1881,  in  his  eighty-first  year,  his  wife 
dj'ing  soon  after  coming  to  this  country'.  She 
bore  the  maiden  name  of  Agnes  Adams,  and  was 
the  daugliter  of  James  and  Catherine  (Curlaw) 
Adams.  She  became  the  mother  of  two  sons  and 
two  daughters,  three  of  whom  are  still  living: 
Catherine  C,  who  is  the  wife  of  L.  Douglas,  de- 
ceased, and  makes  her  home  in  Chester;  Agnes  A., 
who  is  the  wife  of  C.  A.  Durant,  and  resides  in  St. 
Louis,  Mo.,  and  James  A. 

The  subject  of  this  life  record  received  a  splen- 
did education,  first  attending  the  Harmon  School 


near  Chester,  then  the  school  in  Chester,  and  la- 
ter, in  1863,  supplementing  this  by  an  attendance 
at  the  military-  school  at  Jefferson  Barracks,  near 
St.  Louis.  He  tlien  enlisted  in  Company-  L.  Thir- 
teenth Illinois  Cavalry,  and  was  mustered  into 
service  at  Springfield,  111.  His  first  experience 
was  at  the  Red  River  Expedition,  and  afterwards 
in  the  Camden  Expedition  under  General  Run- 
nels, who  had  succeeded  General  Steele,  his  former 
commander.  The  regiment  was  mostly  in  Arkan- 
sas, and  took  part  in  the  battles  at  Pea  Ridge,  Lit- 
tle Rock,  Pine  Blufif,  Poison  Springs,  Arkadelphia, 
Spoon  ville,  besides  many  other  minor  skirmishes. 
During  the  fight  at  Poison  .S|)riiigs,  Mr.  Smith  re- 
ceived four  injuries  in  the  left  side,  and  when  un- 
der charge  at  Hrownville,  his  horse  fell  with  him 
and  fractured  five  ribs.  He  was  sent  l)ack  to 
Convalescent  Camp  to  recover.  Gen.  Powell 
Clayton  was  his  Brigade  Commander,  and  is  yet 
a  very  intimate  friend  of  Mr.  Smith.  He  was  com- 
missioned Second  Lieutenant,  and  was  mustered 
out  October  4,  1865,  at  Springfield.  III. 

After  the  close  of  hostilities  our  subject  returned 
to  his  farm,  and  has  followed  agricultural  pursuits 
ever  since.  His  splendid  estate  comprises  two 
hundred  acres,  all  of  which  are  under  a  fine  state 
of  productiveness,  and  in  which  Mr.  Smith  takes 
great  pride. 

The  marriage  of  our  suliject  and  Miss  Johanna 
Douglas  was  solemnized  February  il,  1870.  Mrs. 
Smith  is  a  daughter  of  Adam  and  Elizabeth  (Reno) 
Douglas,  who  live  near  Chester,  and  who  are  of 
Scotch  parentage.  The  children  who  have  come  to 
bless  the  union  of  our  subject  and  his  wife  are  named 
as  follows:  Adam  F.,  Eugene,  Agnes  A.,  James  A., 
Davis  M.,  Ethel  G.,  Charles  A.  and  Lizzie.  They  are 
all  at  home,  and  have  been  given  the  best  possible 
advantages  for  good  educations.  The  Presbyterian 
Church  finds  in  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Smith  and  their  son 
Adam  devoted  members.  The  father  is  a  member 
of  Lodge  No.  57,  I.  O.  O.  F.,  at  Chester,  and  also 
belongs  to  Swanwick  Poet  No.  212,  G.  A.  R., 
at  Chester.  Politically  he  is  a  true  blue  Republi- 
can, and  never  fails  to  support  the  candidates 
of  that  party.  He  was  honored  by  his  fellow- 
townsmen  with  the  gift  of  the  office,  of  Census- 
taker  iu  1880,  and   has  been  Justice  of  the  Peace 


iPORTRAIT   AND   BtOGRAPHICAL   RECORt). 


411 


and  Road  Commissioner  for  a  number  of  years, 
proving  himself  well  qualified  for  tlie  positions  by 
the  able  way  in  which  he  discharged  the  duties  of 
his  offices.  Personally  lie  is  one  of  the  most 
genial  and  companionable  of  men,  strictly  honor- 
able in  his  dealings,  and  therefore  highly  regarded 
by  all  with  whom  he  has  to  do. 

David  Smith,  an  elder  brother  of  our  subject, 
enlisted  in  the  Tenth  Illinois  Infantry,  in  the  same 
company  with  our  subject,  and  took  part  in  all  the 
engagements  with  his  regiment,  always  being  found 
at  his  post  of  duty.  After  the  close  of  the  war  he 
emigrated  to  Idaho,  engaging  in  mining,  and  there 
died  in  1878. 

■    • 0^P '    . 


;  OHN  A.  PFEFFER  is  a  worthy  representa- 
tive of  the  business  interests  of  Columbiai 
where  he  is  engaged  in  general  merchan- 
dising. As  he  is  widely  and  favorably  known 
in  this  community',  we  feel  assured  that  the  record 
of  his  life  will  prove  of  interest  to  man}'  of  our 
readers.  He  was  born  in  St.  Clair  County,  III.,  Au- 
gust 1,  1844,  and  is  of  German  descent.  His  father, 
John  Pfeffer,  was  born  and  reared  in  the  city  of 
Candel, Bavaria,  German}',  and  in  1832  came  with 
his  parents  to  America,  the  family  landing  in  New 
Orleans,  where  tlie  grandfather  of  our  subject  died. 
In  1840  his  wife,  with  her  five  children,  came  to  Illi- 
nois. One  of  the  sisters  remained  in  the  Crescent 
City,  and  there  married  Fred  Eckel.  The  famil}- 
settled  on  a  farm  in  Centreville  Township,  St. 
Clair  County,  and  John  Pfeffer  and  his  brother 
cleared  and  improved  tlie  land,  transforming  it 
into  a  fine  farm.  They  also  engaged  in  steam- 
boating  on  the  Mississi|)pi  between  St.  Louis  and 
New  Orleans. 

In  the  latter  place  the  father  of  our  subject  mar- 
ried Margaret  Scherrer,  a  native  of  Lorraine,  France, 
who  came  to  America  in  1836.  Mr.  Pfeffer  after- 
wards bought  a  farm  of  partially  improved  land 
in  Monroe  County  and  continued  its  cultivation 
for  a  year.  He  then  went  to  St.  Louis,  where  he 
worked  about  five  j^ears  as  an  engineer  in  a  distil- 
lery. From  1852  until  1856  he  again  carried  on 
his  farm,  and  then  came  with  his  brother-in-law,  F. 
X.  Biohammer,  to  Columbia,  where  they  conducted 


a  saloon  and  mercantile  business.  In  1857  the 
stock  was  divided,  and  Mr.  Pfeffer  continued  alone 
in  trade  until  1890,  when  he  sold  out  to  his  son. 
His  death  occurred  on  the  16th  of  October  follow- 
ing, and  his  wife  died  October  12,  1892.  They 
were  the  parents  of  fourteen  children,  but  only  two 
are  now  living,  John  A.,  of  this  sketch,  and  Mrs. 
Catherine  Dollar,  of  Columbia.  In  politics  Mr. 
Pfeffer  was  a  Democrat,  and  was  Trustee  of  his 
town.  He  held  membership  with  the  Roman 
Catholic  Church.  lie  was  a  successful  business 
man,  and  at  his  death  left  an  estate  valued  at 
$40,000. 

Our  subject  was  a  lad  of  twelve  when  his  father 
established  business  in  Columbia.  He  clerked  in 
the  store  until  his  marriage,  when  his  father  gave 
him  the  saloon,  which  he  carried  on  until  1890, 
when  he  bought  out  the  mercantile  establishment. 
He  has  since  carried  on  operations  along  that  line, 
and  by  well  directed  efforts  and  good  management 
has  secured  a  fine  trade.  lie  now  occupies  a  large 
store,  which  is  well  stocked  with  everything  found 
in  his  line. 

May  22,  1866,  Mr.  Pfeffer  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Johanna  K.  Funk,  daughter  of  John 
Funk,  of  St.  Clair  County.  Her  father  was  a  na- 
tive of  Bavaria,  Germany, and  in  1845 came  to  the 
New  World,  locating  in  St.  Clair  County.  Mrs. 
Pfeffer  was  born  in  New  Orleans,  Februar}'  10, 
1845.  By  their  marriage  they  had  fourteen  children, 
of  whom  the  following  are  3'et  living:  John  Joseph, 
who  is  clerking  for  his  father;  Joseph  F.,  who  is 
studying  medicine  in  St.  Louis;  E.  A.  F.,  Peter  A., 
Mar}',  Theodore,  Annie;  Louis  and  Katie,  twins, 
and  Charlie.  Mary  Ann  died  at  the  age  of  three 
years,  John  at  the  age  of  ten  months,  and  Louis 
at  the  age  of  nine  days.  John  Joseph  married 
Bertha  Reis,  a  daughter  of  Charles  P.  Reis. 

In  his  political  views,  Mr.  Pfeffer  is  a  Democrat, 
and  has  been  a  member  of  the  Village  Board  of  Trus- 
tees, while  for  eleven  years  he  served  as  a  member 
of  the  School  Board.  In  his  undertakings  he  has 
met  with  prosperity,  and  in  connection  with  the 
interests  previously  mentioned,  he  has  a  farm  of 
two  hundred  and  ninety-three  acres  that  yields  to 
him  a  good  income.  His  home  is  a  commodious 
and    substantial   brick    residence.     Mr.    and    Mrs. 


412 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Pfeffer  are  noted  for  their  kindliness,  and  tlirougli 
their  generosity  gave  homes  to  two  adopted  cliil- 
dren:  Elizabetli  Smitli,  who  became  the  wife  of 
Frank  L.  Rieheling,  a  wagonmaker  of  Ava.  Jack- 
son County,  111.;  and  .Johanna  Mary,  who  is  still 
living  with  them.  Our  subject,  his  wife  and  ciiil- 
dren  are  all  members  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church. 


1?  OUIS  DUDENBOSTEL,  who  is  one  of  the 
I  (S)  representative  citizens  and  prominent  resi- 
jjLj^  dents  of  Randolph  County,  is  at  present  re- 
siding in  Chester.  He  has  distinguished  himself 
in  various  walks  of  life — as  a  prominent  civilian, 
an  able  statesman  and  a  successful  man  of  business. 
He  has  long  been  influential  in  the  political  and 
social  life  of  this  section,  and  has  been  a  potent 
factor  in  advancing  its  commercial  and  material 
interests  generallj'. 

A  native  of  Germany,  our  subject  was  born 
March  29,  1836,  in  Hanover,  and  was  the  son  of 
John  H.  and  Mary  Dudenbostel,  also  natives  of 
the  Fatheiland.  The  elder  Mr.  Dudenbostel,  who 
was  born  in  1791,  was  prominent  in  public  life, 
and  for  thirty  years  occupied  the  position  of 
Mayor  of  Basse.  He  was  very  popular,  a  great 
friend  to  the  poor,  and  spent  his  entire  life  in  Ger- 
many. His  good  wife,  who  survived  him  many 
years,  also  departed  this  life  in  Germany,  and  was 
born  about  1814. 

Our  subject  was  the  third  child  in  order  of  birth 
of  his  parents'  large  family  of  seven  children.  He 
was  educated  in  the  model  schools  of  his  native 
land,  and  was  a  lad  of  eighteen  years  when  he  de- 
termined to  try  his  foitunes  in  the  New  World. 
Crossing  the  Atlantic,  the  trip  occupying  sevent^'- 
two  days,  he  first  stopped  in  New  Orleans,  whence 
he  came  up  the  Mississippi  River  to  this  state, 
selecting  Chester  as  his  future  home.  Being  desir- 
ous of  becoming  familiar  with  the  English  language, 
young  Dudenbostel  attended  a  private  school  dur- 
ing the  winter,  and  soon  obtained  a  position  as 
clerk  in  the  general  store.  Saving  his  money,  he 
was  soon  enabled  to  launch  out  in  business  for 
himself,  and  in  company  with  Ernest  H.  Schemmer, 


established  a  general  store  at  Ellis  Grove,  which 
he  continued  to  run  for  three  years.  At  the  expi- 
ration of  that  time  he  sold  out  his  interest  in  the 
business, and  removing  to  Evansville,  this  county, 
opened  a  general  store,  whicli  he  operated  for  the 
following  three  years.  Then  on  account  of  ill- 
health  he  was  again  compelled  to  sell  out,  and  this 
time  began  clerking  for  M.  C.  Crissy  in  Chester. 

Mr.  Dudenbostel  stands  high  in  political  circles, 
and  always  voted  with  the  Democratic  party.  In 
1869  he  was  appointed  Deputy  County-  Clerk 
witii  John  R.  Shannon.  Upon  the  expiration  of 
his  term  of  office  he  assisted  John  T.  McBride  in 
the  discharge  of  hisollicial  duties  as  County  Clerk, 
and  in  all  positions  never  failed  to  give  the  ut- 
most satisfaction.  In  the  year  1875  our  subject 
formed  a  partnership  with  his  brother,  George 
Dudenbostel,  and  opened  up  a  general  store  in 
yteeleviUe.  In  the  year  1877,  he  became  candidate 
for  County  Clerk,  running  against  Robert  J.  Hal- 
mer.  He  was  defeated,  but  in  1882  was  elected  to 
the  above  office,  receiving  one  hundred  and  sixty- 
five  votes  over  Jlr.  Halmer,  who  was  his  opponent 
at  this  time  also.  He  was  the  incumbent  of  that 
position  for  four  years,  and  on  the  expiration  of 
his  term  was  re-elected.  He  was  elected  Mayor  of 
Chester  in  1891,  which  position  he  helri  until  1893. 

April  25,  1870,  Mr.  Dudenbostel  and  Miss  Mary 
C.  Knapp  were  united  in  marriage.  She  was  the 
daughter  of  John  J.  and  Mary  (Ilartenberger) 
Knapp.  Of  the  family  of  seven  children  born  to 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Dudenbostel  five  are  living,  namely: 
Edmund,  a  graduate  of  the  Chester  High  School; 
Naomi,  Louis,  Albert  and  L3'dia. 

Our  subject  has  been  instrumental  in  advancing 
the  interests  of  the  section,  and  is  one  of  the  or- 
ganizers and  stockholders  of  the  Jackson  Pipe 
Organ  Company.  He  also  aided  in  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Chester  Boot  &  Shoe  Manufactoiy,  of 
which  he  is  Manager  and  President.  The  Chester 
Stock  (fe  Agricultural  Association  also  owes  its 
origin  to  our  subject. 

In  social  affairs  Mr.  Dudenbostel  is  a  Mason  and 
a  member  of  Alma  Lodge  No.  497,  at  Steeleville. 
He  is  connected  with  H.  G.  Reynolds  Chapter 
No.  84,  at  Chester.  He  is  Recorder  of  R^mdolph 
Council  No.    44,    and  an    inlluential    member    of 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


413 


Commandery  No.  50,  K.  T.,  at  Belleville,  this 
state.  The  beautiful  residence  of  our  subject  is 
located  on  .Sparta  Street,  where  it  is  presided  over 
by  Ills  estimable  wife,  and  where  Ihey  entertain 
hosts  of  warm  friends,  wlio  deliglit  in  their  suc- 
cess. 


"^^W 


W.  OIIN  W.  TOLER,  who  is  engaged  in  mer- 
chandising in  Carbondale,  and  who'is  num- 
,^^  bared  among  the  honored  veterans  of  the 
^^!fJ  late  war,  was  born  in  Union  Count}',  III., 
November  22,  1840,  and  is  a  son  of  James  I.  and 
Melissa  Toler,  the  former  a  native  of  North  Caro- 
lina, and  the  latter  of  Virginia.  In  1826,  the 
grandfather  emigiated  from  North  Carolina  to 
Union  County,  III.,  becoming  one  of  its  pioneers, 
lie  served  as  a  soldier  in  the  War  of  1812.  The 
father  was  born  in  1817,  and  is  3'et  living.  He 
served  throughout  the  Mexican  War, and  did  duty 
under  General  Taylor.  He  was  also  Commissarj-- 
Sergeant  in  the  .Sixtieth  Illinois  Infantr}'  dur- 
ing the  late  war  for  three  years  and  three  months. 
He  had  two  sons  who  wore  the  blue,  William  H., 
a  Sergeant  of  Company  A,  Sixtieth  Illinois  In- 
fantry; and  Daniel,  a  non-commissioned  officer  of 
the  same  company.  The  former  had  two  fingers 
shot  off  at  Buzzards'  Roost,  and  afterwards  was 
wounded  in  the  left  foot.  Daniel  was  wounded 
at  the  battle  of  Big  Shanty.  Both  have  died  since 
the  war. 

Our  subject  is  the  eldest  of  a  family  of  seven 
children,  three  of  whom  are  now  living.  He  was 
reared  on  the  home  farm,  and  educated  at  Mt. 
Pleasant.  In  1856,  he  drove  the  stage  and  carried 
the  mail  from  Cape  Girardeau  to  Vienna,  a  dis- 
tance of  fifty  miles.  He  also  carried  the  mail  from 
Vienna  to  Shawneetown,a  distance  of  sevent3'-three 
miles,  which  was  often  made  on  horseback  through 
the  unbroken  wilderness.  Later,  he  engaged  in 
clerking  in  the  dry-goods  store  of  Sam  Brower, 
of  Vienna,  and  on  his  return  to  Union  County 
worked  on  a  farm  until  his  enlistment  in  his  coun- 
try's service. 

In  August,  1861,  Mr.  Toler  became  a  member  of 


Company  D,  Thirty-first  Illinois  Infantry,  under 
Col.  John  A.  Logan,  and  participated  in  the 
battles  of  Belmont,  Ft.  Henry  and  Ft.  Donelson, 
where  the  regiment  suffered  severely.  He  was 
there  elected  Orderly-Sergeant  of  Company  D,  and 
was  sent  to  Clarksville,  Tenn.,  to  guard  railroads. 
He  then  went  to  Corinth,  and  went  into  winter 
quarters  at  Jackson,  Tenn.,  where  he  guarded  the 
Burnt  Bridge.  He  was  then  sent  home  on  recruit- 
ing duty,  and  after  his  return  to  Cairo,  he  vol- 
unteered his  services  to  run  the  blockade  at  Vicks- 
burg,  but  the  required  number  had  already  of- 
fered, and  he  was  not  accepted.  He  then  marched 
with  his  command  to  Grand  Gulf,  participated  in 
the  battles  of  Thompson  Hill,  Raymond,  Jackson, 
Champion  Hills  and  Black  River,  and  charged  the 
works  at  Vicksburg.  He  was  there  wounded  by 
a  gunshot  in  the  left  side  of  his  face,  which  fract- 
ured his  jaw  bone  and  cut  his  windpipe  half  in 
two,  but  after  sixty  days  spent  in  the  hospital,  he 
again  joined  his  command. 

Mr.  Toler  was  then  engaged  as  First  Lieutenant, 
and  a  month  later  was  made  Captain  of  his  com- 
pany, which  he  commanded  until  the  close  of  the 
war.  He  took  part  in  the  battles  of  Clinton  and 
Meridian,  and  after  a  thirty  days'  furlough,  took 
part  in  the  engagement  at  Decatur,  Tenn.  He 
bore  his  part  in  the  siege  of  Atlanta,  the  battle  of 
Peach  Tree  Creek  and  the  march  to  .Savannah.  He 
was  in  the  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  which  was  en- 
gaged in  fighting  all  the  time  while  on  the  march 
to  the  sea.  In  Jul},  1864,  he  was  left  on  the  right 
of  Atlanta  to  defend  the  works  with  one  hundred 
and  fifty  men  under  him.  The  main  army  fell 
back.  In  the  morning  the  rebel  bugle  sounded, 
and  though  it  was  one  against  many.  Captain  Toler 
commanded  his  few  men  to  pour  a  volley  into  the 
enemy.  This  was  done,  and  the  rebels  fell  back. 
That  night  they  left  the  place  without  the  loss  of 
a  man.  Our  subject  participated  in  the  battles  of 
Jonesboro  and  the  capture  of  Atlanta,  and  con- 
tinued in  active  service  until  the  close  of  the  war. 
He  had  charge  of  the  advance  on  Columbia,  S.  C, 
then  went  with  the  army  to  Goldsboroand  Raleigh, 
and  then  on  to  Richmond.  He  partici|)ated  in 
the  Grand  Review  in  Washington,  and  in  Louis- 
ville, Ky.,  was   mustered  out,   receiving    his   dis- 


414 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


charge  in  August,  1865,  after  a  (.■onlinuous  service 
of  four  j'ears. 

On  his  return  home.  Captain  Toler  resumed 
farming,  which  he  followed  two  years,  and  then 
spent  seven  years  in  merchandising  in  Murphys- 
boro.  He  came  to  Carbondale  in  1876,  and  with 
the  exception  of  two  years  has  here  since  made 
his  home.  He  was  married  September  25,  1863,  to 
Harriet  E.  Spiller,  a  native  of  Williamson  County. 
They  became  the  parents  of  seven  children,  Wal- 
ter E.,  who  is  now  De[)uty  Sheriff  of  the  county; 
Charles,  a  civil  engineer  of  Coldsburg,  Ala.;  Frank, 
a  mail  agent  between  Chicago  and  Cairo,  111.;  J. 
B.,  who  is  engaged  in  the  drug  business  with 
Prickett  &  Porter;  William  I.,  who  is  engaged  in 
railroading  in  Cairo;  and  Samuel  and  Lillie,  who 
attend  the  college  in  this  place.  The  mother  of 
this  family  died  in  1886,  and  in  1887  Captain 
Toler  married  Mrs.  Spiller,  the  widow  of  Thomas 
Spiller. 

For  thirtj'  years  the  Captain  has  been  a  member 
of  the  Masonic  fraternitj'.  He  also  belongs  to  the 
Odd  Fellows'  society  and  the  Grand  Arm}-  of  the 
Republic.  Ho  is  ex-Postmaster  of  Carbondale,  hav- 
ing held  the  office  from  1886  to  1890.  He  holds 
membership  with  the  Christian  Church,  and  takes 
a  very  active  part  in  .Sunday-school  work.  He  is 
a  valued  citizen,  who  manifests  the  same  loyalty  to 
his  country  in  her  hours  of  peace  as  in  the  daj-s  of 
peril,  when  he  faithfully  followed  the  Old  Flag  that 
now  floats  triumphantly  over  the  united  nation. 
In  politics  he  is  a  stanch  Democrat. 


\^^ 


f^i*=^^^RANCIS  HARRIS,  who   makes  his  home  in 

Pf  Percy,  is  a  stockholder  in  the  Percy  Co-ope- 
rative Creamery  Company  and  also  operates 
a  threshing  machine  and  a  clover  hulling  machine 
in  this  place.  He  has  the  honor  of  being  a  native 
of  Randolph  County,  where  his  birth  occurred 
September  6,  1845.  His  parents,  John  and  Amanda 
(Threlkill)  Harris,  were  natives  of  Kentucky  and 
Illinois  respectively.  When  a  young  man  the 
fallier  came  with  his  family  to  Illinois,  locating  in 
Randolph  County.  He  took  up  the  occupation  of 
farming,  and  followed  it  continually   up  to   the 


time  of  his  death,  which  occurred  in  1867.  His  wife 
passed  away  in  1882.  They  were  highly  respected 
people  and  merited  the  esteem  in  which  the}'  were 
held. 

Francis  Harris  obtained  his  primary  education 
in  the  district  schools  near  the  old  homestead,  and 
at  the  age  of  sixteen  years  entered  JIcKendree 
College,  of  Lebanon,  111.,  where  he  attended  about 
three  terms.  On  the  expiration  of  that  peiiod 
he  returned  to  the  farm  and  engaged  in  teaching 
in  the  district  schools  of  Randolph  County.  He 
was  thus  emplo3ed  for  three  terms  in  the  public 
schools  and  for  one  terra  in  a  private  school. 
During  the  summer  months  he  gave  his  attention 
to  the  work  of  the  farm,  and  when  he  had 
reached  the  age  of  twenty-two  years,  he  began 
farming  for  himself,  assiduoush'  devoting  his  en- 
ergies to  that  pursuit  for  about  twelve  years.  His 
next  venture  was  in  commercial  lines.  He  em- 
barked in  merchandising  in  Steeleville,  111.,  in 
1880,  and  successfully  carried  on  a  store  at  that 
place  for  four  years,  when,  in  1884,  he  began  op- 
erating a  threshing  machine.  He  is  still  in  that 
line  of  business  in  Perc}-,  and  finds  it  a  profitable 
undertaking. 

An  important  event  in  the  life  of  Mr.  Harris  oc- 
curred on  Christmas  Day,  1867,  when  was  cele- 
brated his  marriage  with  Miss  Mary  J.  Minter,  a 
daughter  of  Jacob  and  Anna  E.  (Rust)  Minter, 
who  were  natives  of  Kentuckj-.  The  union  of  our 
subject  and  his  wife  has  been  blessed  with  ten 
children,  seven  of  whom  are  3'et  living,  as  follows: 
Carrie  E.,  wife  of  Arthur  Goalby,  a  resident  of 
Percy;  Leon  H.,  Leroy,  Lulu  M.,  Nellie,  Birdie 
and  Grover  C.  With  the  exception  of  the  eldest, 
all  are  at  home  with  their  parents. 

Socially,  Mr.  Harris  is  connected  witli  the  Ma- 
sonic fraternity,  belonging  to  Alma  Lodge  No. 
497,  A.  F.  &  A.  M.,  of  Steeleville.  In  politics  he 
is  a  Democrat,  and  takes  an  active  interest  in  sup- 
porting his  party  and  aiding  in  its  growth.  He 
has  been  honored  with  some  offices,  having  served 
as  School  Director,  Justice  of  the  Peace  and  Vill.ige 
Treasurer.  He  has  also  been  President  of  the 
Board  of  Village  Trustees,  and  a  prompt  and  faith- 
ful discharge  of  duty  has  made  him  recognized  as  a 
capable  and  efficient  officer.     He  is  well  known  in 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


415 


the  comiminity  in  which  he  makes  his  home,  and 
is  recognized  as  a  public-spirited  and  progressive 
citizen.  His  entire  life  has  been  spent  in  Randolph 
County,  and  he  is  a  worthy  representative  of  one 
of  its  honored  pioneer  families. 


^^,EORGE  BOLLINGER,  one  of  the  promi- 
jll  J— _  nent  citizens  of  Randolph  County,  was 
^^  born  near  Ellis  Grove  February  6,  1856, 
and  is  the  eldest  child  of  Daniel  and  Mary  (Leav- 
itt)  Bollinger.  His  father  was  born  neat  Nashville, 
Tenn.,  where  he  lived  until  eighteen  years  of  age, 
when  he  came  with  his  father,  Jacob  Bollinger,  to 
Randolph  County,  111.  The  latter  here  followed 
farming  and  distilling  until  his  death,  and  Daniel 
carried  on  agricultural  pursuits  throughout  his  life. 
He  passed  away  in  1866.  and  his  wife  was  called  to 
her  final  rest  in  1849. 

In  the  common  schools  George  Bollinger  was 
educated,  and  upon  the  home  farm  was  reared. 
At  the  age  of  twent^'-tliree  he  began  earning  his 
own  livelihood,  and  throughout  life  has  been  a 
farmer.  He  is  now  the  owner  of  one  of  the  finest 
farms  of  Randolph  County,  highly  cultivated  and 
improved,  and  complete  in  its  appointments.  It  is 
neat  and  thrift}'  in  appearance  and  indicates  to 
the  passer-by  the  careful  supervisou  of  the  owner. 

In  March,  1862,  Mr.  Bollinger  married  Miss 
Harriet  C,  daughter  of  Dwight  Hunt,  a  native  of 
Connecticut,  who  came  to  Illinois  and  married 
Miss  Hughes,  of  Randolph  County.  To  our  subject 
and  his  wife  were  born  seven  children,  but  Ada  and 
Barnes  died  in  childhood.  Those  living  are,  Henry 
E.;  Jlaiy,  wife  of  P.  H.  MuUholland,  who  is  living 
near  Portland,  Oregon;  Ida,  wife  of  Daniel  Ning- 
ler,  who  resides  near  Ellis  Grove;  Maud  and  George 
D.,  who  are  at  home  with  their  father.  The 
mother  died  June  25,  1878,  and  Mr.  Bollinger 
was  married  November  25,  1879,  to  Mrs.  Nanc}' 
J.  Haimeu.  She  was  married  May  2,  1873,  to 
Andrew  Harmen,  with  whom  she  lived  three  years. 
The}'  had  two  children,  Carrie  and  Ida  R.,  who 
are  with  their  mother.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bollinger  have 
one  son,  Joseph. 

Our  subject  is  a  member  of  the  Masonic  frater- 
nity, and  his  wife   belongs  to  the  Baptist  Church. 


In  politics  he  is  a  Republican,  but  has  never  been 
an  office  seeker,  although  he  has  been  officially 
connected  with  the  schools  for  a  number  of  years. 
He  is  a  prosperous  citizen,  and  his  success  in  life 
has  been  acquired  through  his  own  efforts. 

Mrs.  Bollinger  is  the  daughter  of  Thomas  Mc- 
Donald, whose  father,  Felix  McDonald,  came  from 
South  Carolina  to  Randolph  County  in  an  early 
day.  The  former  married  Mary  J.,  daughter  of 
John  Thompson,  who  was  elected  to  the  Legisla- 
ture from  this  district  in  1834.  In  his  canvass  he 
made  the  following  speech: 

"Fellow-citizens:  I  come  before  you  as  a  candi- 
date for  your  suffrages,  to  represent  j'our  counties 
in  the  next  General  Assembly  of  Illinois.  It  is  due 
j'ou  that  I  should  declare  m}'  opinions  concerning 
some  leading  questions  that  now  are,  and  will  con- 
tinue to  be  for  some  time,  the  subject  of  legisla- 
tion. I  shall  freely  express  m}'  sentiments, cherish- 
ing a  hope  that  they  will  meet  your  approbation. 
I  have  been  a  citizen  of  Randolph  County  from 
early  j-outh,  and  have  endeavored  to  support  the 
principles  of  the  Democratic  school,  believing 
them  to  be  in  strict  accordance  with  the  spirit 
and  genius  of  our  free  institutions.  That  liberty 
and  learning  lean  upon  each  other  for  support  is 
a  truth  which  has  long  been  acknowledged  by 
the  intelligent  and  liberal  thinking  people  of  all 
countries,  and  of  which  we  are  all  becoming  con- 
vinced by  experience  and  observation.  It  is  not 
in  the  nature  of  things  that  a  popular  Govern- 
ment can  long  exist  except  among  an  enlightened 
and  virtuous  people.  Every  effort,  therefore,  to 
encourage  education  deserves  the  zealous  support 
of  ever}'  genuine  friend  of  liberty.  Nothing  else 
can  shield  them  against  the  designs  of  intriguing 
politicians,  who  always  come  in  the  name  and 
garb  of  patriotism,  and  calling  themselves  friends 
of  the  people,  cheat  thera  to  their  ruin.  As  it 
respects  the  election  of  a  Senator  to  Congress, 
I  am  willing  to  express  raj'  partiality  as  soon  as 
the  candidates  are  fairly  in  the  field,  and  shall  em- 
brace this  earliest  opportunity  of  satisfying  the 
voters  of  the  district  on  that  point.  In  this  case, 
the  vote  not  coming  directl}'  from  the  people,  I 
will,  if  elected,  consider  myself  bound  to  be  ruled 
by  instruction.     The  removal  of  the  county  seat 


416 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


of  Randolph  County'  is  a  question  tiiat  lias  arisen 
among  it^  citizens.  Satisfied  as  I  am  that  sectional 
prejudices  are  allayed  as  to  making  it  a  question 
to  operate  on  the  ensuing  election,  and  believing 
also  that  the  removal  should  never  be  asked  until 
the  majority  of  the  citizens  of  the  countj'  by  peti- 
tion or  otherwise  should  make  the  application, 
individually  I  am  in  favor  of  the  measure,  but  if 
elected,  should  never  be  heard  to  advocate  the 
removal  until  a  clear  and  decided  majority  of 
the  co.unty  should  prefer  it.  A  railway  or  canal 
to  effect  a  direct  communication  between  Lake 
Michigan  and  the  Illinois  River  is  a  subject  of 
great  importance  to  tliis  and  the  neighboring 
states,  and  should  be  encouraged  so  far  as  the 
means'of  our  state  and  aid  from  the  general  Gov- 
ernment would  justify.  These  and  other  measures 
that  we  are  all  conversant  with  will  meet  my  ar- 
dent approbation.  I  do  not  approve  of  the  pres- 
ent principle  upon  which  the  school  fund  is  ap- 
plied, or  of  establishing  another  state  bank  without 
a  special  capital.  I  feel  satisfied  that  the  citizens 
of  our  counties  are  convinced  and  generally  united 
on  this  point.  And  now,  fellow-citizens,  I  submit 
myself  to  the  ballot  box,  feeling  at  the  same  time 
that  you  will  give  me  a  strong  and  honorable  sup- 
port, and  yielding,  if  not  elected,  without  a  mur- 
mur. "Jonx  MoKiusoN." 

He  was  elected  and  removed  to  Yandalia,  then 
the  capital,  where  shortly  afterward  he  died  and 
was  buried. 


,^^>  TEPIIEN  R.  THOMPSON.  The  efficient 
^^^  Postmaster  at  Tilden,  Randolph  County, 
li\//li)  has  long  been  known  as  one  of  the  prom- 
inent  citizens  of  this  localitj',  and  for 
many  years  has  been  identified  with  the  progress- 
ive interests  of  the  count}',  materially  aiding  in 
the  promotion  of  local  improvements  and  mutual 
welfare.  Possessed  of  sterling  integrit}'  of  char- 
acter, executive  ability  and  excellent  judgment, 
Mr.  Thompson  is  especially  adapted  to  discharge 
the  duties  of  his  responsible  position,  and  is 
doing  so  to  the  univeral  satisfaction  of  his  fellow- 
citizens. 

Richard  Thompson,  the   father  of  our  subject, 


was  born  in  Nova  Scotia  in  1804,  while  his  mother, 
who  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Nancy  Erabree,  was 
born  in  1811  in  New  York.  The  parents  were 
married  and  lived  in  Nova  Scotia  for  a  few  years, 
and  then,  coming  to  the  United  States,  located  in 
Bangor,  Me.,  thence  later  removed  to  Canada. 
Their  last  removal  was  made  when  the}'  came  to 
the  state  of  New  York,  where  the  father  died 
July  22,  1854,  aged  fift}'  years.  His  wife  pre- 
ceded him  to  the  better  land  by  a  number  of 
years,  d^ing  June  10,  1848.  The}'  reared  a  fam- 
ily of  ten  children.  Mrs.  Thompson  was  a  de- 
voted member  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church, 
while  the  father  of  our  subject  held  membership 
with  the  Free  Will  Baptists. 

Stephen  R.  Thompson,  of  this  sketch,  was  the 
eldest  in  the  parental  family,  and  was  born  May 
17,  1830,  in  Nova  Scotia.  His  parents  being  in 
limited  circumstances,  his  education  was  very  much 
neglected,  and  he  was  compelled  to  earn  his  own 
living  when  reaching  his  fifteenth  year.  In  1837 
he  came  to  the  States.  Learning  the  carpenter's 
trade,  he  followed  that  for  a  time,  and  in  1850-51 
worked  in  the  lumber  camps  in  Michigan.  Thence 
he  went  to  Minnesota,  where  he  built  the  first 
billiard  saloon  ever  erected  in  Rochester,  that 
state.     He  remained  in  that  place  for  ten  years. 

On  the  outbreak  of  the  Civil  War,  Mr.  Thomp- 
son offered  his  services,  joining  Company  H,  Fifth 
Minnesota  Infantry, and  with  his  regiment  served 
under  General  Pope.  He  was  jireseut  at  the  bat- 
tles of  Corinth,  luka.  Champion  Hills  and  the  siege 
of  Vicksburg.  Then,  with  his  company,  he  was 
transferred  to  the  department  commanded  by  Gen- 
eral Smith,  and  with  him  participated  in  the  bat- 
tles of  Tupelo  and  Guntown.  He  later  aided  in 
building  the  bridges  between  Mozelle  and  St.  Louis, 
Mo.,  and  Memphis  and  Nashville,  Tenn.  During 
his  three  years  and  five  mouths  of  seivice  he  was 
never  wounded  or  taken  prisoner,  but  lay  sick  in 
the  hospital  near  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  for  three 
months. 

Mr.  Thompson  received  his  honorable  discharge 
May  30,  1865,  and  on  being  mustered  out  at  St. 
Paul,  returned  to  Michigan,  where  he  remained 
only  a  short  time, however,  and  removed  to  Frank- 
lin County,  Mo.,  where  he  was  in  the  employ  of 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


419 


the  Michigan  Lumber  Company.  From  that  place 
he  went  to  Marble  Hill,  the  same  state,  and  after 
a  short  stay  there  came  to  Grand  Tower,  this  state, 
in  1869,  where  he  was  engaged  in  working  at  his 
trade  for  a  period  of  two  years.  February  17, 
1871,  he  moved  to  Sparta,  and  during  the  same 
month  came  to  Tilden,  where  he  has  since  made 
his  home  and  followed  his  trade  until  about  eigh- 
teen months  ago. 

In  1858  our  subject  and  Miss  Annie  La  Saur 
were  united  in  marriage.  Mrs.  Thompson  died  in 
1863,  after  having  become  the  mother  of  two  chil- 
dren, both  of  whom  are  deceased.  Five  years 
later  our  subject  married  Mrs.  Marj-  (Nettle) 
Sonels,  who  was  born  m  England  November  8, 
1827.  Mr.  Thompson  votes  with  the  Democratic 
party  and  is  a  stalwart  advocate  of  its  principles. 
In  1893  he  was  appointed  Postmaster  by  President 
Cleveland,  and  now  gives  his  entire  time  and  at- 
tention to  the  duties  devolving  upon  him.  H« 
maj-  trul}-  be  called  a  self-made  man,  for  he  has 
worked  his  way  unaided  to  a  position  of  influ- 
ence, and  is  numbered  among  the  substantial  citi- 
zens of  Randolph  Count}'. 

il^  ON.  A.  H.  ROBERTS, a  prominent  merchant 
if)!^  and  the  ex-Mayor  of  Murphysboro,  is  one 
f^^^  of  the  most  enterprising  and  public-spirited 
(^J  citizens  of  this  place.  He  is  now  a  dealer 
in  hardware  and  furniture,  and  also  carries  on  the 
undertaking  business.  He  was  born  in  .Jonesboro, 
Union  County,  111.,  April  13,  1844,  and  comes 
from  an  old  Pennsylvania  family  of  Scotch  de- 
scent. His  father,  Joshua  Roberts,  was  born  near 
Painesville,  Ohio,  and  in  an  earl}'  day  emigrated 
to  Union  County,  this  stale.  He  was  one  of  the 
first  school  teachers  of  that  communit}',  and  for  a 
time  worked  as  a  millwright.  Afterward  he  en- 
gaged in  the  furniture  business  in  Jonesboro,  and 
at  the  time  of  its  building,  he  was  foreman  of  the 
Mt.  Carbon  Railroad.  He  married  Caroline  Cruse, 
a  native  of  Union  County,  whither  her  father  re- 
moved from  North  Carolina.  The  family  was  of 
German  origin.  Mr.  Roberts  died  in  1866,  but  his 
widow  is  still  living  (1894),  at  the  age  of  seventy 
12 


years,  and  yet  enjoys  good  health.  She  is  an  ac- 
tive member  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church. 
In  the  family  were  fourteen  children,  but  only 
five  sons  and  two  daughters  are  now  living. 

Our  subject,  who  is  the  eldest,  was  reared  in 
Jonesboro,  and  w.os  educated  in  its  common  schools. 
In  1862  he  enlisted  in  Company  F,  One  Hundred 
and  Ninth  Illinois  Infantry,  and  immediately 
went  to  the  south.  He  participated  in  the  siege 
of  Vicksburg,  tiic  battle  of  Jackson  and  in  other  im- 
portant engagements.  For  two  and  a-half  j-ears 
he  never  had  a  sick  da}-,  but  during  the  last  six 
months  of  his  service  he  suffered  much  from  ill 
health.  He  was  sent  to  Jefferson  Ban-acks,  and  when 
he  had  sufficiently  recovered  he  went  to  the  front 
again,  but  it  w.ns  seven  3'ears  before  he  had  com- 
pletel}^  regained  his  health.  He  was  mustered  out 
at  Springfield  in  June,  1865. 

On  his  return,  Mr.  Roberts  embarked  in  the  fur- 
niture business  with  his  father,  who  died  in  1866. 
He  then  became  sole  proprietor,  and  in  1872  he  re- 
moved his  business  to  Murphysboro.  He  is  a  nat- 
ural mechanic,  and  does  fine  work  as  a  cabinet- 
maker. In  1883  he  built  his  double  brick  store  at 
the  corner  of  Chestnut  and  Main  Streets.  It  is 
45x70  feet  and  two  stories  in  height,  with  a  base- 
ment. The  first  floor  is  occupied  by  hardware, 
stoves,  tinware,  etc.,  and  the  second  floor  bj'  his 
furniture  and  undertaking  shop.  He  also  handles 
agricultural  implements  and  does  a  fine  business, 
receiving  from  the  surrounding  country  a  liberal 
patronage.  He  is  a  stockholder  in  the  Murphys- 
boro Milling  Company,  and  was  one  of  the  organ- 
izers of  the  Southern  Illinois  Milling  Company,  of 
which  he  is  now  a  stockholder  and  Director.  He 
is  also  a  Director  in  the  building  and  loan  asso- 
ciation, and  is  serving  as  its  Treasurer. 

In  1873,  Mr.  Roberts  wedded  Miss  Frances  E. 
Sanders,  and  to  them  have  been  born  six  children: 
Ella  M.,  Delia,  Carrie  C;  Alex  J.  and  Hamilton  S. 
(twins),  and  Homer  V,.  Mr.  Roberts  affiliates  with 
the  Democracy.  While  in  Jonesboro  he  served  as 
Alderman  one  term,  and  has  been  connected  with 
the  School  Board  of  this  place  for  six  terms,  serv- 
ing a  part  of  the  time  as  its  President.  Socially, 
he  is  connected  with  the  Masonic  fraternity,  the 
Odd  Fellows'  society,  and  Worthen  Post,  G.  A.  R. 


420 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Ilis  wife  belongs  to  the  Lutheran  Church.  JMr. 
Roberts  is  also  President  of  the  Jackson  County 
Lumber  Company,  and  is  a  man  of  excellent  bus- 
iness and  executive  ability,  who  has  achieved  a  re- 
markable success  in  life. 


<«  MLLIAM  P.  MALONE  was  born  where  the 
\/\//!  town  of  Percy  now  stands,  in  Randolph 
)^  County,  January  5,1840,  to  Daniel  and 
Mary  G.  (Brown)  Malone.  The  latter  were  of 
Iiish  origin,  but  it  is  thought  the}'  were  born  in 
Tennessee.  They  emigrated  to  the  Prairie  State 
in  an  earl}-  day,  settling  first  in  Perry  Count}', 
and  later  removing  to  Short  Prairie,  in  Randolph 
County,  w^here  they  were  married. 

Our  subject  is  the  j-oungest  in  order  of  birth  in 
a  family  of  four  children.  His  early  life  was  spent 
on  the  farm,  and  two  years  after  the  death  of  his 
father,  in  1841,  his  mother  removed  to  Mill  Creek, 
where  he  attended  school  when  old  enough.  Feh- 
ruar}-  9,  1860,  our  subject  was  married  to  Miss  Sa- 
rah J.,  daughter  of  William  and  Sarah  (Adkins) 
Duncan.  Mrs.  Malone's  father  was  of  Scotch 
origin, and  came  to  this  state  from  South  Carolina, 
settling  in  Jackson  Count}',  where  she  was  born. 
For  two  years  succeeding  his  marriage  Mr.  Ma- 
lone lived  in  Jackson  County,  where  he  culti- 
vated a  tract  of  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres  of 
land  in  partnership  with  a  man  named  Culpepper. 
The  succeeding  year  we  find  him  at  Mill  Creek, 
where  he  farmed  a  season  with  his  brother-in-law. 
Thence  he  removed  to  Steeleville,  where  he  con- 
ducted a  grist  and  saw  mill  for  three  years,  or 
until  purchasing  a  farm  near  Mill  Creek.  There  he 
continued  to  reside  until  1874,  at  which  time  lie 
leased  his  farm  and  removed  to  Jackson  County, 
where  he  remained  four  years.  After  the  expira- 
tion of  that  time,  Mr.  Malone  returned  to  his  farm, 
living  there  until  the  fall  of  1879,  when  he  dis- 
posed of  his  landed  interests  in  Randolph  County 
and  removed  to  the  wild  west,  settling  near 
Blooraington,  Franklin  County,  Neb.  After  a  two 
years' sojourn  there,  he  had  the  misfortune  to  lose 
his  wife,  and  he  then  returned  to  his  native  county, 
occujjying  the  Richards  farm,  on  section   8,  town- 


ship 8,  range  5,  and  making  this  his  home  for  the 
succeeding  five  years.  Our  subject  again  moved 
to  the  town  of  Mill  Creek,  but  after  a  period  of 
two  years  located  on  the  farm  on  which  he  now 
resides,  on  section  6,  township  8,  range  5. 

Our  subject  was  a  second  time  married,  taking 
as  his  wife  Mrs.  Viana  Roberts,  September  20, 
1883.  Mrs.  Malone  is  a  daughter  of  Jolin  and 
Jane  (Burns)  Dean,  and  was  born  December  6, 
1844,  in  Randolph  County.  Of  her  first  marriage 
nine  children  were  horn,  as  follows:  Samuel  C, 
Sarah  S.,  Mary  I.,  Daniel  P.,  Ezekiel  J.,  William  H., 
Eliza  E.,  Carrie  B.  and  Jane.  Two  children  have 
come  to  bless  the  second  union:  Murray,  who  is 
nine  years.of  age,  and  Harry,  aged  seven  years. 

Since  his  return  from  Nebraska,  Mr.  Malone  has 
spent  a  part  of  his  time  working  at  the  carpen- 
ter's trade,  in  which  he  is  quite  skilled.  On  at- 
taining his  majority,  he  cast  his  vote  with  the 
Republican  party,  and  has  ever  since  stanchly  sup- 
ported its  principles.  He  became  a  member  of  the 
Christian  Church  in  1872,  and  is  one  of  its  valued 
members,  while  his  wife  is  a  member  of  the  Free 
Will  Baptist  denomination  at  Pleasant  Ridge. 
The  former  Mrs.  Malone  was,  like  her  husband,  a 
devoted  member  of  the  Christian  Church.  Our 
subject  has  been  School  Director  nearly  all  his  life, 
but  not  being  an  office  seeker,  has  refused  to  enter 
politics  for  anything  within  the  gift  of  the  peo- 
ple, nor  has  he  affiliated  with  any  secret  societies. 
Twice  he  volunteered  lo  enter  the  service  of  his 
country  during  the  late  Rebellion.  The  flrst  time 
he  remained  at  home  because  his  elder  brother 
went  to  war,  leaving  no  one  but  himself  to  carry 
on  the  affairs  at  home,  and  the  second  time  because 
the  ranks  were  full  and  no  more  could  be  accepted. 


'jf'  OHN  J.  WOODSIDK.  The  success  which  has 
attended  the  efforts  of  Mr.  Woodside  enti- 
tles him  to  more  than  passing  mention  in 
this  volume.  As  a  farmer  he  was  progress- 
ive and  enterprising,  and  as  a  citizen  he  has  long 
been  ranked  among  the  most  public-spirited  of 
Randolph  County's  residents.  He  is  the  possessor 
of  considerable  real  estate,  apd  is  now  living  retired 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


421 


in  the  village  of  Coulterville.  Mr.  Woodside  owns 
two  l)undred  acres  of  land  in  this  county,  a  quar- 
ter-section in  Clay  County,  this  state;  a  like 
amount  in  Hasltell  County,  Kan.:  two  city  lots  in 
Olatlie,  tliat  state,  and  a  fine  dwelling  and  twenty- 
five  lots  in  Coulterville. 

Our  subject's  fatlier,  Samuel  Woodside,  was  a 
native  of  Chester  Countj%  S.  C,  where  he  followed 
farming  until  liis  removal  to  Kentucky.  He  was 
a  soldier  in  the  War  of  1812,  and  after  his  settle- 
ment in  the  Blue  Grass  (State  married  Miss  Sarah 
Bawher,  a  native  of  Tennessee.  In  the  spring  of 
1829  they  came  to  Illinois,  and  lived  for  one  year 
on  the  Opossum  Den  Prairie.  Thence  they  re- 
moved to  Grand  Coat  Piairie,  where  they  made 
their  permanent  home,  and  where  they  died  at 
the  respective  ages  of  eighty-four  and  eighty-eight 
years.  Of  their  family  of  seven  children  the  fol- 
lowing six  are  living:  Mai'tha,  John  J.  (our  sub- 
ject), Robert,  Samuel,  William  and  James.  The 
parents  were  members  of  the  Covenanter  Presby- 
terian Cliurch. 

John  J.  Woodside  was  burn  August  11,  1816,  in 
Kentucky,  and  was  a  lad  of  twelve  years  when  the 
family  made  tlie  trip  overland  to  this  state.  When 
locating  here,  llie  country  was  infested  with  wild 
animals,  and  young  Woodside  had  many  oppor- 
tunities for  proving  his  skill  as  a  marksman.  He 
was  a  skillful  hunter  and  an  unerring  shot,  and  dur- 
ing the  early  history  of  tiiis state  killed  as  many  as 
one  thousand  deer.  He  was  reared  to  manhood 
on  the  old  farm  and  obtained  a  fair  schooling. 

April  3,  1839,  Mr.  Woodside  married  Miss  Mary 
Ann,  daughter  of  Samuel  Burns,  a  native  of  Ches- 
ter County,  S.  C.  After  his  marriage  our  subject 
settled  upon  section  24,  township  4,  range  5, 
where  he  improved  a  quarter-section  of  land.  His 
wife  became  the  mother  of  nine  children,  and  de- 
parted this  life  April  18,  1892.  The  six  children 
who  are  living  are,  Samuel  B.,  Nancy  Ann,  Will- 
iam J.,  Sarah  Jane,  Joseph  L.  and  Mary  Eliza. 
After  the  death  of  Mrs.  Mary  A.  Woodside,  our 
subject  married  Mrs.  Maria  S.  Woodside,  also  a 
native  of  Kentucky. 

Our  subject  has  been  a  resident  of  this  county 
for  sixty-four  years  and  is  consequently  one  of 
the  oldest  settlers  now  living.     He  takes  &ji  abid- 


ing interest  in  governmental  issues,  and  aids  lib- 
erally in  all  matters  pertaining  to  the  welfare  of 
the  community.  He  is  and  always  has  been  a 
stanch  Republican  in  politics,  and  has  frequently 
lepresented  his  party  as  delegate  in  county  con- 
ventions. He  was  a  strong  Union  man  during  tiie 
wai-,  and  was  a  friend  of  Gen.  John  A.  Logan. 

Mrs.  Woodside  is  a  member  in  good  standing  of 
the  United  Presbyterian  Church.  Although  not  a 
member  of  any  denorhination,  our  subject  is  a  lib- 
eral contributor  to  the  support  of  the  various 
churches.  He  is  the  largest  tax-payer  in  this  lo- 
cality, and  the  high  standing  which  he  occupies 
among  the  business  men  of  Randolph  Cdunty  is 
attributable  to  his  indefatigable  perseverance  and 
untiring  energy. 

ANIEL  SCHNEIDER.  Among  the  native 
born  citizens  of  Monroe  County  we  name 
Daniel  Schneider,  who  Is  one  of  the  pros- 
perous land  owners  on  section  22,  town- 
ship 1  south,  ranges  9  and  10  west.  He  was  born  on 
the  place  where  he  now  resides,  October  19,  1845. 
Peter  and  Margaret  (Weber)  Schneider,  the  par- 
ents of  our  subject,  were  natives  of  Germany,  and 
the  father  was  a  farmer  bj-  occupation,  in  connec- 
tion with  which  he  carried  on  the  trade  of  a  wag- 
on-maker for  about  fifteen  j'ears  prior  to  coming 
to  this  country'  in  1842.  He  immediately  lo- 
cated in  this  county,  and  was  enabled  to  purchase 
seventy-seven  acres  of  raw  land,  which  he  im- 
proved and  cultivated,  and  to  which  he  added 
from  time  to  time,  at  his  death  possessing  three  hun- 
dred and  thirt3'-five  acres.  He  and  his  worthy  wife 
were  members  of  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church, 
and  passed  from  this  life  in  1890  and  1873  respec- 
tively. 

Our  subject  is  one  in  a  family  of  eight  children 
born  to  his  parents,  five  of  whom  were  born 
in  Germany.  They  are:  David  and  Catherina, 
deceased;  Margaret;  Christian,  deceased;  Louis; 
Caroline,  deceased;  Daniel,  our  subject;  and  Peter. 
Daniel  received  his  education  in  the  village 
schools  of  Columbia,  and  at  the  same  time  as- 
sisted his  father  in  the  farm  duties.     He  remained 


422 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


iukUm-  the  parental  roof  until  attaining  manhood, 
when  he  purchased  of  his  father  ninety-seven  acres 
of  land,  for  which  he  went  in  debt  §1,000,  and 
which  is  still  in  his  possession.  Here  he  is  en- 
gaged in  active  agricultural  pursuits,  and  he  has 
made  of  his  place  one  of  the  finest  in  the  township. 
The  marriage  of  Daniel  Schneider  and  Miss 
Caroline  Kretch  took  place  in  1868,  and  to  them 
were  born  ten  children,  three  of  whom  died 
wlien  (luile  young.  The  surviving  are  named 
Minnio,  Herman,. Julius,  Emma,  Willie,  Bertha  and 
Carrie.  They  are  all  attending  school  in  Colum- 
bia and  are  gaining  good  educations.  Mrs.  Schnei- 
der was  born  in  Germany  in  1851  and  came  to  the 
United  States  with  her  parents,  settling  in  Mon- 
roe County.  She  and  her  husband  are  members  of 
the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church,  in  good  stand- 
ing and  fellowship.  Politically  Mr.  Schneider  is  a 
member  of  the  Democratic  part}',  and  in  the  fall  of 
1893  was  chosen  by  his  party  as  a  member  of  the 
City  Scliool  Board  of  Columbia. 


^^^^^I^^jg..^^^ig. 


»$^^ig-^)g-^S-^ig-Si& 


JUDGE  W.  W.  BARR,  of  Carliondale,  who 
has  won  a  prominent  position  among  the 
leading  attorne3's  of  Jackson  County,  claims 
^,,  Pennsylvania  as  the  state  of  liis  nativity. 
He  was  born  in  Centre  County  May  8,  1845,  and 
is  a  son  of  James  S.  and  Charlotte  (Stage)  Barr, 
both  of  whom  were  natives  of  the  Kej'stone  State, 
the  former  being  born  in  1817,  and  the  latter  in 
1818.  The  father  was  Principal  of  the  public 
schools  of  Huntingdon,  Pa.,  for  several  ^-ears,  and 
was  County  Superintendent  of  Schools  for  a  num- 
ber of  years.  He  was  also  editor  and  proprietor 
of  the  Huntingdon  American  for  a  considerable 
time.  In  1858,  he  emigrated  to  Illinois,  locating 
in  Tamaroa,  and  subsequently  came  to  Carbondale. 
He  took  a  verj'  prominent  part  in  political  affairs; 
was  a  stalwart  Democrat,  and  served  as  Circuit 
Clerk  and  Master  in  Chanceiy  in  Franklin.  He 
and  his  wife  were  members  of  the  Presbj'terian 
Cliurch,  and  were  highly  respected  people. 

Judge  Barr  is  the  eldest  in  their  family'  of  seven 
children.  His  early  education,  acquired  in  the 
coiuinon  schools,  was  supplemented   by  study  in 


the  Indiana  University,  from  which  he  was  gradu- 
ated in  the  Class  of  '67,  having  completed  the 
law  course.  Tlie  same  year  he  went  to  Benton, 
111.,  where  he  engaged  in  the  practice  of  his  pro- 
fession until  1876,  when  he  came  to  Carbondale, 
where  he  has  since  made  his  home.  He  has  a  keen, 
quick  intellect,  is  a  logical  reasoner  and  a  Uuent 
speaker,  and  has  therefore  won  success  in  his  chosen 
profession. 

In  the  vear  1870  Judge  Barr  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Alice  G.  Brenizer,  a  native  of 
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  and  a  daughter  of  Charles  and 
Christina  Brenizer,  of  the  Empire  State.  They 
have  two  children,  Jessie  G.  and  Bertha  A.  Keesee. 
The  former  is  a  graduate  of  the  Southern  Illinois 
State  Normal  Universit}-. 

Judge  Barr  takes  considerable  interest  in  civic 
societies.  He  belongs  to  the  Masonic  fraternity, 
the  Knights  of  Honor  and  the  Ancient  Order  of 
United  Workmen.  He  has  been  Grand  Dictator 
of  the  state  for  two  3'ears.  His  wife  and  daughters 
are  members  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church. 
He  has  always  taken  an  active  part  in  politics,  and 
votes  with  the  Democratic  party.  He  has  been  a 
member  of  eveiy  state  convention  since  1867,  and 
it  was  he  who  nominated  J.  B.  Gill  for  Lieutenant- 
Governor  at  the  last  convention.  He  is  now  a 
member  of  the  State  Central  Democratic  Commit- 
tee. Mr.  Barr  was  State's  Attorney  of  Franklin 
County  for  one  term.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
first  legislature  which  convened  under  the  new 
constitution  in  1871-72,  and  in  1886  he  was  elected 
Count}' Judge, and  re-elected  in  1890.  His  present 
term  continues  until  December,  1894.  During  his 
long  service  he  has  fully  demonstrated  his  excel- 
lent abilit}',  and  his  admirable  management  of  the 
court  has  won  him  high  commendation. 

3 =*=S  <  T  V  [^ — ■ ^ 1. 


ly/  GUIS  WEHRHEIM,  one  of  the  leading 
|l  (?S)  and  representative  farmers  of  Randolph 
j'^\  County,  who  is  now  successfully  engaged 
in  agricultural  pursuits  in  township  6,  range  7, 
has  the  honor  of  being  a  native  of  Illinois,  his 
birth  liaving  occurred  in  EvansviUe,  on  the  8th 
of  September,  1852,     fJi?  father  was  John  Wehr- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


423 


beim,  and  his  mother  bore  the  maiden  name  of 
Elizabeth  Rett}'.  Both  were  natives  of  German}-, 
and  in  tlieir  childhood  tliey  came  with  their  re- 
spective families  to  America,  and  grew  to  mature 
years  in  Monroe  County,  111.,  where  their  marriage 
was  celebrated.  The  father  was  a  cooper  by  trade, 
and  followed  that  pursuit  for  several  years.  He 
later  engaged  in  milling,  and  also  cjirried  on  farm- 
ing in  connection  with  the  operation  of  his  mill. 
During  the  last  years  of  his  life  his  energies  were 
devoted  exclusivel}-  to  agriculture. 

We  now  take  up  the  personal  Bistory  of  our  sub- 
ject, who  is  so  widely  and  favorably'  known  in 
Randolph  County  that  he  needs  no  special  intro- 
duction to  our  readers.  The  educational  priv- 
ileges which  he  received  were  only  those  afforded 
b}'  the  common  schools  of  this  locality.  His  train- 
ing at  farm  labor,  however,  was  not  so  meagre,  for 
he  was  early  inured  to  the  arduous  laboi-s  of  the 
fields.  He  gave  his  father  the  benefit  of  his  serv- 
ices until  after  he  had  attained  his  majority',  when, 
at  the  age  of  twenty-two,  he  embarked  in  business 
for  himself  as  a  merchant.  In  connection  with 
liis  brother  George  he  established  a  store  in  Evans- 
ville,  where  they  carried  on  operations  for  a  3'ear. 
On  the  expiration  of  that  period,  our  subject  sold 
out  and  resumed  farming,  which  vocation  he  has 
since  followed.  He  owns  a  valuable  and  product- 
ive tract  of  laud,  which  is  now  under  a  high  state 
of  cultivation  and  well  improved.  Everything 
about  the  place  denotes  the  careful  supervision  of 
the  owner,  who  is  justi}-  regarded  as  one  of  the 
leading  agriculturists  of  this  I'Ogion. 

On  June  4,  1874,  Mi-.  \Yehrheim  was  united 
in  marriage  with  Miss  Elizabeth  Beare,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Christian  and  Martha  (Lenherr)  Beare,  of 
Ellis  Grove,  111.  Three  children  graced  this  union, 
hut  the  only  son  died  at  the  age  of  two  j-ears;  the 
two  daughters,  Tillie  and  Anna,  are  still  with  their 
parents,  and  are  attending  school.  The  mother  is 
a  member  of  the  German  Methodist  Church.  The 
household  is  a  hospitable  one,  and  its  members 
rank  high  in  social  circles. 

In  his  political  views,  Mv.  Wehrheim  is  an  in- 
flexible adherent  of  the  Republican  party  and  its 
principles,  and  does  all  in  his  power  to  promote 
its  growth  and  insure  its   success.     Althouah  he 


is  so  deeply  interested  in  politics,  he  has  never 
sought  or  desired  political  preferment  for  himself. 
However,  he  has  served  as  Justice  of  the  Peace,  and 
is  now  creditably  and  acceptably  filling  the  office 
of  School  Director.  The  cause  of  education  finds  in 
him  a  warm  friend, and  his  hearty  support  and  co- 
operation are  given  to  ever}-  enterprise  which  he 
believes  will  prove  of  public  benefit.  He  is  a  pub- 
lic-spirited and  progressive  citizen  and  a  man  of 
sterling  worth,  who  is  held  in  high  regard  through- 
out the  community  in  which  the  greater  part  of 
his  life  has  been  passed. 


<)C<-H"»"t"i"M"H"M'jgg»»^-<--»"8"i-i-»4'»-;-X> 

2^^H0MAS  LEO  MUDD.  Randolph  County 
m^^  has  among  its  citizens  manv  men  of  more 
^^^y  than  average  ability  and  intelligence  who 
are  doing  a  great  work  for  its  advancement.  Prom- 
inent among  these  is  the  gentleman  whose  name 
appears  at  the  head  of  this  biographj-.  He  is  one 
of  the  most  enterprising  fanners  in  this  part  of 
the  county,  and  is  also  a  marked  figure  m  its  po- 
litical life.  He  served  for  many  years  as  School 
Director  and  as  Trustee  of  his  district. 

A  native  of  this  county,  our  subject  was  born 
June-28,  1831,  and  is  the  son  of  James  and  Amelia 
(O'Hara)  Mudd.  The  father  was  born  in  Ken- 
tucky, whence  he  came  to  Randolph  County  in  an 
early  day  and  was  classed  among  its  earl}-  settlers. 
He  was  a  farmer  by  occupation,  and  died  when  our 
subject  was  a  small  boy.  The  parental  family  in- 
cluded six  sons  and  three  daughters,  of  whom 
Thomas  L.  is  the  youngest  but  one. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  died  when  he  was 
seventeen  years  of  age,  and  he  was  then  thrown 
upon  his  own  resources.  Prior  to  that  time,  he 
had  gained  a  fair  education  in  the  district  school, 
and  when  compelled  to  make  his  own  wa}"  in  the 
world  turned  his  attention  to  farming.  He  has  re- 
sided upon  his  present  estate  since  1844,  and  his 
whole  course  in  life  shows  him  to  be  a  shrewd, 
practical  and  capable  farmer.  When  locating  here 
his  land  was  covered  with  timber,  and  he  entered 
upon  the  hard  task  of  clearing  it  with  a  sturd}- de- 
termination to  conquer  all  obstacles.  In  the  years 
that  followed,  he  put  his  place  in  good  order,  and 


424 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


now  has  a  well  developed  farm  of  one  hundred 
and  twenty-seven  acres,  located  five  miles  south 
of  Ruma,  in  township  5,  range  9. 

January  9,  1855,  Thomas  L.  Mudd  and  Miss 
Mary  E.  HarrcU  were  united  in  marriage.  The 
lady  is  likewise  a  native  of  tliis  county,  and  by 
her  union  with  our  subject  h.as  become  tlie  motlier 
of  the  following  named  six  children:  John  H., 
Austin  P.,  Thomas  W.,  James  R.,  Jerome,  and  Mary 
Ann,  now  Mrs.  John  Hoy.  In  politics  Mr.  Mudd 
favors  Democratic  principles, and  cast  liis  first  vote 
for  Buchanan.  All  the  members  of  his  family  are 
identified  with  the  Catholic  Church  and  are  higlilj" 
respected  in  their  communit}-. 


]S^  AVID  OIILWINE,  a  well  known  resident  of 
I  j)  Red  Bud,  and  one  worthy  of  representation 
^f^  in  the  history  of  Randolpii  Countj'  among 
its  prominent  citizens,  claims  Ohio  as  the  place  of 
his  nativity.  He  w.is  born  in  Greene  County,  and 
is  a  son  of  Charles  and  Elizabeth  (Sciiroeder)  Ohl- 
wine,  who  were  natives  of  Maryland.  The  father 
served  in  the  War  of  1812,  and  the  familj'  was 
probably  founded  in  America  during  Colonial  days. 

In  the  Buckeye  State,  David  Ohlwine  was  reared 
to  manhood,  no  event  of  special  importance  occur- 
ring during  his  boyhood  and  youth.  The  com- 
mon schools  afforded  him  his  educational  privi- 
leges. After  arriving  at  man's  estate,  he  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Charlotte  Ta.)  lor. 
Their  wedding  was  celebrated  in  Ohio,  and  in 
1839  they  left  that  state  for  Illinois.  The  first 
year  after  their  arrival  was  spent  in  Preston.  Mr. 
Ohlwine  purchased  eighty  acres  of  land  and  began 
farming,  but  on  account  of  sickness  he  was  forced 
to  incur  indebtedness,  and  during  the  earlier  j'ears 
of  his  residence  in  this  state  he  met  with  many 
hardships  and  difficulties,  but  at  length  persever- 
ance and  industr}-  overcame  these,  and  by  good 
management  and  well  directed  efforts  he  achieved 
a  handsome  propertj-,  becoming  an  extensive  land 
owner  in  Randolph  and  Richland  Counties. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Airs.  Olilwiue  were  born  eleven 
children,  six  of  whom  are  yet  living,  namelj^: 
Clementine,  wife  of  W.  R.  Kelsej-,  of  San  Antonio, 


Tex.;  Walter;  George;  James,  who  resides  in  South 
Dakota;  Frank,  a  resident  of  Kendallville,  Ind.; 
and  Cora,  wife  of  Charles  A.  Wolfe,  who  is  living 
in  Ligonier,  Ind.  Tlie  mother  of  this  family,  who 
was  a  faithful  member  of  the  Baptist  Church,  died 
April  6,  1891.  For  his  second  wife  Mr.  Ohlwine 
chose  Mrs.  Cordelia  Allen,  widow  of  James  Allen, 
and  a  daughter  of  Nathaniel  Smith,  one  of  the 
early  settlers  of  Randolph  County. 

In  connection  with  his  farming  interests,  Mr. 
Ohlwine  was  one  of  the  originators  of  the  Ohl- 
wine-Schrieber  Ilanking  Company,  and  has  filled 
the  office  of  President  since  its  formation.  The 
success  of  that  financial  institution  is  due  to  his 
efforts.  He  has  been  one  of  the  active  and  leading 
business  men  of  the  county,  and  as  the  result  of 
his  untiring  efforts  has  won  the  prosperitj'  which 
now  enables  him  to  lay  aside  business  cares.  He 
was  at  one  time  a  member  of  the  Independent  Or- 
der of  Odd  Fellows.  In  politics,  he  is  a  supporter 
of  Democratic  principles,  and  in  religious  belief  is 
a  Baptist.  He  may  truly  be  called  a  self-made 
man,  and  his  life  is  in  many  respects  well  worthy' 
of  emulation. 


w 


WILLIAM  HUCH,  who  was  born  in  Monroe 


County,  III.,  in  1842.  is  one  of  the  larg- 
^ff%  est  and  most  energetic  farmers  in  town- 
ship 1  south,  ranges  9  and  10  west.  He  is  a  son  of 
Gottleib  and  Caroline  (Holzhaus)  Huch,  both  na- 
tives of  Hanover,  Germany.  There  the  father  re- 
ceived a  good  education  and  was  reared  as  a 
farmer's  bo}',  afterward  learning  the  trade  of  a 
stone  mason.  He  came  to  the  United  States  with 
his  family,  and  located  first  in  Ohio.  Later  com- 
ing to  Monroe  County,  he  bought  a  large  tract  of 
land  from  the  Government,  being  also  the  owner 
of  land  in  Wayne  County,  this  state.  At  the  time 
of  Ills  death,  which  occurred  in  1865,  he  was  the 
possessor  of  a  fine  piece  of  property,  consisting  of 
one  hundred  and  thirty  acres  of  land,  which  he 
took  great  pride  in  cultivating  and  improving. 
Politically  he  was  first  an  old-line  Whig,  but  on 
the  organization  of  the  Republican  party  he  cast 
his  vote  for  its  candidates.     Gottleib  Huch,  with 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


425 


his  good  wife,  was  a  member  of  the  Evangelical 
Church  at  Columbia,  and  helped  to  erect  the  old 
log  structure  in  whicii  tiic  congregation  first  met 
for  services.  He  was  preceded  to  the  better  land 
by  his  wife,  she  djing  three  days  before  his  death. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  received  a  fair  com- 
mon-school education,  and  remained  on  the  home 
farm  assisting  his  father  until  the  death  of  his 
parents,  when  he  went  to  live  with  a  brother,  re- 
maining one  year.  The  marriage  of  our  subject 
and  Miss  Marj-  Williams  occurred  in  1865,  and  to 
them  has  been  born  a  family  of  eleven  children, 
all  of  whom  are  living:  Margaret,  Lizzie,  Caroline, 
Louisa,  Henry,  Michael,  John,  Herman,  Jacob, 
Louis  and  William.  Mrs.  Huch  was  born  in  this 
county.  She,  with  her  husband,  is  a  worthy  mem- 
ber of  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church  at  Colum- 
bia. Politicallj',  Mr.  Huch  is  a  stanch  Republican, 
always  believing  in  the  principles  of  that  partv. 

At  the  time  of  his  marriage,  the  gentleman 
whose  name  heads  this  sketch  received  oue  hun- 
dred and  thirty  acres  of  his  father's  estate,  and  at 
once  set  about  its  cultivation.  He  lias  since  been 
enabled  to  add  to  it,  and  is  now  the  owner  of  two 
hundred  and  ten  broad  and  fertile  acres.  He  is 
thereon  engaged  in  mixed  farming  and  stock-rais- 
ing, and  has  made  of  his  place  one  of  the  best  in 
the  township. 

:  ATHf:R  K.  SCHAUERTE,  pastor  of  St.  An- 
drew's Catholic  Church  of  Murphysboro, 
was  born  in  Westphalia,  Germany,  March  7, 
1862.  His  father,  AVilliam  .Schauerte,  was  a  well- 
to-do  farmer,  who  died  in  that  countiy  at  the  age 
of  sixt^'-five.  His  wife,  who  bore  the  maiden 
name  of  Regina  Matzhauser,  is  still  living  on  the 
old  homestead.  In  the  family  are  seven  children, 
three  of  whom  reside  in  Germany  and  ^ur  in  this 
country. 

Our  subject  is  the  eldest.  He  remained  in  his 
native  land  until  1880,  wlieu  he  sailed  from  Bre- 
men to  Baltimore,  and  thence  went  to  East  St. 
Louis,  where  he  studied  under  the  private  instruc- 
tion of  Father  C.  Koenig  for  one  year.  He  then 
attended  St.  Joseph's  College,  of  Teutopolis,  111., 
from    which   he    was   graduated  in    1883,  having 


completed  the  classical  coui-se.  He  then  studied 
theology  and  philosophy  in  St.  Francis'  Seminary, 
of  Milwaukee,  and  was  graduated  in  1887.  He 
was  ordained  b\-  Archbishop  Heiss,  of  Milwaukee, 
and  then  was  appointed  as  substitute  for  Rev.  F. 
Bergmann,  of  Murphysboro. 

For  five  months  Father  Schauerte  acted  as  sub- 
stitute, and  w.as  made  pastor  of  St.  Andrew's  con- 
gregation in  January  of  1888.  On  the  4th  of  May 
following,  the  small  frame  church  was  burned  to 
the  ground,  but  [ilans  were  soon  afterward  made 
for  a  new  church,  and  the  sau.e  fall  the  building 
was  begun.  It  was  completed  September  16,  1889, 
and  its  images  and  inside  furnishings  were  all  im- 
ported from  Europe.  There  is  a  membership  of 
one  hundred  and  fifty  families. 

Father  .Schauerte  has  established  four  missions — 
St.  Elizabeth's,  at  Ava,  111.;  St.  Ann's,  at  Raddle- 
ville;  St.  Gregor}''s,  at  Grand  Tower;  and  one  at 
Cartersville.  At  the  first  two  places  he  built 
churches.  In  the  summer  of  1893  St.  Andrew's 
school  was  built.  It  is  a  three-story  brick  struct- 
ure, 46x50  feet.  It  is  in  charge  of  five  Sisters  of 
the  Precious  Blood,  who  teach  the  common 
branches,  sciences  and  music.  The  church  owns 
St.  Andrew's  Cemetery,  which  is  two  miles  from 
the  cit}-,  and  which  comprises  six  acres  of  land.  It 
also  owns  a  hospital  site  near  the  Chicago  &  Texas 
depot.  The  church  is  the  largest  and  finest  in 
southern  Illinois  between  Belleville  aud  Cairo,  is 
built  in  Gothic  style,  and  is  one  hundred  and 
seven  feet  long  and  forty-two  feet  in  front,  with 
a  transcept  fifty-eight  feet.  There  are  church  so- 
cieties for  the  male  members  of  the  congregation, 
married  ladies,  \'oung  ladies  and  young  men.  For 
the  past  two  years  Father  Schauerte  has  had  an 
assistant.  He  is  an  untiring  worker  in  his  church, 
and  its  rapid  development  in  this  community  is 
largely  due  to  his  effort*. 

— >>> o*o.@-Jxv1©..o*o.. *<^ 

ANIEL  KLEIN.  Among  the  attractive 
estates  of  Monroe  County  there  is  one 
comprising  one  hundred  and  three  acres 
of  land  in  township  1  south,  ranges  9  and 
10  west,  to  which  the  eye  of  the  passer-by  returns 
again    and   again.     Everything   about    the    pl.acc 


426 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


bears  an  air  of  neatness  and  order,  while  a  com- 
plete line  of  excellent  buildings  and  well  kept 
fences  adds  to  the  pleasing  prospect  afforded  by 
well  cultivated  fields.  This  place  was  formerl3' 
owned  and  occupied  by  the  gentleman  whose 
name  initiates  this  sketcli,  and  who  helil  high  rank 
among  agriculturists. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  a  native  of  Rhenish 
Bavaria,  German^-,  where  he  was  born  December  1, 
1S28.  His  father,  Daniel, and  his  mother,  Elizabeth 
(Teiss)  Klein,  were  farmers  in  their  native  country, 
and  emigrated  to  America  in  1841,  making  their 
way  to  St.  Louis.  In  October  of  the  same  year,  how- 
ever, they  located  in  Monroe  Count3',  on  the  farm 
which  our  subject  afterward  owned.  The  father 
first  purchased  sixt^'-three  acres,  and  later  added 
forty  more,  making  a  total  of  one  hundred  and 
three  acres.  Daniel  Klein.  Sr.,  was  one  of  the  or- 
ganizers and  builders  of  the  Evangelical  Lutheran 
Churchat  Columbia,  and  was  a  worthy  Trustee  at 
the  time  of  il^  erection.  He  was  called  to  the  land 
of  rest  iu  1845,  his  good  wife  surviving  him  ten 
years. 

The  paternal  grandfather  of  our  subject,  Adam 
Klein,  was  a  stone-mason  by  trade,  but  also  followed 
the  occupation  of  a  farmer  in  Germany,  where  he 
died.  He  was  the  father  of  three  children,  Cathe- 
rine, Daniel  and  Adam,  and  was  also  connected 
with  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church. 

Mr.  Klein  was  one  in  a  family  of  six  cliil- 
dren  born  to  his  parents,  two  of  whom  died 
when  young.  Those  living  are,  Elizabeth,  who 
is  the  wife  of  William  Hoffman;  Catherine,  who 
married  Jacob  Young;  and  Margaret,  who  is  the 
wife  of  Henry  Huch.  The  early  education  of 
our  subject  was  obtained  both  in  the  Old  Countr3^ 
and  in  Monroe  County,  and  he  early  in  life  began 
to  assist  in  the  duties  on  the  farm,  becoming  thor- 
ouglil}-  familiar  with  all  its  details.  He  remained 
with  his  parents  until  the  age  of  twenty-six,  when 
he  was  married  to  Julia  Kern,  a  daughter  of  Theo- 
bold  and  Elizabeth  Kern.  The  lady  was  born  in 
the  Eatherland,  and  came  to  the  United  States 
alone  when  nineteen  years  of  age,  here  meeting  her 
brother  and  sister,  who  had  preceded  her.  She 
bore  her  husband  eleven  children,  tliiee  of  whom 
are  deceased:    Elizabeth,  who  married  John  Reger, 


and  died  leaving  two  children,  Henr}-  (deceased) 
and  William;  Caroline;  Catherine,  deceased;  Louis, 
who  died  when  seven  months  old;  Emma,  the 
wife  of  Henry  Kreckel;  Henr\-,  a  resident  of 
Columbia;  Lewis,  who  makes  his  home  in  St.  Louis; 
Charles,  a  resident  of  Chicago;  William,  who  is  at 
home;  Gus,  who  is  in  St.  Louis;  and  Ida,  who  is  at 
home.  They  were  all  educated  in  the  Columbia 
schools  and  are  well  fitted  for  the  battles  of  life. 
Mr.  Klein  was  a  stalwart  Republican  in  his  po- 
litical views,  and  with  his  worthy  wife  was  a  val- 
ued member  of  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Churchat 
Columbia.  At  the  deatli  of  his  father  our  subject 
inherited  the  home  estate,  and  was  considered  one 
of  the  thrifty  and  energetic  agriculturists  of  the 
county  at  the  lime  of  his  death,  January  19,  1894. 


'E5 


1^-^  EXRY  BUETTNEK,  of  Red  Bud,  is  widely 
|(  )jl  known  throughout  Randolph  and  adjoin- 
ss^'  ing  counties,  and  with  pleasure  we  present 
(^i)  to  our  readers  this  record  of  his  life.  He 
w.as  born  in  Germany  in  1844,  and  in  his  native 
laud  spent  the  da^'s  of  his  boyliood  and  3'outh,  no 
event  of  special  importance  occurring  during  that 
time.  In  1869  he  determined  to  seek  a  home  and 
fortune  beyond  the  Atlantic,  and  on  crossing  the 
ocean  located  in  Davenport,  Iowa.  He  had  one 
brother,  Ferd,  who  also  came  to  the  United  States, 
and  is  now  a  prosperous  and  successful  merchant 
of  Percy,  111. 

For  three  years  after  his  arrival  in  this  county, 
Mr.  Buettner  remained  in  Davenport,  and  in  1873 
went  to  St.  Louis,  where  he  continued  for  nearly 
three  j'ears  working  at  his  trade,  that  of  a  brewer. 
During  his  residence  in  St.  Louis  he  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Marguerita  Gaul,  by  whom  he 
has  had  five  children,  Julius  H.,  Oscar,  Otto,  Ella, 
and  Hem-}',  who  died  at  the  age  of  three  years. 
In  1875  Mr.  Buettner  came  with  his  family-  to 
Red  Bud  in  the  capacity  of  agent  for  the  Excelsior 
Brewing  Company  of  St.  Louis.  After  two  years 
he  bought  the  property-  of  the  firm  in  this  place 
and  embarked  in  the  same  line  of  business  for 
himself.  He  is  now  interested  in  the  Tennessee 
Brewing  Companj-,  of  Memphis,  Tenn.,as  one  of  its 


^^■s^ 


RESIDENCE  or  GFO.   D.  SEYMOUR  ,  SEC. 20.,   T.    G.,  R.  T.,  RAN  DOLPH     CU  ,  I  LL. 


'  HOTEL  BU'^TTMER';  RED    BU  D  VI  L  .,  1  LL.,H  EN  R  Y    BUET^^'^R  .    PROPRl  ETOR. 


tORTRArr  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORt). 


429 


stockholders.  In  connection  with  his  other  inter- 
ests he  also  owns  and  "carries  on  the  Buettner  Hotel. 
He  is  a  member  of  and  stockholder  iu  the  Iowa,  Illi- 
nois and  Alabama  I^uraber  and  Live  Stock  Com- 
pany, which  owns  ten  thousand  acres  of  timber 
land  iu  the  state  Alabama.  AVhen  he  reached  Rock 
Island,  III.,  he  had  but  twentj-flve  cents  in  his 
pocket,  but  to-day  he  is  one  of  the  well-to-do  citi- 
zens of  this  part  of  the  state.  By  working  hard, 
saving  what  he  had  earned  and  investing  it  with 
care  and  diligence,  he  h.as  become  what  we  find 
him  to-day, one  of  the  substantial  business  men  of 
Randolph  County. 

In  ]j()litics  Mr.  Buettner  generally  votes  with 
the  Republican  party,  but  he  is  not  an  active  par- 
tisan and  has  never  been  an  office-seeker,  prefer- 
ring to  devote  his  entire  time  and  attention  to  his 
business  rnterests.  He  takes  considerable  interest 
in  civic  societies  and  is  connected  with  the'  Ma- 
sf)nic  fraternity,  the  Odd  Fellows'  lodge  and  the 
Knights  of  Honor.  A  pleasant,  genial  gentleman, 
he  makes  friends  wherever  he  goes  and  has  ac- 
quaintances throughout  this  part  of  the  state.  He 
was  not  disappointed  in  the  hope  that  his  financial 
condition  would  be  improved  in  America,  and  in- 
deed his  success  has  far  exceeded  his  expectations. 


:EORGE  D.  SEYMOUR.  This  gentleman 
may  truly  be  called  a  self-made  man,  as 
will  be  seen  by  the  perusal  of  his  biograjjhy. 
He  occupies  a  finely  improved  farm  in  township 
6,  range  7,  and  ranks  among  the  highly  respected 
residents  of  Randolph  County  by  reason  of  his 
intelligence,  sterling  character  .and  relial)le  citizen- 
ship. He  is  an  enterprising  farmer,  prudentl}' 
changing  his  crops  in  order  to  promote  the  fertil- 
ity of  the  soil,  and  devoting  the  greater  part  of  his 
land  to  grain,  although  not  neglecting  other  arti- 
cles of  produce.  He  raises  graded  hogs,  cattle  and 
fine  horses,  and  has  his  estate  well  supplied  with 
orchards  and  groves.  Neat  fences  enclose  and  sub- 
divide the  six  hundred  acres  which  he  owns,  and 
good  buildings  are  favorably  located  upon  it.  The 


land  has  been  tilled  wherever  necessary,  and  is 
improved  in  every  part. 

Edward  A.  Seymour,  the  father  of  our  subject, 
was  a  native  of  Connecticut,  where  he  was  en- 
gaged as  a  clock-maker.  He  also  conducted  a  large 
business  through  the  west,  and  in  1838  concluded 
to  locate  in  Illinois.  His  good  wife,  the  mother  of 
our  subject,  was  known  in  her  maidenhood  as  Har- 
riet A.  Johnson,  and  was  born  in  Connecticut. 
When  her  husband  moved  to  ihe  Prairie  State  she 
did  not  come  with  him,  as  she  did  not  like  to  leave 
her  native  home.     Both  are  now  deceased. 

The  subject  of  this  sketcli  was  born  in  Farming- 
ton,  Conn.,  April  28,  1831,  and  is  the  eldest  child 
in  the  family.  He  attended  school  in  his  native 
town  until  reaching  his  fifteenth  j'ear,  when  he 
commenced  to  work  in  a  foundry,  and  afterward 
was  employed  in  a  furniture  factory  in  that  place. 
He  was  twenty-three  years  of  age  on  coming  to 
Randolph  Countj-,  and  after  a  sojourn  of  one  year 
here  he  went  to  St.  Louis.  Not  finding  that  city 
what  be  expected,  he  soon  returned  to  this  county 
and  located  on  a  small  farm,  which  he  at  once  pur- 
chased. To  the  original  acreage  he  has  since  added, 
and  he  is  to-day  classed  among  the  most  extensive 
farmersin  Illinois.  He  is  considered  one  of  thekeen, 
thoroughly  wide-awake  farmers^and  stock-raisers  of 
the  count}',  who  are  contributing  so  much  to  its 
material  prosperity. 

In  October,  1864,  our  subject  responded  to  his 
country's  call  and  enlisted  in  Comi)any  C, Thirtieth 
Illinois  Infantr}-,  and  was  mustered  into  service  at 
Alton,  111.  The  first  engagement  in  which  the 
regiment  took  part  was  at  Nashville,  Tenn.,  and 
afterward  they  participated  in  tiie  battles  of  Mur- 
freesboro  and  Chattanooga.  Thence  they  marched 
to  North  Carolina,  and  at  Kingston  our  subject 
and  some  of  his  comrades  were  captured.  They 
were  confined  in  Libby  Prison,  and  one  month 
later  were  paroled  and  returned  to  Camp  Butler, 
where  he  was  mustered  out  .June  30,  1865. 

From  the  army  Mr.  Seymour  returned  to  his 
home, and  has  since  given  his  undivided  attention 
to  the  cultivation  of  his  farm.  Socially  he  is  one 
of  the  leading  members  of  the  Royal  Arch  Masons 
and  the  Council  Degrees  Lodge  No.  86,  at  Kaskas- 
kia,   in  which  he  has  served  as  Worshipful  Mas- 


430 


PORTRAIT  AND  BlOGRARfflCAL  RECORD. 


ter.  He  is  connected  with  Florence  Post  No.  719, 
G.  A.  R.,  at  Florence.  Politically  a  Republican, 
in  national  and  state  elections  he  is  soniewliat 
conservative  in  local  matters.  He  has  served  as 
School  Trustee  of  liis  township  for  a  number  of 
years. 

December  1,  1857,  George  D.  Seymour  and  Miss 
Helen  M.  Reckwith  were  united  in  marriage.  Mrs. 
Seymour  was  a  daughter  of  George  and  Lovina 
(Austin)  Beckwith,  who  died  at  New  Hartford, 
Conn.  She  became  the  mother  of  three  children: 
Clarence  A.,  who  died  in  infancy;  Charles  Henry, 
who  married  Lillie  Lovina  Young,  and  lives  near 
Ellis  Grove,  this  county,  and  George  E.,  who  mar- 
ried Mary  Lovina  Humphries  and  also  resides  near 
Ellis  Grove.  In  December  of  1886  Mrs.  Helen 
Seymour  died.  May  9,  1889,  Miss  Rosella  Bell  be- 
came the  wife  of  our  subject.  She  is  a  daughter 
of  David  and  Mary  J.  (Hale)  Bell,  and  was  bo'-n 
in  Jefferson  Count3',  111.  To  this  marriage  one 
cliild  has  been  born,  who  bears  tlie  name  of  Frances 
Belle.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Seymour  are  attendants  at 
the  Episcopal  Church,  and  are  highl}'  regarded  in 
the  neighborhood. 


B^ 


/^iQTTLIEB  ZIEBOLD  is  the  senior  member 
III  ^— -  of  the  firm  of  G.  Ziebold  k  Son,  the  well 
^^^:^!  known  millers  of  Red  Bud.  He  was  born  in 
Wagenstedt,  Baden,  Germany,  in  1822,  and  is  a  son 
of  Gottlieb  and  Catherine  (Lauer)  Ziebold,  both 
of  whom  were  natives  of  the  same  countr3-.  Their 
family  numbered  five  children,  the  eldest  of  whom, 
Magdelena,.was  born  in  1818,  and  married  Frede- 
rick Ilirsch,  who  died  in  tlie  Fatherland.  She  then 
brought  her  family  to  America,  and  located  in 
Monroe  County,  111.,  where  her  last  daj'S  were 
spent.  Christina,  who  was  born  in  1820,  became 
the  wife  of  Jacob  Schneider,  and  never  left  Ger- 
man}'. Gottlieb  is  the  third  in  order  of  birth. 
Joseph  is  now  an  extensive  farmer  and  stock-raiser 
of  California,  Mo.  Caroline  is  the  widow  of  Fred 
KiUey,  of  Waterloo,  111. 

Mr.  Ziebold  of  this  sketch  was  reared  to  man- 
hood in  his  native  land,  and  for  seven  years  served 
in  the  German  army.     He  took  part  in   the  Revo- 


lution when  Baden  attempted  to  establish  lier  in- 
dependence, .and  was  wounded  in  the  battle  of 
Wagheisel  under  General  JMerolovsky  and  General 
Leigh.  In  1850  he  crossed  the  Atlantic,  and  for  a 
short  time  worked  in  New  York,  after  wliich  he 
went  to  Ohio.  In  1851  he  purchased  a  small  farm 
in  Ross  Count}',  Ohio,  where  he  cai-ried  on  agri- 
cultural pursuits  until  1859.  That  year  witnessed 
■his  removal  to  California,  Mo.,  where  he  lesided 
until  1867.  Meantime  he  engaged  in  farming  un- 
til 1862,  and  then  purchasing  a  mill,  superintended 
its  management  for  five  years.  Removing  to 
Monroe  City,  111.,  he  purchased  a  mill,  and  also 
erected  one,  which  he  conducted  until  1881.  In 
1871,  he  bought  a  mill  in  Tipton,  Mo.,  which  he 
carried  on  for  one  year  in  connection  with  his 
business  in  Monroe. 

During  the  late  war,  Mr.  Ziebold  was.j(\mong  the 
first  to  respond  to  the  country's  call  for  troops, 
enlisting  in  1861,  in  Company  G,  First  Missouri 
Infantry,  in  which  he  served  for  four  months.  He 
has  ever  taken  a  commendable  interest  in  every- 
thing pertaining  to  the  welfare  of  the  community 
in  which  he  makes  his  home,  and  is  recognized  as 
one  of  the  prominent  and  valued  citizens  of  Red 
Bud,  where  he  located  in  1880. 

In  1851,  Mr.  Ziebold  married  Miss  Magdelena 
Schnaiter,  and  to  them  were  born  eight  children, 
of  whom  five  are  still  living.  Mina  is  the  wife  of 
Joseph  W.  Rickerl,  a  lawyer  of  Waterloo.  Nelson 
G.  will  be  mentioned  later  on.  George  W.  is  now 
manager  of  the  Waterloo  Milling  Company.  Mary 
M.  is  the  next  }  ounger.  Charles  F.  is  a  lawyer  of  St. 
Louis.  Nelson  G.  is  his  father's  partner  in  business. 
He  was  born  in  Chillicolhe,  Ohio,  in  1857,  and  at- 
tended the  St.  Louis  University,  from  which  he 
was  graduated  in  1876.  He  then  joined  his  father 
in  the  milling  business,  and  has  since  been  an  ac- 
tive member  of  the  firm.  He  is  President  of  the 
Waterloo  Milling  Company,  in  which  his  father 
owns  two-fiftlis  of  the  stock.  He  is  also  a  stock- 
holder in  and  President  of  the  Saxenineyer  Lumber 
Company,  of  Red  Bud.  In  1883  he  wedded  Miss 
Mary  C,  daughter  of  Fred  Parroll,  of  Monroe 
County. 

Mr.  Ziebold  lost  his  first  wife  in  California,  Mo., 
and  in    1872   he  married   Mrs.  Margaret  Mueller. 


RjRTRAlT  AND  BTOGHAPmCAL  IlfiCOMD. 


431 


They  now  have  five  children:  Anna,  William, 
Maggie,  Amelia  and  Gottlieb.  By  her  first  union 
Mrs.  Ziebold  also  had  two  children,  Peter  and 
Henry  J. 

The  members  of  tlie  firm  of  Ziebold  cfe  Co  are 
both  well  known  men  of  good  business  ability,  and 
through  upright  dealing  have  won  the  confidence 
of  their  patrons.  Their  mill  has  a  capacity  of 
three  hundred  barrels  daily,  and  seldom  a  day 
passes  when  a  carload  of  flour  is  not  shipped  from 
their  track.  Both  gentlemen  are  supporters  of  the 
Republican  party.  The  father  is  a  member  of  the 
Odd  Fellows'  society,  and  the  son  is  a  Knight  Tem- 
plar Mason. 


-WE 


^^r 


'  OHN  T.  TOWNSEND.  Adjoining  the  cor- 
porate limits  of  the  city  of  Steeleville  lies  the 
finely  improved  farm  owned  and  occupied 
by  the  subject  of  this  sketch.  The  property 
is  one  of  the  most  valuable  in  township  6,  range  5; 
in  fact,  in  all  Randolph  Count}-  there  is  no  estate 
more  higlily  cultivated  than  this.  A  visitor  to 
the  homestead  will  see  that  good  buildings  have 
been  erected.  IModern  machinery  has  been  intro- 
duced, the  land  has  been  subdivided  into  pastures 
and  fields  of  convenient  size  by  an  excellent  sys- 
tem of  fencing,  and  all  the  improvements  have 
been  introduced  that  mark  a  first-class  farm. 

A  native  of  the  state  of  Missouri,  the  subject  of 
this  sketch  was  born  January  17,  1840,  and  is  the 
eldest  child  of  William  and  Mary  (Weinbarger) 
Townsend.  His  ancestors  were  for  raanj'  genera- 
tions identified  with  the  history  of  the  Old  Do- 
minion. Though  enjoying  few  advantages  in 
youth,  he  is  a  well  informed  man,  and  in  the  sub- 
scription schools  of  earl}'  daj's  laid  the  foundation 
for  the  broad  fund  of  knowledge,  he  afterward 
acquired.  At  the  age  of  eighteen  he  commenced 
to  operate  a  rented  farm,  and  saved  his  earnings 
in  order  that  he  might  invest  them  in  land. 

The  boyhood  years  of  our  subject  were  passed  in 
Missouri,  where  his  parents  died.  Thence,  on  the 
4th  of  February,  1865,  he  removed  to  Illinois  and 
located  near  Steeleville,  where  for  four  years  he 
engaged  in  fanning  upon  rented  land.     He  then 


came  to  Steeleville,  where  he  erected  a  house  and 
resided  for  a  number  of  years.  In  1879  he  pur- 
chased the  beautiful  homestead  he  now  occupies. 
In  religious  belief  he  and  his  wife  are  members  of 
the  Baptist  Church,  and  arc  generous  contributors 
to  all  philanthropic  enterprises.  Their  residence 
is  an  attractive  rural  abode,  and  its  hospitable 
doors  are  ever  open  for  the  reception  of  their 
friends,  who  arc  many. 

In  1858  Mr.  Townsend  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Rachel,  daughter  of  James  and  Martha 
(Cannon)  DanncI,  natives  of  Tennessee,  who,  how- 
ever, spent  the  greater  part  of  their  lives  in  Ste. 
Genevieve,  Mo.  Three  children  have  been  born 
of  this  union,  one  of  whom  died  in  infancy.  Hu- 
bert J.  married  Miss  Rebecca  Lickiss,of  Steeleville, 
and  is  a  prominent  insurance  agent  in  St.  Louis; 
William  H.,  a  successful  physician,  married  Miss 
Mary  McClain,  of  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  he  now 
conducts  an  extensive  practice. 

In  his  political  belief,  Mr.  Townsend  is  a  Demo- 
crat, and  since  attaining  his  majority  has  always 
given  his  support  to  the  nominees  of  that  party. 
He  has  rendered  satisfactory  and  efficient  service 
as  a  School  Director,  and  has  occupied  other  ])osi- 
tions  of  prominence.  It  may  be  said  of  him  that 
no  measuie  having  for  its  object  the  direct  or  in- 
direct promotion  of  the  welfare  of  the  citv  fails 
to  secure  his  heart}-  co-operation  and  enthusiastic 
support. 


GEORGE  GORZNY.  Since  his  early  youth 
,  our  subject  has  manifested  a  degree  of  en- 
_  J  terprise  which  has  redounded  to  his  credit 
and  resulted  in  worldly  pi-osperity.  He  is  one  of 
the  leading  business  men  of  Chester,  where  he  has 
resided  since  the  year  1879.  A  native  of  Poland, 
our  subject  was  born  April  23,  1856.  His  father, 
Valentine  Gorzny,  was  born  in  the  same  place  as 
his  son.  He  emigrated  to  America  in  1866  with 
his  family,  and  located  in  Chester,  where  he  was 
engaged  as  a  day  laborer.  He  died  in  1886.  He 
was  married  to  Ann  Grott,  likewise  a  native  of 
Poland,  who  bore  him  twelve  children,  of  whom 
four  are  still  surviving.     They  are:  Zack,  a  resi- 


432 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPmCAL  RECORD. 


dent  of  Chester;  Mary,  the  wife  of  Stephen  Jany, 
a  piominent  fainier  in  this  county;  Rosa,  who  is 
the  wife  of  Milie  Wolshock,  and  resides  in  Cliester; 
and  Georj^e. 

Our  subject  attended  scliool  only  two  months 
in  his  life,  but  lias  improved  every  opportunity 
to  grasp  knowledge,  and  being  of  an  observing 
disposition,  has  made  of  himself  a  practical  and 
sagacious  business  man.  He  began  in  life  for 
himself  when  but  ten  years  old,  working  for 
his  board  and  clothes  on  a  farm  for  seven  j'ears. 
He  then  received  some  pay  for  his  labor,  when, 
a  year  later,  he  engaged  witli  Wolf  Brothers  as 
a  farm  hand,  near  Evansville,  111.  After  eigli- 
teen  months'  time,  our  subject  came  to  Cliester 
and  commenced  to  learn  to  manufacture  soda 
water,  but  not  making  a  success  of  this  enterprise, 
he  again  worked  on  a  farm.  In  1879  he  engaged 
in  the  cigar  business  in  Chester,  continuingin  this 
for  two  years,  when  he  took  up  his  present  busi- 
ness, that  of  liquor  dealer.  In  this  latter  under- 
taking he  has  been  prosperous,  and  by  his  diligence 
and  perseverance  has  been  successful. 

Mr.  Gorzny  is  a  devout  Catholic  in  his  religious 
belief,  and  is  a  member  of  the  Western  Catholic 
Union,  being  Trustee  of  tliat  order.  He  is  one  of 
the  leading  Democrats  in  the  county,  and  takes  an 
active  part  in  all  political  matters. 


ERNST*  E.  SCHRADER,  wlio  for  many  years 
has  been  engaged  in  business  as  a  barber  of 
Chester,  claims  Germany  as  the  land  of  his 
birth.  He  was  born  March  31,  1833,  and  is  the 
eldest  child  of  Henry  and  Sophia  (Vieges)  Schra- 
der,  who  were  also  natives  of  Germany.  The  fa- 
ther was  a  grain  dealer  of  that  country,  and  served 
in  the  German  army,  taking  part  in  the  war  against 
the  French.  He  did  a  good  business  and  was  a 
prominent  citizen. 

Krnst  E.  Schrader,  whose  name  heads  this  rec- 
ord, attended  the  common  schools  of  his  native 
land,  as  required  by  the  laws  of  that  country,  until 
fifteen  years  of  age,  and  then  entered  the  univer- 
sity of  Goettingen,  where  he  pursued  his  studies  for 
two  years.     In  the  meantime  he  learned   the   bar- 


ber's trade,  and  on  the  expiration  of  that  period 
he  went  to  Slieflield,  England,  where  he  remained 
for  six  months,  working  at  his  chosen  trade.  We 
next  find  him  in  London,  whither  he  went  to  visit 
the  London  Museum,  in  which  hespentsome  days. 
He  then  went  to  Liverpool,  England,  and  crossed 
the  Irish  Channel  to  Dublin,  Ireland,  where  he 
spent  five  weeks.  On  the  expiration  of  that  period 
he  returned  to  Bremen,  Germany,  where  he  vvas 
engaged  as  a  barber  for  six  months,  when  he  went 
to  Copenhagen,  Denmark,  spending  one  year  in 
that  city.  He  returned  by  way  of  the  Baltic  Sea 
and  Hamburg  to  his  native  town,  where  he  made 
preparations  for  coming  to  America. 

Having  determined  to  seek  a  home  and  fortune 
in  the  New  World,  Mr.  Schrader  cros.^ed  the  At- 
lantic, and  landed  in  Baltimore,  Md.,on  the  2d  of 
August,  1854.  In  that  city  he  spent  four  months, 
and  then  went  to  Cincinnati,  where  he  woikedfor 
a  short  time,  after  which  we  find  him  in  Lexing- 
ton, Ky.  Thence  he  went  to  Peoria,  III.,  and  in 
1855  he  came  to  Chester.  Here  he  opened  the 
first  barber  shop  in  Randolph  County,  and  along 
the  line  of  his  chosen  trade  he  has  continued  busi- 
ness in  Chester  for  about  forty  years.  Meeting 
with  most  excellent  success  in  his  undertakings, 
he  has  secured  a  large  patronage,  and  has  ac- 
quired a  handsome  competence,  which  numbers 
him  among  the  substantial  citizens  of  the  commu- 
nity. 

In  August,  1856,  Mr.  Schrader  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Louisa  Roeder,  who  was  of 
German  descent.  They  have  become  the  parents 
of  ten  children.  Doris,  the  eldest,  was  killed  in  an 
explosion  in  St.  Louis,  at  the  age  of  twentj--one; 
August,  who  carries  on  a  barber  shop,  married 
Sophia  Dany.  The  others  are  Nettie,  Sophia, 
Lena,  Dora;  Lizzie,  wife  of  Fred  Oaks,  of  Chester; 
Mamie,  wife  of  Charles  Tackleberg,  a  resident  of 
St.  Louis;  Caroline,  wife  of  Charles  Schroeder, 
who  is  living  in  Ilorton,  Kan.;  and  Nellie,  wife  of 
Charles  Elirhardt,  of  St.  Louis. 

Mr.  .Schrader  and  his  family  are  all  members  of 
the  Lutheran  Church.  They  are  people  of  promi- 
nence in  this  community-,  and  in  social  circles  hold 
an  enviable  position  on  account  of  their  sterling 
worth.     In   politics,  Mr.  Schrader  is  a  Democrat, 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


433 


but  has  never  been  an  office-seeker.  Hema\-  truly 
be  called  a  self-made  man,  for  through  his  own 
efforts  he  has  achieved  a  success  which  has  ciowned 
his  undertakings,  and  made  him  one  of  the  substan- 
tial citizens  of  the  coramunitv. 


•SI 


^,'UGUST  F.  WEINEL,  who  is  engaged  in 
(l^/JI     the  lumber  and  livery  business  in  Colum- 

l/(  li  bia,  claims  Germany  as  the  land  of  his 
f  birth,  which   occurred   in   Piussia  on  the 

5th  of  August,  1837.  His  father,  G.  P.  Weinel, 
was  a  miller  of  that  country.  In  his  parents' 
home  our  subject  was  reared,  and  the  public  sciiools 
afforded  him  his  educational  privileges.  At  the 
age  of  nineteen  he  bade  adieu  to  friends  and  fam- 
ily' and  sailed  for  the  New  World,  for  he  believed 
that  America  furnished  better  opportunities  for 
ambitious  young  men  than  the  older  countries  of 
Europe. 

In  18.56  Mr.  Weinel  took  up  his  residence  in 
Columbia,  where  he  engaged  in  clerking  for  two 
years.  He  then  bought  an  interest  in  a  store, 
which  was  conducted  under  the  firm  name  of  J. 
Weinel  &  Co.,  the  partners  being  J.  AVeinel,  .7.  S. 
Morgan  and  A.  Weinel.  On  the  expiration  of 
five  j'ears  the  last  named  member  sold  out  to  his 
brother.  In  1865  he  was  elected  County'  Surveyor, 
which  office  he  filled  for  a  term  of  two  years. 

In  the  meantime  Mr.  AVeinel  was  married,  in 
1866,  to  Miss  Bertha,  daughter  of  Ernest  Grosse, 
a  lumber  dealer  of  Columbia.  He  was  a  native  of 
Hesse-Cassel,  Germanj',  and  came  to  America  in 
1837.  He  served  as  a  soldier  all  through  the  Mex- 
ican War.  He  was  then  given  a  land  warrant,  and 
afterward  was  granted  a  pension.  Mrs.  AVeinel 
was  born  in  St.  Louis  and  was  about  twoj'ears  old 
when  the  family  came  to  Columbia.  To  our  sub- 
ject and  his  wife  were  born  ten  children,  t!ie  eldest 
of  whom,  Catherine,  is  deceased.  The  others  are 
Bertha,  Ernst  A.,  Amelia,  Louisa,  Adelia,  Fred  AV., 
Edwin,  Philip  and  Elsie. 

After  serving  his  term  as  Surve^'or,  Mr.  Weinel 
embarked  in  the  hotel  and  livery  business,  which 
he  carried  on  for  about  eight  years.     He  then  es- 


tablished a  lumber  j'ard,  and  has  conducted  the 
same  in  connection  with  his  livery  business  con- 
tinuously since.  He  has  prospered  in  his  business 
dealings,  and  now  owns  five  hundred  acres  of 
good  farming  lands  in  Monroe  County,  besides 
considerable  town  property.  His  farm  is  well  im- 
proved and  under  a  good  state  of  cultivation,  be- 
ing devoted  to  the  raising  of  grain.  His  residence 
is  a  fine  one  and  is  most  pleasantly  situated.  In 
his  political  views,  Mr.  Weinel  is  a  Democrat.  He 
has  been  a  member  of  the  School  Board  for  two 
years,  and  served  as  its  President  for  one  year.  For 
many  years  he  has  been  Chairman  of  the  Demo- 
cratic County  Central  Committee,  and  has  taken 
an  active  part  in  political  work.  He  is  a  prominent 
member  of  the  Masonic  fraternity' and  is  Treasurer 
of  the  local  lodge.  He  is  also  a  Director  of  and 
is  interested  in  the  building  of  the  Masonic  Hall, 
and  is  one  of  the  Directors  of  the  electric  light 
company.  The  various  business  interests  with 
which  he  is  connected  have  not  only  proved  of 
benefit  to  himself,  but  have  also  aided  in  the  ma- 
terial advancement  of  the  city.  He  and  his  wife 
are  members  of  the  German  Protestant  Church, 
and  are  prominent  and  highly  respected  people, 
who  well  deserve  representation  in  this  volume. 

/>S^  HARLES  M.  WHEELER.  Every  country, 
[l\  f^  state  and  county  furnishes  its  quota  of 
^^('''  what  the  world  calls  "self-made"  men,  men 
who,  commencing  life  without  financial  assistance, 
have  by  means  of  their  own  good  judgment  and 
energy  gained  success  in  their  chosen  vocations, 
and  the  subject  of  our  sketch  undoubtedly  belongs 
to  this  class.  He  is  Democratic  in  politics,  and  is 
serving  as  Deputy  Sheriff  under  Alfred  Adams. 

A  native  of  Ste.  Genevieve  County,  Mo.,  Mr. 
Wheeler  was  born  January  4,  1844,  and  is  the  son 
of  James  M.  Wheeler.  His  father  was  one  of  the 
earliest  settlers  of  Kaskaskia,  this  state,  coming 
here  as  early  as  1833.  He  was  a  native  of  Eng- 
land, having  been  born  in  London,  and  was  a  lad 
of  ten  years  when  he  came  to  the  United  States  in 
company  with  his  parents,  who  located  in  JLary- 
land.     The  maiden  name  of  our  subject's  mother 


434 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


was  Mary  Boarman.  Slie  was  born  in  Maryland 
and  was  a  daughter  of  Ignatius  Boarman,  a  soldier 
in  the  War  of  1812. 

James  M.  Wiieelcr,  the  father  of  our  subject, 
when  coming  to  this  state  purchased  a  large  tract 
of  land  adjoining  tiie  town  of  Kaskaskia.  It 
comprised  three  hundred  and  twenty  acres,  and 
in  addition  to  raising  the  cereals,  he  was  exten- 
sively engaged  in  raising  stock.  He  was  also  a  car- 
penter and  builder  of  some  renown,  erecting  the 
Kask.askia  Convent,  and  also  was  given  tiie  contract 
to  build  the  bridge  across  the  Kaskaskia  River. 
His  death  occurred  April -4,  1860,  while  the  mother 
of  our  subject  died  in  1846. 

Charles  M.,  of  this  sketch,  was  the  youngest  of 
four  children  born  to  his  parents,  and  after  the  de- 
cease of  his  mother,  the  father  was  united  in  mar- 
rige  with  Miss  Agnes  Hailman,  of  St.  Louis.  Our 
subject  remained  upon  the  home  farm  and  carried 
on  his  studies  in  the  common  school  until  reaching 
liis  eleventh  year,  when  he  went  to  Adams  County, 
Pa.,  and  entered  the  Conewago  College.  After 
three  3'ears  spent  in  that  institution,  young  Wheeler 
returned  home,  and  for  one  year  clerked  in  the 
store  of  Daniel  Reily. 

In  1860  our  subject  went  west  to  Kansas  City, 
Mo.,  stopping  for  a  time  with  his  uncle,  John  A. 
Boarman,  and  later  with  another  uncle,  Jerome 
Boarman,  who  was  running  a  store  at  Oxford, 
Kan.,  among  the  Shawnee  Indians.  He  remained 
with  him  until  1862,  when  he  went  to  Pleasant 
Hill,  Cass  County,  Mo.,  and  there  joined  General 
Price's  army.  He  did  faithful  and  valiant  service 
until  the  close  of  the  war,  and  after  the  surrender 
of  Lee,  spent  one  year  in  the  Louisiana  State  Uni- 
versity at  Mt.  Lebanon.  He  then  returned  to  Kas- 
kaskia, after  an  absence  of  seven  years,  and  eng.aged 
as  traveling  salesman  for  the  wholesale  boot  and 
shoe  firm  of  George  P.  Gore  &  Co.,  now  of  Chi- 
cago. Soon  tiring  of  that  kind  of  life,  Mr.  Wheeler 
in  1868  engaged  in  business  on  his  own  account 
in  the  above  place,  which  be  carried  on  success- 
fully until  1882. 

The  lady  to  whom  our  subject  was  married, 
September  1,  1869,  was  Miss  Mary,  daughter  of 
Patrick  H.  Reily,  and  to  them  has  been  l)orn 
a  family  of  seven  children,  all  of  whom  are  living. 


In  1882  our  subject  came  to  Chester,  and  purciias- 
ing  tlie  grocery  stock  of  Thomas  James  ife  Son,  car- 
ried it  on  for  three  years.  Then,  on  account  of 
failing  health,  he  returned  to  his  farm,  where  he 
resided  until  1890,  at  which  time  he  was  appointed 
Deputy  Sheriff  under  Alfred  Adams.  He  has  also 
held  many  other  positions  of  responsibility,  and 
while  residing  in  Kaskaskia  was  .Justice  of  the  Peace 
for  fifteen  years.  He  has  always  been  an  active 
politician,  and  has  served  his  party  many  times  as 
a  member  of  Congressional  committees.  He  pos- 
sesses intelligent  views  on  all  subjects  of  general 
interest,  is  a  man  of  raan^'  pleasant  social  qualities 
and  is  well  liked  by  the  entire  communit_y.  Novem- 
ber 1,  1893,  he  was  appointed  Deputy  Collector  in 
the  Internal  Revenue  service  b}'  Collector  Tom  K. 
Murph},  whicli  position  he  is  now  holding. 


<OC»-H"H--i-»-^»-»'5"5'^-i"i''t"i"i"H"8"i-i'»»X> 

[It-^ERMANN  GRAH.  This  country  is  the 
|lf  )|'  home  of  many  Germans,  who  have  come 
/^^^  here  from  time  to  time  to  take  advantage 
(^/  of  the  peculiarly  favorable  opportunities 
offered  for  accumulating  money,  and  few  have 
won  more  friends  or  have  been  more  successful 
than  the  subject  of  this  sketch.  He  was  born  in 
Prussia  March  24,  1834,  and  is  the  youngest  cliild 
born  to  Daniel  and  Caroline  (Mueller)  Grab. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  attended  the  model 
schools  of  his  native  country  until  accompanying 
his  parents  on  their  emigration  to  the  United 
States  in  the  j'car  1847.  They  came  as  far  west 
as  Missouri,  and  after  spending  some  months 
in  St.  Louis,  came  to  Randolph  County,  where 
they  located  on  a  tract  of  land  near  Chester. 
AVhen  attaining  mature  years,  he  began  farming 
on  his  own  account,  which  has  since  been  his  life 
occupation,  and  in  which  he  has  been  more  than 
ordinarily  successful.  At  different  times  he  has 
cultivated  fruits,  from  which  branch  of  agriculture 
he  has  reaped  good  profits,  having  a  good  estate 
in  township  7,  range  6. 

The  lady  who  became  the  wife  of  our  subject 
January  1,  1863,  was  Miss  Mary,  daughter  of 
Alfred  and  Mary  Emmer.  Their  union  has  been 
blessed  by  the  birth  of  six  children,  of  whom  the 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOORAPHICAL  RECORD. 


435 


two  living  are  Maria  and  Robert.  Tliey  are  both 
living  at  liome  and  are  being  given  the  best  pos- 
sible advantages  for  obtaining  an  education.  Mrs. 
Grail  died  February  15,  1877,  and  the  following 
year  our  subject  was  married  to  Miss  Alice  Clore. 
.She  was  the  daughter  of  Franklin  and  Lucile  (Ru- 
pert) Clore,  and  of  their  family  of  four  children 
only  one  is  living,  Lucile  Christina. 

In  religious  matters  our  subject  is  a  member  of 
the  Presbyterian  Church,  while  his  good  wife  is  con- 
nected with  the  Methodist  denomination.  In  pol- 
itics he  has  always  been  a  Republican,  having  cast 
his  first  vote  for  Fremont  in  1856.  Although  he 
has  never  been  an  office  seeker,  he  has  been  called 
upon  several  times  to  represent  his  fellow-towns- 
men in  chosen  positions,  and  at  all  times  dis- 
charged the  duties  imposed  upon  him  with  credit 
to  himself  and  good  to  the  municipality. 


'jiJSAAC  MEREDITH.  Randolph  County  is  the 
I!  home  of  a  goodly  number  of  men  who  have 
Ih  put  forth  such  industrious  and  well  directed  ef- 
forts that  they  have  been  enabled  to  retire  from  the 
cares  and  toils  of  life  and  are  now  spending  their 
time  in  ease  and  enjoyment.  Among  this  number 
is  the  gentleman  above  named,  who  owns  a  valua- 
ble estate  of  two  thousand  acres,  but  makes  his 
home  in  the  city  of  Chester. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  Perry  County,  Mo.,  No- 
vember, 1840,  and  is  the  son  of  Daniel  W.  and 
Mary  C.  (Iloggard)  Meredith,  natives  respectivel}' 
of  Missouri  and  Virginia.  Mrs.  Meredith  is  a 
daughter  of  Austin  Hoggard,  of  Scotch  descent, 
while  on  his  father's  side  our  subject  is  of  Welsh 
ancestry.  Daniel  W.  Meredith  was  a  farmer  by  oc- 
cupation and  was  one  of  the  early  settlers  of  Perry 
County',  Mo.  His  father,  Isaac,  was  one  of  the 
pioneers  of  the  state,  having  located  there  before 
Missouri  was  admitted  into  the  Union. 

Of  the  parental  family,  which  consisted  of  five 
children,  all  are  living  with  one  exception.  Isaac 
W.,  of  this  sketch,  was  reared  on  his  father's  farm 
in  Missouri  and  received  the  basisof  his  education 
in  the  primitive  schools  of  those  times.  Later,  after 
the  removal  of  the  family  to  this  city,  he  attended 


the  Chester  schools  and  thus  obtained  a  fair  knowl- 
edge of  men  and  things.  In  1865  young  Meredith 
crossed  the  Isthmus  to  California  and  spent  two 
years  in  working  on  a  farm  in  Halfmoon  Ba}',  Santa 
Clara  County.  Returning  at  the  expiration  of 
that  time,  he  began  farming  in  Perry  County,  mak- 
ing a  specialty  of  stock-raising. 

In  1881  Mr.  Meredith  came  Uy  Chester,  where  he 
has  since  lived  a  retired  life.  His  fine  estate,  which 
is  located  in  Perry  County,  Mo.,  is  a  very  fertile 
tract  of  land,  on  which  he  has  erected  every  build- 
ing necessary  in  carrying  on  the  work  of  the  es- 
tate, and  all  of  which  are  substantial  and  well 
arranged.  In  1869  he  was  married  to  Miss  Amelia, 
daughter  of  John  and  Ann  (Hey)  Wilkinson,  na- 
tives of  Yorkshire,  England.  Mrs.  Meredith  was 
born  in  Perry  County,  Mo.,  and  by  her  union  with 
our  subject  has  become  the  mother  of  six  children, 
four  of  whom  are  living,  namely:  John  W.,  who  is 
engaged  in  the  jewelry  business  in  Chester;  Isaac 
J.,  Daniel  W.  and  Amelia  Ann. 

While  not  an  active  politician  or  an  office  seeker, 
Mr.  Meredith  takes  pride  in  using  his  influence  for 
worthy  political  causes,  and  during  election  times 
always  casts  a  Democratic  vote.  He  is  considered 
one  of  the  most  substantial  citizens  of  the  county 
and  has  acquired  a  considerable  amount  of  mone^'. 
Socially  he  is  a  Mason  and  is  a  member  of  Chester 
Lodge  No.  226. 


(^ 


Ltr 


:^ 


^ 


(S^5§)HE  SPARTA  PLAIN  DEALER.  The 
//^  newspaper  history'  of  Randolph  County-  is 
v^^  checkered  and  interesting.  Here  it  was 
that  the  first  newspaper  in  the  state  was  published, 
when,  in  1814,  Mathevv  Duncan  established  the  Illi- 
nois Herald,  at  Kaskaskia.  At  a  very  early  date  in 
its  history,  Sparta  established  the  Herald,  in  May, 
1839,  its  founder  being  James  Morrow,  who  brought 
his  printing  outfit  from  Ohio.  John  E.  Deitrich 
shortly  afterward  became  its  owner  and  changed 
the  name  to  the  Sparta  Democrat. 

In  1843  the  Z)e))iocTrt<  suspended,  and  the  office 
was  leased  to  O.  F.  McMillan, who  changed  the  name 
of  the  publication  to  the  Randolph  County  Record. 


436 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


In  1847  this  oftice  was  removed  to  Chester,  111., 
and  in  1848  John  R.  Shannon  established  in 
Sparta  the  Prairie  Deinocrai.  This  he  continued 
until  .1851.  when  the  office  was  leased  to  C.  P. 
Johnson,  afterward  Lieutenant-Governor  of  Mis- 
souri. He  named  the  paper  the  Independent,  and 
continued  its  publication  until  1862,  when  it  sus- 
pended. It  was  revived  by  D.  A.  Armour,  who 
shortly  afterward  leased  the  pa[)er  to  Parsons 
Percj',  and  that  gentleman  continued  at  its  head 
for  two  years,  when  J.  W.  Fletcher  succeeded  to 
its  management  and  soon  afterward  removed  the 
office  to  Chester. 

The  next  paper  of  Sparta  was  established  in 
1862  by  the  Kotrock  Brothers,  who  continued  its 
publication  through  the  war,  when  it  was  leased  to 
\V.  J.  Armour,  who  changed  the  name  to  The  Star  of 
the  West.  The  next  owner  of  the  paper  was  Gen.  J. 
Blackburg  Jones,  who  became  proprietor  in  No- 
vember, 18G6.  It  then  had  but  one  hundred  and 
thirty  subscribers.  General  Jones  purchased  new 
type  and  changed  the  name  to  the  Randolph 
Plain  Dealer.  The  paper  thrived  under  his  man- 
agement, and  was  the  first  in  Illinois  to  place  the 
name  of  U.  S.  Grant  before  its  readers  for  Presi- 
dent. 

General  Jones  continued  the  work  until  1868, 
when  he  sold  out  to  T.  M.  Nichel,  who  was  after- 
ward private  secretarj'  of  President  Garfield.  In 
April  of  the  following  year,  a  half-interest  was 
purchased  by  J.  D.  Watson,  and  in  1870  the  firm 
sold  to  Messrs.  Kimball  and  Taylor,  of  Belleville, 
Edward  Fagin  being  placed  in  charge  as  editor. 
In  1872  he  was  succeeded  by  Fred  L.  Alles.  In 
1873  S.  L.  Taylor,  of  Sparta,  purchased  the  paper, 
and  the  following  June  Albert  Goddard  became 
associated  with  Mr.  Taylor  in  its  management. 
He  retired,  however,  in  1874,  being  succeeded  by 
W.  B.  Taylor,  a  brother  of  his  partner. 

The  Taylor  Brothers  continued  as  publishers 
until  May,  1881,  when  they  sold  out  to  George  H. 
Campbell  and  Don  E.  Deitrich.  Subsequently 
Charles  Campbell  purchased  the  latter's  interest, 
and  Campbell  Brothers  continued  as  publishers 
until  August,  1887,  when  George  H.  Campbell  be- 
came sole  owner.  He  continued  as  editor  and 
proprietor  until   1891,  when  K.  I.  Smith  bought  a 


half-interest  and  the  firm  name  of  Campbell  (fe 
Smith  was  assumed.  These  gentlemen  are  its  pres- 
ent owners  and  publishers.  Aside  from  the  dis- 
tinction of  being  one  of  the  oldest  papers  in  the 
state,  the  Plain  Dealer  has  one  of  the  finest 
equipped  steam  printing  offices  in  southern  Illi- 
nois. Its  owners  are  both  practical  newspaper 
men,  and  under  their  management  the  paper  en- 
joys a  large  circulation.  The  Plain  Dealer  is  rec- 
ognized as  one  of  the  representative  and  leading 
newspapers  in  soutiicrn  Illinois. 


ICHAEL  SHEA.  This  gentleman,  who  is 
of  Irish  birth,  has  been  a  resident  of  Ran- 
dolph County'  since  1850  and  h:is  contrib- 
uted to  the  development  of  township  5, 
range  9,  and  the  attainment  of  its  present  high 
standing  among  tiie  agricultural  districts  of  the 
state.  In  his  efforts  to  secure  a  good  home  he  has 
been  successful,  having  accomplished  his  purpose 
by  strict  attention  to  business  and  thorough  re- 
sponsibilit}-  in  every  undertaking.  He  owns  and 
occupies  a  good  estate  of  seventy-four  acres,  lo- 
cated three  and  one-half  miles  northeast  of  Prairie 
du  Kocher.  The  entire  work  of  clearing  and  im- 
proving the  property  has  been  done  by  himself. 
The  house,  barn  and  other  buildings  are  substantial, 
conveniently  located  and  sullicieiitly  adequate  for 
their  various  purposes. 

Born  in  County  Kilkenny,  Ireland,  October  10, 
1826,  oiir  subject  is  the  son  of  Richard  and  Jo- 
hanna (Murphy)  Shea,  also  natives  of  the  Emerald 
Isle,  where  they  lived  and  died.  ,  Michael  had 
three  brothers  and  one  sister,  and  he  was  the  eld- 
est-born. He  was  reared  and  educated  in  his  na- 
tive land,  supplementing  the  knowledge  gained  in 
the  common  schools  by  a  two  years'  course  at  the 
national  school,  and  when  coming  to  America,  in 
his  twentj'-fourth  j'ear,  had  fitted  himself  to  oc- 
cupj'  a  position  as  book-keeper. 

When  landing  in  the  New  World,  Mr.  Shea  made 
\  his  way  to  Illinois,  and  in  this  county  embarked 
I  in  farm  work.  At  the  expiration  of  four  3-ears, 
I   having  saved  a  sufficient  sum  of  money  to  enable 


■'»»%^H 


-n- 


Jr^-^/o^ 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


439 


him  to  do  so,  he  purchased  seventy-four  acres  of 
school  land,  and  at  the  same  time  sent  enough 
money  to  Ireland  to  pay  the  passage  of  two  broth- 
ers who  were  coming  to  America.  He  cleared  his 
land  at  odd  times,  and  deserves  a  gi'eat  deal  of 
credit  for  its  present  finely  improved  condition. 

In  February,  1854,  Mr.  Shea  married  Miss  Mary, 
daughter  of  John  and  Catlierine  (Conner)  Aliarn, 
natives  of  Ireland.  Mrs.  Shea  was  likewise  a  na- 
tive of  Ireland,  and  became  the  mother  of  a  family 
of  ten  children,  viz.:  Julia,  now  the  wife  of  William 
Mudd;  Margaret,  John,  Cacilla,  Heniy,  Sarah, 
Eliza,  Anna,  Rose  and  Willie.  In  religious  views 
our  subject  and  his  family  are  Catholics,  and  in 
politics  he  is  a  prominent  Democrat.  He  is  well 
known  and  lespected  throughout  the  county,  as 
his  industrious  and  upright  life  merits. 


JOHN  STOEIIR,  familiarly  known  as"Squire" 
Stoehr,  is  numbered  among  the  honored 
pioneer  settlers  of  Randolph  County.  He 
'  was  born  in  the  kingdom  of  Wurtemberg, 
Germany,  in  1825,  and  is  the  elder  of  two  chil- 
dren, whose  parents  were  John  and  Magdelene 
(Lingie)  Stoehr.  They  were  both  born  and  reared 
in  the  kingdom  of  Wurtemberg,  and  the  mother 
there  died.  The  father  afterward  married  Chris- 
tina Brown,  and  about  1834  crossed  the  Atlantic 
and  took  up  his  residence  near  Dayton,  Ohio, 
where  his  death  occurred  some  four  years  later. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  went  to  Cincinnati, 
Ohio,  where  he  learned  the  carpenter's  trade,  serv- 
ing a  three  years' apprenticeship.  At  the  expiration 
of  that  period  he  went  to  St.  Louis,  and  in  1843 
located  in  Monroe  County,  where  he  followed 
farming  in  connection  with  carpentering  for  sev- 
eral vears.  Two  years  after  his  arrival  in  that 
county  he  was  united  in  marriage  with  Magdelena, 
widow  of  John  Stuhlfauth,  and  a  daughter  of 
Jacob  Rahn.  Upon  the  farm  they  began  their 
domestic  life,  and  there  Mr.  Stoehr  carried  on  his 
work  until  the  spring  of  1857,  when  he  removed 
with  his  family  to  Red  Bud.  Here  he  embarked 
in  the  brewing  business,  but  soon  sold  out.  In 
1860  he  was  elected  Justice  of  the  Peace,  and 
with  the  exception  of  four  j'ears  filled  the  office 
13 


continuously  until  1893,  when  he  resigned.  His 
reputation  as  a  Justice  was  unsullied  through  all 
the  long  years  in  which  he  filled  the  position,  and 
no  higher  testimonial  could  be  given  of  his  effi- 
ciency than  his  repeated  re-elections.  In  his  busi- 
ness career  he  has  met  with  success,  and  as  the 
years  have.passed  he  has  made  judiciousinvestments 
in  real  estate,  until  he  now  owns  three  thousand 
acres  of  well  improved  land,  which  yields  to  him  a 
handsome  income. 

By  his  first  marriage  Mr.  Stoehr  had  one  daugh- 
ter, Catherine.  The  mother  died  in  the  spring  of 
1881,  and  he  afterward  married  Mrs.  Elizabeth 
Rabe,  widow  of  Fred  Rabe.  Previous  to  her  union 
with  Mr.  Rabe,  Mrs.  Stoehr  married  William  H. 
Dickmann,  b}'  whom  she  had  four  children:  Annie, 
wife  of  Otto  Platte;  Emma;  William  H.,  who  resides 
on  the  old  homestead;  and  Louisa,  wife  of  Ernest 
Kastrup.  The  children  of  her  second  marriage 
are,  jNIaggie,  wife  of  O.  Helber;  Louis  and  Lillie. 

During  the  late  war,  Mr.  Stoehr  offered  his  serv- 
ices to  the  Government,  but  as  his  eyesight  was 
not  perfect  he  was  not  accepted.  The  men  and 
measures  of  the  Republican  party  ever  find  in 
him  a  stalwart  supporter,  ready  to  advance  their 
interests,  and  he  is  recognized  as  a  leader  in  local 
politics.  He  served  as  delegate  to  the  county  and 
state  conventions  of  his  party,  and  was  a  delegate 
to  the  national  convention  which  convened  in 
Baltimore  and  nominated  Abraham  Lincoln  for 
the  presidency'.  For  fifteen  years  he  filled  the 
office  of  School  Trustee  of  his  township,  and  has 
ever  been  a  zealous  friend  of  the  cause  of  educa- 
tion. An  industrious  man,  his  success  has  coine 
to  him  through  close  attention  to  business  and 
well  directed  efforts.  He  landed  in  Illinois  a  poor 
boy,  but  has  steadily  worked  his  way  upward  from 
an  humble  position  to  one  of  affluence.  He  makes 
many  friends  and  no  enemies,  and  throughout  the 
community  in  which  he  has  so  long  resided  is  held 
in  the  highest  regrard. 


^•M'******^ 


1/  EVI  E.  BARNES.  This  gentleman,  who  is 
I  (^  one  of  the  ()rominent  residents  of  Rock- 
[[j— ^^  wood,  besides  conducting  a  fine  farm  of 
ninety-nine  acres  adjoining  the  village,  is  engaged 
in  contracting  and  building,  iu  company  with  his 


I 


440 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


son  Albert.  He  is  a  native  of  this  count}',  and 
was  born  about  four  miles  northeast  of  Ciiester, 
Marcli  31,  1837.  He  is  the  son  of  Benjamin  S. 
and  Marcia  Aurillia  (Tilden)  Barnes,  natives  of 
North  Carolina  ami  Vermont,  respect! vel}'.  The 
father  was  a  son  of  William  and  Maria  Barnes,  was 
born  ]\Iarch  18,  1807,  and  came  to  this  county  direct 
from  North  Carolina  in  1829.  After  his  marriage 
he  purchased  land  near  Chester,  where  our  subject 
was  born.  Later,  the  elder  Mr.  Barnes  sold  his 
property  and  purchased  another  tract  about  seven 
miles  from  Chester.  After  residing  there  for  some 
time  he  disposed  of  that  place  and  bought  a  fort}'- 
acre  tract  in  township  7,  range  6,  which  he  after- 
ward disposed  of,  and  locating  near  Chester,  there 
continued  to  reside  until  his  death,  which  occurred 
September  17,  1872. 

The  mother  of  our  subject,  who  was  the  daugh- 
ter of  Stephen  B.  and  Bethia  Tilden,  was  born  in 
Franklin  Count}-,  Vt.,  February  4,  1811.  Her  par- 
ents emigrated  to  Chester  in  a  very  earl\-  day, 
when  it  was  known  as  Smith's  Landing,  and  Illi- 
nois was  still  a  territorj'.  She  continued  to  make 
this  county  her  home  until  her  death,  which  oc- 
curred at  Poland  Station  June  14,  1852. 

The  parental  fam'ily  included  five  children,  of 
whom  our  subject  was  the  second  in  order  of  birth. 
His  childhood  days  were  spent  mostly  on  the  home 
farm,  where  he  attended  the  subscription  schools. 
TVlien  attaining  his  eighteenth  year,  Levi  left 
hume.  and  going  down  into  the  Cherokee  Nation, 
attended  a  subscription  school  there  for  twenty- 
days,  during  which  time  he  learned  to  write,  a 
branch  of  his  education  which  had  been  neglected 
in  his  previous  school  experience.  After  remain- 
ing a  year  among  the  red  men,  our  subject  returned 
to  the  bounds  of  civilization,  working  one  year  in 
Perry  County,  Mo.,  after  which  he  boarded  a  ves- 
sel at  Rockwood,  bound  for  Montrose,  Iowa.  In 
that  region  he  remained  three  months,  being  oc- 
cupied in  burning  brick.  At  the  end  of  that  time 
he  started  for  the  south.  He  spent  that  winter  in 
Council  Bend,  Ark.,  where  he  worked  through  the 
winter  in  the  Cyprus  brakes,  and  in  the  spring  re- 
turning to  Rockwood,  employed  his  time  in  work- 
ing near  the  village  until  late  in  the  fall,  when  he 
again  left  for  the  south,  going  to  Pemiscot  Coun- 


ty, Mo.,  where  he  was  working  at  the  time  of  Lin- 
coln's  first  election.  He  well  remembers  that  pe- 
riod, as  it  was  as  much  as  his  life  was  worth  to 
speak  northern  sentiments.  Later,  young  Barnes 
went  furtheu  south, to  Commerce,  Miss.,  remaining 
there  until  late  in  the  spring,  after  Mississippi  had 
seceded.  So  bitter  was  the  feeling  against  Yankees 
that  he  had  to  deny  his  being  from  Illinois,  claim- 
ing Missouri  as  his  home.  Returning  north,  he 
discovered  when  at  Memphis  that  he  was  in  pos- 
session of  South  Carolina  .State  Bank  money,  which 
he  had  to  discount  at  twenty  per  cent.  This  he 
was  verj-  glad  to  do,  as  it  was  utterly  worthless 
further  north. 

On  his  return  to  Rockwood,  our  subject  went 
to  work  on  a  farm,  where  he  continued  until  Jan- 
uarj-,  1862,  at  which  time  he  went  into  Missouri, 
where  he  was  made  overseer  of  the  plantation  be- 
longing to  James  Preston.  Here  lie  remained  un- 
til July  28  of  that  .year,  and  while  there  heard 
the  Emancipation  Proclamation  announced.  Mr. 
Barnes,  desiring  to  take  up  arms,  enlisted  in  three 
different  regiments,  but  was  as  many  tinics  rejected, 
owing  to  the  loss  of  one  eye. 

September  4,  18G2,  Mr.  Barnes,  of  this  sketch, 
was  married  to  Miss  Melvina,  daughter  of  Robert 
and  Lovisa  (Miller)  Moore,  the  former  a  native  of 
Tennessee,  and  the  latter  of  Kentucky.  Robert 
Moore  was  born  June  26,  1796,  and  died  June  8, 
1879.  His  good  wife,  who  was  born  January  23, 
1806,  is  now  deceased,  having  reached  her  eightj-- 
ninth  year.  To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  L.  E.  Barnes  were 
born  eight  children,  all  of  whom  are  deceased  but 
U.  S.  Grant,  Albert  H.  and  Hattic  A.  The  others 
were:  Calvin  H.,  Marion  E.,  Lovisa  C,  Maria  A. 
and  Amanda  C. 

After  the  close  of  the  war,  our  subject  moved  to 
Fountain  Bluff,  J.ackson  County,  this  state,  where 
he  engaged  in  farming.  For  five  jears  he  served 
as  Justice  of  the  Peace,  and  three  years  as  School 
Treasurer.  After  seven  years'  residence  in  Jackson 
County,  he  came  to  Rockwood,  where  he  purchased 
propertj-  and  where  he  h.as  since  made  his  home. 
He  is  an  expert  carpenter,  and  in  company  with 
his  son  Albert  turns  out  some  of  the  finest  work  of 
this  kind  in  the  count\-.  He  has  served  eight  years 
as  Justice  of  the  Peaije  o(  Rockwood,  and  is  the 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


441 


present  Notary  Public.  Mr.  Barnes  is  a  Republican 
in  politics,  and  is  a  local  leader  in  his  party.  In  ad- 
dition to  his  farm  already  spoken  of,  he  owns  sev- 
enteen lots  in  Rockwood,  and  is  looked  upon  as 
one  of  the  well-to-do  men  of  the  locality. 

'II  oil's  D.  C4ERLACII.  Even  in  the  west, 
where  many  prominent  positions  are  occu- 
^A  ]  pied  by  joung  men,  there  are  few  so  well 
l^gl^'  situated,  or  who  have  displayed  so  much 
energy'  and  judgment  in  business  affairs  as  the  gen- 
tleman whose  personal  history'  is  briefly-  outlined 
in  these  columns.  As  Cashier  of  the  First  Na- 
tional Bank  of  Chester,  he  is  prominently  con- 
nected witli  one  of  the  solid  financial  institutions 
of  the  count}';  as  a  citizen,  he  has  ever  been  pro- 
gressive and  liberal  spirited,  contributing  his  quota 
to  the  advancement  of  every  material  interest  of 
the  community.  Now  in  the  prime  of  life,  having 
bravely  faced  adversity  and  poverty,  and  having 
by  shrewd  business  management  risen  above  their 
immediate  influence,  he  has  before  him  every  pros- 
pect of  the  full  fruition  of  the  hopes  cherished  by 
himself  and  his  many  friends. 

A  native  of  Randolph  County,  our  subject  was 
born  four  miles  west  of  Sparta  April  24,  1858. 
His  father,  Daniel  Gerlach,  was  born  in  German}-, 
and  now  resides  at  the  old  homestead  near  Sparta. 
The  mother  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Catherine 
Baura,  and  was  born  in  Belleville,  111.,  being  a 
daughter  of  John  Baum.  In  the  parental  famil}' 
there  were  seven  children,  the  eldest  of  whom, 
John  D.,  spent  the  years  of  boyhood  and  youth  at 
the  home  place,  aiding  in  the  work  of  blacksmith- 
ing,  and  spending  his  leisure  hours  at  the  district 
schools.  Later  he  entered  the  Sparta  High  School, 
from  which  he  was  graduated  in  1875.  He  then 
became  a  student  in  Bryant  &  Stratton's  Commer- 
cial College  at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  was  laid  the 
foundation   of  his  extensive   business  knowledge. 

When  his  father  was  elected  Sheriff  of  Randolph 
County,  our  subject  became  his  depu1}',and  served 
in  that  capacity  for  four  3'cars,  and  in  1880  was 
elected  upon  the  Republican  ticket  as  Sheriff  of 
the  county,  serving  in  that  position  for  two  years. 


In  1883  he  was  chosen  a  Committee  Clerk  in  the 
State  Senate,  and  was  elected  Assistant  Secretary 
of  the  Senate  in  1885.  Later  he  became  Assistant 
Secretary  of  the  Railroad  Committee  of  the  State 
Board  of  Equalization,  and  in  August  of  1886  was 
tendered  the  position  of  Secretary  of  the  commit- 
tee, an  honor  richlj'  merited. 

Embarking  in  the  insurance  business  in  October, 
1885,  Mr.  Gerlach  was  thus  engaged  until  Decem- 
ber, 1889,  when  he  organized  the  Bank  of  Chester. 
On  the  1st  of  January,  1890,  he  formed  his  present 
connection  with  the  First  Nati(mal  Bank, of  which 
he  and  the  President,  M.  C.  Crissey,  are  the  heads. 
In  addition  to  his  work  as  Cashier,  he  is  t'ice- 
Prcsident  and  General  Manager  of  tlie  Chester 
Light,  Water  and  Ice  Company,  of  which  he  was 
the  organizer.  Socially  he  is  a  member  of  Chester 
Lodge  No.  72,  A.  F.  &  A.  M.,  Harmon  G.  Reynolds 
Chapter  No.  84,  R.  A.  M.,  Randolph  Council  No. 
44,  and  Hercules  Lodge  No.  218,  K.  P. 

The  first  marriage  of  Mr.  Gerlach,  occurring  in 
1880,  united  him  with  Miss  Catherine  Dauer,  the 
daughter  of  John  Dauer,  of  Randolph  County. 
After  her  death,  Mr.  Gerlach  was  ag.ain  married, 
choosing  as  his  wife  Miss  Mary  P.  Neville,  of  Ches- 
ter, III.,  the  daughter  of  Capt.  Harvey  Neville. 
Their  marriage  took  place  January  9,  1884,  and 
they  have  established  a  cozy  home  in  Chester,  into 
which  the}'  hospitablj'  welcome  and  pleasantly  en- 
tertain their  hosts  of  personal  friends. 


fe^©l 


ALVIN  A.  MANN,  M.  D.  The  city  of 
Chester  is  not  without  her  share  of  mem- 
bers of  the  learned  professions,  who  are  a 
credit  to  the  pursuit  they  have  chosen  and  to  the 
town  itself.  Among  those  who  have  taken  up  the 
calling  of  a  medical  practitioner  is  Dr.  Mann,  who 
devotes  himself  assiduously  to  his  practice  and 
the  scientific  investigations  which  will  enhance 
his  professional  knowledge  and  skill.  He  is  well 
established  in  reputation  as  a  physician  and  is 
recognized  as  among  the  able  practitioners  of 
this  section. 

Before  outlining  the  life  history  of  our  subject, 
it  may  be  well  to  make  a  brief  record  regarding 


442 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL    RKCORD. 


his  parents.  His  father,  John  Mann,  was  born 
February  1,  1796,  in  South  Carolina,  and  removed 
when  quite  young  to  Kentuci<y,  where  he  grew  to 
manliood.  On  the  outbreak  of  the  War  of  1812 
he  enlisted  his  services,  and  fought  at  New  Or- 
leans under  Gen.  Jackson.  Ilis  father,  the  grand- 
father of  our  subject,  bore  the  name  of  Robert 
Mann.  He  was  a  native  of  South  Carolina,  and 
of  Scotch-Irish  extraction.  He  married  Miss  Mary 
Huston,  a  relative  of  Governor  Huston,  of  Texas. 

The  fatlier  of  our  subject  was  united  in  mar- 
riage on  the  4lh  of  July,  1815,  to  Albina  B.  Balch, 
the  daughter  of  the  Rev.  James  Balch,  the  first 
Presbyterian  minister  to  ever  preach  a  sermon 
in  Indiana.  The  parents  were  married  while  re- 
siding in  Kentucky,  whence  he  moved  to  Indiana, 
and  in  1827  came  to  lUinoit,  locating  in  the  town 
of  Preston,  four  miles  east  of  Kaskaskia.  There 
he  made  his  home  until  his  decease,  March  7, 
1881.  His  wife,  the  mother  of  our  subject,  was 
born  in  East  Tennessee  November  25,  1797,  and 
was  married  to  John  Mann  July  4,  1815.  She 
is  also  deceased,  her  death  having  occurred  No- 
vemlier  17,  1882.  They  reared  a  family  of  nine 
children,  and  two  died  in  infancy.  Those  liv- 
ing bear  the  respective  names  of  William  H.,  John 
P.,  Robert  C,  Capt.  James  F.,  Albina,  Jonathan 
B.,  Rev.  Alfred  M.,  Calvin  A.  (our  subject)  and 
Mary  J.  Alfred  M.  is  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church  at  Osawalomie,  Miami  County,  Kan.  At 
the  breaking  out  of  the  late  war,  the  Mann  fam- 
ily was  loyal  to  the  Union  cause,  and  Dr.  Mann 
and  four  of  his  brothers  enlisted  in  the  army  and 
served  their  country  faithfully  until  the  close  of 
the  Rebellion. 

Our  subject  entered  the  common  schools,  and 
further  advanced  his  knowledge  by  attendance 
at  tlie  Chester  schools.  Having  decided  to  fol- 
low the  medical  profession,  he  began  reading  un- 
der the  tutelage  of  Dr.  Roe.  Later  entering 
the  St.  Louis  Medical  College,  he  carried  on  his 
.studies  until  he  was  graduated  in  1858.  Dr. 
Mann  then  engaged  in  the  active  practice  of 
his  profession,  being  thus  employed  until  187fi, 
when  he  took  a  course  of  study  at  the  Jefferson 
Medical  College  at  Philadelphia. 

Dr.  Mann  and  Miss  Emily  C.  Young  were  united 


in  marriage  March  10,  1859.  The  lady  was 
the  daughter  of  John  Young,  and  was  born  in 
Chester.  They  have  been  blessed  with  a  family 
of  four  children,  namely:  Walter  H.,  Emily  A., 
Cornelius  A.  and  Mary  A.  Cornelius  has  followed 
in  the  footsteps  of  his  father,  and  is  a  practicing 
physician,  being  a  graduate  of  the  St.  Louis  !\Ied- 
ical  College.  Politicall}',  our  subject  is,  and  al- 
waj's  has  been,  an  earnest  and  stanch  Rei)ublican, 
having  cast  his  first  vote  for  John  C.  Fremont  in 
1866.  Sociall}-,  he  is  an  honorary  niembei-  and 
ex-President  of  the  Southeastern  Missouri  IMedical 
Association,  and  also  holds  membership  with  and 
has  occupied  the  same  otlice  in  the  Southern  Illinois 
Jledical  Association.  He  is  an  ambitious  and  wide- 
awake nian  and  has  contributed  several  articles  of 
value  to  the  profession,  which  have  been  pub- 
lished in  the  leading  medical  journals.  The 
Doctor  and  his  wife  are  devoted  members  of  the 
First  Presbyterian  Church  of  Chester,  in  which 
the)'  have  been  zealous  and  active  workers,  and 
in  which  Dr.  Mann  is  an  Elder. 

OBERT  GANT,  a  respected  and  prosperous 
farmer  of  township  7,  range  6,  Randolph 
Count)-,  was  born  November  1,  1832.  in 
this  county,  and  has  here  made  his  home 
all  his  life.  His  father,  Thomas  Gant,  was  a  na- 
tive of  Nelson  County,  Ky.,  and  lived  in  the  Blue 
Grass  State  until  1831,  when  he  came  to  this 
county  and  engaged  in  farming,  which  vocation 
he  followed  until  his  death,  which  occurred  in 
April,  1875.  The  grandfather  of  our  subject 
bore  the  name  of  William  Gant.  He  was  of  Eng- 
lish birth,  but  came  to  the  United  States  and  lo- 
cated in  Kentucky  about  the  year  1795.  He  was 
married  in  his  native  country  to  Miss  Jane  Holt. 
The  mother  of  our  subject  bore  the  name  of 
Eliza  Hathaway.  Her  parents  came  from  Wales 
and  settled  in  Kentucky,  where  she  was  born  and 
reared.  She  was  called  from  this  life  in  April, 
1834,  when  Robert  was  but  a  year  and  a-half  old. 
His  father  was  again  married,  taking  Mrs.  Parthena 
(Williamson)  Uhls  as  his  wife.  The  lady  was  born 
in  North  Carolina,  but  was  residing  in   Randolph 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


443 


County  at  the  time  of  her  marriage,  and  b^'  her 
union  with  the  fatlier  of  our  subject  became  the 
mother  of  two  children,  onlj'  one  of  whom  is 
living.  He  bears  the  name  of  Thomas,  and  is  now 
United  States  Gauger,  with  headquarters  at  Belle- 
ville. 

Our  subject  is  one  in  a  family  of  five  children 
born  to  his  mother,  only  two  of  whom  are  yet  liv- 
ing, Robert  and  Spicy.  The  latter  married  Will- 
iam Gant  and  makes  her  home  in  this  county. 
Robert  had  the  advantages  of  a  three  months' 
subscription  school  for  a  few  years  when  he  was 
quite  young,  but,  being  of  a  studious  turn  of 
mind,  he  improved  his  spare  moments  and  has  be- 
come one  of  the  well  posted  men  of  his  section. 
He  aided  his  father  on  the  home  farm  until  reach- 
ing his  majorit}',  when  for  the  next  four  years  he 
received  a  small  compensation  for  his  labors.  He 
then  began  on  his  own  account,  and  has  added 
to  his  first  small  purchase  until  he  is  now  the 
happy  possessor  of  eight  hundred  broad  and  fer- 
tile acres.  As  a  farmer,  he  displays  excellent 
judgment  in  the  rotation  of  crops,  fertilization  of 
the  soil  and  cultivation  of  the  land,  and,  as  a  re- 
sult of  his  efforts,  he  has  gained  prosperity.  In 
addition  to  raising  the  cereals,  Mr.  Gant  keeps  a 
fine  grade  of  stock  on  his  place,  which  is  now  one 
of  the  most  attractive  in  the  township. 

The  marriage  of  Robert  Gant  and  Miss  Cather- 
ine Harmon  was  solemnized  .June  10,  1858.  Mrs. 
Gant  is  a  daughter  of  Abraham  and  Ann  (Pillars) 
Harmon,  residents  of  Randolph  County.  The  fol- 
lowing children  have  been  born  of  this  union: 
S.  E.  Gant,  a  practicing  physician  in  California; 
Florence,  the  wife  of  G.  B.  Allison,  Postmaster  of 
Chester;  Emily,  who  married  George  Pinkerton, 
and  is  now  making  her  home  in  Chicago;  and 
Pollen,  Thomas  A.j  Anna  E.,  Robert  L..  Laura,  May 
and  Katie  Alice,  all  of  whom  are  at  home  with 
their  parents.  Roy  Holt,  the  youngest  child,  died 
when  but  three  j-ears  old. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gant  are  consistent  members  of 
the  Methodist  Cliurch,  in  which  the  former  is 
Trustee.  Socially,  he  is  connected  with  Lodge 
No.  72,  A.  F.  &  A.  M.,  of  Chester.  In  his  political 
affiliations  Mr.  Gant  is  a  stalwart  Republican,  but 
has  never  been  desirous  of  office,  although  in  1887 


he  was  elected  County  Commissioner,  and  has 
filled  the  position  with  satisfaction  to  his  con- 
stituents as  well  as  with  credit  to  himself.  His 
term  of  office  was  three  years,  and  during  one 
j-ear  of  that  time  he  was  Chairman  of  that  bod^'. 
William  Harmon,  a  nephew  of  Mrs.  Gant,  whose 
parents  died  when  he  was  but  three  months  old,  is 
now  included    in  the  family  circle  of  our  subject. 


..^.^^..j. 


'*-}-4"5->^^'*-i"i"i-F 


ANIEL  DAWSON, a  prominent  and  highly' 
.,  ,)]  respected  citizen  of  Percy,  who  for  sev- 
^^1^  eral  years  has  been  prominent  in  business 
circles  in  this  place,  where  he  is  engaged 
in  general  merchandising,  was  born  in  New  Castle- 
upon-Tyne,  England,  on  the  21st  of  May,  1824, 
and  is  the  third  child  of  Edward  and  Ann 
(Rodara)  Dawson,  who  were  also  natives  of  Eng- 
land, and  there  spent  their  entire  lives. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  attended  llie  public 
schools  of  his  native  land  until  fourteen  years  of 
age,  when  he  entered  the  mines,  where  he  was 
employed  until  twenty  years  of  age.  During  that 
time  he  regularlj'  attended  night  school,  for  he 
wished  to  acquire  a  good  education  and  make 
himself  a  well  informed  man.  He  lived  in  Eng- 
land when  there  was  nothing  but  wooden  rail- 
roads in  that  country,  and  he  saw  what  was  called 
the  "Puffing  Billy,"  the  first  engine  that  drew  a 
car-load  of  coal  in  Great  Britain.  He  also  heard 
the  funeral  sermon  of  George  IV.,  and  saw  Lady 
B3'ron's  maid  who  caused  tiic  seiiar.alion  of  Lord 
and  Lady  Byron. 

In  1852  Mr.  Dawson  bade  adieu  to  his  t,,U\  home 
and  friends  and  sailed  for  America,  landing  in 
New  York  on  the  22d  of  September.  He  first  lo- 
cated in  Cannelton,  Ind.,  where  he  remained  for  a 
few  months,  and  then  removed  to  Hawesville,  Ky., 
where  he  worked  for  a  year  and  a-half.  His  next 
place  of  residence  was  in  Maryland,  where  he  was 
employed  for  eight  months,  after  which  he  went 
to  Arkansas,  spending  two  years  in  that  state. 
Returning  to  the  north,  he  located  at  Saline 
Mines,  near  Shawneetown,  111.,  in  185G,  and  began 
work  in  the  mines,  where  he  continued  his  labors 
until    1872,    when    he    went    to  Du  Quoin,  Perry 


444 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


County.  Four  years  later  we  find  liim  in  Camp- 
bell Ilill,  111.,  where  lie  made  liis  home  from  1877 
until  1892.  That  year  witnessed  his  arrival  in 
Percy,  where  he  has  since  resided.  He  here  estab- 
lished a  general  merchandise  store,  wliicii  he  j-et 
conducts,  doing  a  good  business  in  tliat  line.  He 
is  now  well  advanced  in  years,  but  is  still  quite 
active,  and  ably  manages  his  business  interests. 

Mr.  Dawson  has  one  son,  who  is  engaged  in  rail- 
roading in  the  employ  of  the  Cotton  Belt  Rail- 
road Company.  Our  subject  is  a  member  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church,  and  in  his  political  views  he 
was  in  early  life  a  stanch  Abolitionist.  When  the 
Republican  party  was  formed  to  prevent  the  further 
extension  of  slaver3',  he  joined  its  ranks,  and  has 
since  been  one  of  its  stanch  supporters.  He  warmly 
advocates  its  princi|)les  and  does  all  in  his  power 
to  promote  the  growth  and  insure  the  success  of 
the  i)art3'.  During  the  administrations  of  Presi- 
dents Garfield  and  Arthur  he  filled  the  position  of 
Postmaster  of  Campbell  Hill,  and  has  also  served 
as  Justice  of  the  Peace.  He  came  to  America  in 
the  hope  of  bettering  his  financial  condition,  and 
his  hope  has  certainly  been  realized.  Although 
his  life  has  been  one  of  labor,  he  has  secured  a 
comfortable  home  and  has  acquired  a  competence. 


-^^^l 


THOMAS  E.  BAKER,  who  is  engaged  in  the 
hotel  business  in  Percy,  is  a  popular  and 
agreeable  host,  and  one  of  the  leading  citi- 
zens of  this  place.  He  was  born  in  Cape  Girardeau, 
Mo.,  on  the  9th  of  March,  1844,  and  is  a  son  of 
James  K.  and  Sarah  E.  (Leggct)  Baker.  The  par- 
ents were  both  natives  of  German}',  were  reared 
and  married  in  that  country,  and  in  1843  crossed 
the  broad  Atlantic  to  America,  locating  in  Cape 
Girardeau,  Mo.  Mr.  Baker  was  a  wagon-maker  by 
trade  and  followed  that  pursuit  for  a  number  of 
years.  He  became  an  honored  and  influential  cit- 
izen of  the  community  in  which  he  made  his 
home, and  was  elected  to  various  official  positions. 
He  held  the  office  of  Circuit  Clerk,  was  afterwards 
elected  County  Clerk,  and  filled  those  two  offices  al- 
ternately during  the  remainder  of  his  life.  His  fre- 
quent re-elections  indicated  the  prompt  and  faith- 


ful manner  in  which  he  discharged  his  duties  and 
the  confidence  reposed  in  him  by  his  fellow- 
townsmen. 

Our  subject  spent  his  early  boyhood  days  amidst 
plaj'  and  work.  He  attended  school  in  his  native 
town  until  a  youth  of  fourteen  years,  when  he  en- 
tered the  employ  of  a  cabinet-maker  and  served  a 
full  apprenticeship  to  that  trade.  When  he  had 
thoroughly  mastered  the  business,  he  left  Cape 
Girardeau  for  the  south  and  traveled  through 
Missouri,  Arkansas,  Alabama  and  Mississippi  in 
the  emjjloy  of  the  Thompson  Pill  Company. 
Shortly  after  his  return  to  Missouri  he  removed  to 
Steeleville,  111.  This  was  in  May,  1869.  He  began 
working  in  the  mines  at  that  place  and  there  made 
his  home  for  a  period  of  seven  years,  when  he  em- 
barked in  stock  dealing,  which  business  he  followed 
until  his  removal  to  Percy  in  1885. 

Some  years  previous,  in  1873,  Mr.  Baker  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Mary  E.,  daughter  of 
Henry  Rur^-,  a  native  of  Germany,  who  emigrated 
to  this  country  and  is  now  living  in  Percy.  By 
the  marriage  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Baker  have  been 
born  six  children,  and  the  family  circle  yet  re- 
mains unbroken.  In  order  of  birth  they  are  as 
follow:  Theresa,  Mattie  J.,  James  H.,  MoUie  J., 
Jennie  J.  and  Samuel  R.  The  mother  of  this 
family  was  called  to  the  home  bej'ond  in  August, 
1891,  and  on  the  21st  of  October,  1892,  Mr.  Baker 
was  again  married,  his  second  union  being  with 
Miss  Lydia  Roston,  of  Campbell  Hill,  111.,  and  a 
daughter  of  .James  AV.  and  Jane  (Wylie)  Roston. 
The  father's  family  was  from  Kentucky,  and  her 
mother's  came  from  the  Emerald  Isle. 

On  coming  to  Percy  in  1885,  Mr.  Baker  em- 
barked in  the  hotel  business,  which  he  has  followed 
continuousl}'  since.  He  has  been  very  successful 
in  his  undertakings,  and  from  the  public  receives  a 
very  liberal  patronage.  His  hotel  is  complete  in 
its  appointments,  being  well  furnished  and  sup- 
plied with  all  modern  conveniences..  The  proprie- 
tor IS  a  pleasant,  genial  man  and  therefore  a  pop- 
ular host.  He  started  out  in  life  for  himself  at  the 
age  of  fourteen,  without  capital  or  the  aid  of  influ- 
ential friends,  and  has  steadily  worked  his  way 
upward,  overcoming  the  difficulties  in  his  path, 
until  he  is  now  numbered   among  the  substantial 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


445 


citizens  of  the  community.'  Socially  he  is  a  mem- 
ber of  Alma  Lodge  No.  497,  A.  F.  &  A.  M.,  of 
Steeleville,anrl  politically  is  a  Republican.  He  has 
held  many  township  offices,  and  at  present  is  ac- 
ceptably filling  the  position  of  Treasurer  of  Percy. 


DAM  RUSSELL.  It  is  a  well  established 
(@yi^ll  fact  that  a  man,  if  possessed  of  natural  abil- 
(i  ity  and  energy,  can  accomplish  almost  any 
jiven  purpose  in  life,  and  such  is  the 
case  with  our  subject,  who  is  a  practicing  attorney 
at  Coulterville.  Here  he  has  followed  his  pro- 
fession since  1874,  and,  in  addition  to  the  man- 
agement of  an  extensive  legal  practice,  he  has 
been  an  important  factor  in  the  growth  and  prog- 
ress of  the  town. 

Alexander  and  Margaret  (Anderson)  Russell, 
the  parents  of  our  subject,  were  natives  of  Ireland, 
wlieie  the  former  was  born  in  County  Donegal 
in  1805,  and  the  latter  in  County  Derry,  October 
28,  1812.  Accompanied  by  his  parents,  thc3'  emi- 
grated to  the  United  States  in  1831,  and  were 
married  iu  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  four  years  later. 
Thence  they  came  to  Illinois  and  settled  upon  the 
old  Russell  homestead,  which  is  located  one  and 
a-half  miles  south  of  this  village.  At  that  time 
the  land  was  in  its  primitive  wildness,  and  there 
were  only  three  other  houses  for  miles  around. 
Upon  the  farm  which  they  developed  from  the 
wilderness  they  continued  to  reside  until  1870, 
when  the  father  died.  Mrs.  Russell  is  still  living, 
and  makes  her  home  in  Coulterville.  The  father 
was  a  man  who  made  friends  wherever  he  went, 
and  contributed  to  the  general  welfare  of  the 
conimunit3',  where  he  was  held  In  high  esteem. 
In  politics  he  was  a  stanch  Republican.  The  pa- 
ternal grandparents  of  our  subject,  Adam  and 
Elizabeth  Russell,  after  emigrating  from  Ireland, 
made  their  home  with  the  father  of  our  subject, 
residing  with  him  on  the  old  homestead  until  their 
decease. 

Adam  Russell  was  the  second  in  order  of  birth 
111  a  family  of  seven  children,  and  was  born  in 
1842  on  the  old  homestead,  which  he  now  owns. 
His  adv.antages  for   obtaining  an  education    were 


quite  limited.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  years  he 
went  to  Sparta,  and  was  apprenticed  to  learn  the 
trade  of  a  harness-maker,  which  occupation  he 
followed  until  1874.  Deciding  to  follow  the  pro- 
fession of  a  lawyer,  he  read  the  necessary  books 
at  night  after  his  day's  work  was  done,  and  on 
completing  his  legal  studies  he  opened  an  office, 
and  now  has  a  good  clientage. 

In  1866  Mr.  Russell  and  Miss  Martha  S.  Wil- 
son, a  native  of  this  county  and  the  daughter  of 
Peter  C.  and  Mary  J.  (Day)  Wilson,  were  united 
in  marriage.  The  parents  of  Mrs.  Russell  were 
early  settlers  in  Randolph  County',  and  the  father 
died  in  1892.  In  his  political  relations  Mr.  Russell 
IS  a  firm  believer  in  Republican  principles,  and  in 
1890  ran  for  the  office  of  County  Judge.  He  is 
always  interested  in  the  welfare  of  his  community, 
and  has  delivered  addresses  at  the  various  con- 
ventions and  public  gatherings  in  tlie  county. 


eAPT.     WILLIAM    C.    POSTAL.     Among 
those  men  who  have  commenced  at  the  bot- 
, .     tom  round  of  the  ladder  of  fortune  and  by 

dint  of  natural  abilit3'  and  perseverance  have 
worked  their  way  up  to  the  top,  we  find  William 
C.  Postal.  To  such  men  the  country  is  indebted 
for  the  excellent  example  set  the  youth  of  the 
land,  as  well  as  the  good  results  they  have  accom- 
plished in  the  communities  where  they  have  re- 
sided. Our  subject  is  one  of  the  prominent  busi- 
ness men  of  Chester,  where  he  carries  on  a  thriving 
business  as  a  coal  merchant,  dealing  in  all  kinds 
of  hard  and  soft  coal. 

Mr.  Postal's  birth  occurred  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y., 
October  4,  1825,  and  he  is  a  son  of  William  and 
Lima  (Cartel)  Postal.  The  father,  who  is  also  a 
native  of  the  Empire  State,  was  the  son  of  William 
Postal,  Sr.  He  was  a  prominent  builder  and  lum- 
ber dealer  in  New  York,  and  on  his  removal  to 
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  1831,  there  made  his  home  until 
1838,  at  which  time  he  moved  to  Jefferson  City, 
that  state.  In  1842,  however,  he  went  with  his 
family  to  St.  Joseph,  and  four  years  later  returned 
to  St.  Louis,  making  it  his  home  until  1863.  He 
was  a  strict  Union  man  during  the  war,  and  in  the 


446 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


above  year  went  to  Mempliis,  Tenn.,  where  ho 
died. 

Mr.  Postal  was  variously  employed  until  1884, 
when  he  became  identified  with  the  business  in- 
terests of  Chester,  where  he  has  since  been  en- 
gaged as  one  of  its  leading  coal  merchants.  His 
marriage  witli  Miss  Celia  B.  Dyer  was  celebrated 
in  1850.  Mrs.  Postal  was  tlic  daughter  of  William 
H.  Dyer,  and  was  a  native  of  IMissouri.  There 
were  born  to  them  four  children,  of  whom  only 
one  is  now  living,  a  daughter,  Annie,  who  mar- 
ried Horace  Baker,  an  employe  of  the  Illinois 
Central  Railroad. 

Mr.  Postal  is  a  strong  Democrat  in  [jolitics,  and 
by  his  honest  and  straightforward  manner  has 
wonthe  confidence  of  the  peoi)le.  He  has  attained 
success  slowly  but  surely,  and  fully  merits  ttie  po- 
sition accorded  him  throughout  the  community  in 
which  he  resides. 


'I  Cii' 


•=^^- 


EDWARD  WORTllEN,  a  well  known  farmer, 
who  owns  and  operates  a  good  tract  of  land 
^  -"  on  section  12,  Sand  Ridge  Township,  Jack- 
son County,  has  always  lived  in  this  comniunitj'. 
He  was  born  September  15,  1848,  near  his  present 
home,  and  is  a  worthj-  representative  of  an  hon- 
ored pioneer  family.  His  father,  William  Worthen, 
was  born  in  South  Carolina  in  1799,  and  was  a 
son  of  I'^lias  Worthen,  a  native  of  Virginia.  The 
family  was  of  English  origin,  and  the  great-grand- 
father of  our  subject,  who  served  in  the  Revolu- 
tionary War,  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Cowpens. 
The  mother  of  Edward  was  in  her  maidenhood 
Mary  AVill.  She  was  l)orii  in  Pennsylvania  in 
1809,  and  was  a  daughter  of  Conrad  Will,  who  was 
also  a  native  of  the  Keystone  State,  whence 
he  emigrated  to  Illinois  in  1813.  He  located  in 
Kaskaskia,  then  Brownsville,  in  181(5,  and  there 
spent  his  remaining  days.  His  family  numbered 
three  daughters. 

Elias  Worthen  removed  from  Tennessee  to  Illi- 
nois in  1809, and  located  one  mile  east  of  Murphys- 
boro.  It  was  not  his  intention  to  here  settle,  but 
a  storm  delayed  him,  and  he  took  up  a  squatter's 
claim   in    this   locality.     His  death  (iccurred  soon 


afterward.     William  Worthen  was    the  eldest  son 
of  the  family  of  eleven  children,  all  of  whom  are 
now  deceased.     In    1816,  he  went  to  Brownsville, 
III.,  and  became  one  of  its  earliest  settlers.    A  mile 
and  a-half  southwest  of  that  place  he  opened  up  a 
large  farm,  upon  which  he  continued  to  reside  un- 
til   his    death    in  1854.     His  wife   survived    him 
thirty  years,  and  passed  away  in  1884.     They  were 
the  parents  of  seven  children  who  grew  to  mature 
years,  while  six  are  yet  living,  namely:  Mrs.  Eliza- 
beth Richart,  of  Columbus,  Ohio;  Mrs.  Mary  W.  Por- 
ter, of  Sand  Ridge  Township;  Mrs.  Julia  A.  Richie, 
of    Sand  Ridge   Township;    Robert    E.,  of  Silver 
City,N.Mex.;  Edward,  of  this  sketch;  and  Mrs.  Su- 
san   Waldbieser,  of   this  county.     The  eldest  son, 
Daniel,  served  as  a  soldier  in  the  late  war  for  three 
years  and  one  month.    He  enlisted  as  a  Lieutenant, 
but  was  mustered   out  with   the   rank  of  Captain. 
He   died    in    March,  1873,  leaving  two  children. 
The  parents  of  our  subject  were  both  members  of 
the  Lutheran   Church.     The  father  took  quite  an 
active  part  in   politics,  supporting  ihe  Democratic 
party,  and  was   elected   Sheriff  of  the  county  for 
three  terms.     His  long  continuance  in    that  office 
indicated  his  fidelity  to   duty  and   the   confidence 
reposed  in  him  by  his  fellow-townsmen.     The  ma- 
ternal grandfather,  Conrad  Will,  was  also  a  promi- 
nent politician,  and  was  a  snpporter  of  the  Whig 
party.     He  served  in  the  first  Constitutional  Con- 
vention, and  was  elected  to  the  first  State  Senate. 
He  served  as  Senator  in    1818  and  1819,  and  also 
from    1828    until    1834.     He   was  Representative 
from  his  district  from    1820  until  1826.     The  first 
deed  of  conveyance  in  this  county  was  made  to  his 
father,  Daniel  Will. 

Edward  Worthen  was  born  and  reared  on  the 
old  homestead.  He  attended  school  in  Carbondale, 
but  left  the  school  room  at  the  age  of  sixteen  years 
to  work  as  a  farm  hand.  He  was  married  in  Oc- 
tober, 1877,  to  Maggie  L.  Osburn,  daughter  of 
James  F.  Osburn,  and  they  located  upon  his  pres- 
ent farm,  which  was  then  entirely'  unimproved. 
Her  death  occurred  March  27.  1884.  They  wcie 
the  parents  of  four  children,  of  whom  Charles  and 
Hugh  are  now  living.  Mr.  Worthen  was  again 
married,  m  September,  1885,  his  second  union  be- 
ing with  Jennie  Laney,  who  was  born  July  4,  1860, 


Jm/d  ^.  fu/y 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RfiCORD. 


449 


and  is  a  daughter  of  William  Laney,  of  Carbon- 
dale.  One  child  graces  this  marriage,  Blanche. 
The  parents  are  both  members  of  the  Methodist 
E|)iscopal  Church  South,  and  are  prominent  and 
highly  respected  people  of  this  community. 

He  served  as  a  member  of  the  School  Board,  was 
Supervisor  of  Sand  Ridge  Township  in  1873  and 
1874,  and  also  served  one  term  in  Murphysboro 
Township  in  the  same  position.  Later  he  was 
again  Supervisor  of  Sand  Ridge  Township  for 
three  years.  He  has  also  been  Justice  of  the  Peace, 
and  in  that  office,  as  in  the  others  he  has  filled,  he 
was  found  true  and  faithful  to  his  duties,  dis- 
charging the  same  with  a  promptness  and  fidelity 
that  have  won  him  high  commendation. 

In  his  business  affairs,  he  has  met  with  a  high  de- 
gree of  success,  and  is  now  the  owner  of  eight  hun- 
dred and  thirty-eight  acres  of  valuable  land,  which 
yields  to  him  a  handsome  income.  He  is  a  worthy 
representative  of  an  honored  pioneer  family,  and 
is  himself  numbered  among  the  best  citizens  of 
Jackson  County. 


APT.  J0SP:PH  B.  thorp,  the  efficient 
and  popular  County  Treasurer  of  Jackson 
County,  who  makes  his  home  in  Murphys- 
boro, was  born  in  New  York  City  on  the  4tli  of 
December,  1827,  and  is  of  English  descent.  His 
grandfather  was  a  manufacturer  of  Yorkshire, 
England,  and  on  leaving  his  native  land  took  up 
his  residence  in  New  York  City,  but  his  last  days 
were  spent  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.  The  father  of 
our  subject,  Joshua  Thorp,  was  also  born  in  Y'ork- 
shire,  but  was  reared  in  Philadelphia.  In  his 
youth  he  learned  the  tailor's  trade,  which  he  there 
followed  throughout  life.  Ills  death  occurred  at 
the  age  of  seventy  years,  in  the  faith  of  the  Epis- 
copal Church.  His  wife,  who  bore  the  maiden 
name  of  Elizabeth  Brooke,  was  also  born  in  Y'ork- 
shire,  and  was  a  daughter  of  Ignatius  Brooke,  a 
machinist.  In  the  familj^  were  five  children,  four 
of  whcmi  are  still  living. 

The  Captain  is  the  second  in  order  of  biith.  In 
early  life  he  became  a  pattern  maker  in  a  machine 
shop.     In  1848  he  emigrated  westward  to  Jackson 


County,  111.,  making  the  journey  by  boat.  For  a 
time  he  worked  as  a  millwright,  afterward  locating 
near  Carbondale,  and  began  the  development  of  a 
farm,  to  the  cultivation  of  which  he  devoted  his 
energies  until  May,  1861.  Prompted  by  patri- 
otic impulses,  he  responded  to  the  country's  call 
to  service  and  enlisted  among  the  bo.ys  in  blue  of 
Company  K,  Eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry.  He 
was  mustered  in  with  the  rank  of  Sergeant,  and 
participated  in  the  battles  of  Fts.  Henry  and  Don- 
elson,  and  Shiloh,  after  which  he  was  commis- 
sioned First  Lieutenant  by  Governor  Y'ates.  He 
participated  in  the  capture  of  Little  Rock  and  in  a 
number  of  skirmishes  in  Arkansas,  also  the  expe- 
dition in  Tennessee,  during  which  he  was  wounded. 
On  the  11th  of  June,  1864,  he  was  mustered  out 
at  Springfield,  III.,  and  returned  to  his  home.  He 
was  always  faithful  to  his  duty  and  to  the  Old  . 
Flag  which  now  floats  triumphantly  over  the 
united  Nation. 

On  his  return  home.  Captain  Thorp  again  re- 
sumed farming  near  Carbondale,  where  he  owned 
two  hundred  acres  of  rich  and  arable  land,  which 
he  placed  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation. 
He  successfully  carried  on  general  farming  until 
the  fall  of  1890,  when  he  was  nominated  and 
elected  County  Treasurer  on  the  Republican  ticket. 
He  was  the  only  Republican  candidate  for  a  county 
office  elected  at  that  time.  In  December  following, 
he  entered  upon  the  discharge  of  his  duties  and 
has  since  creditably  and  acceptably  filled  the  posi- 
tion. 

In  June,  1851,  in  Carbondale,  Captain  Th(>rp 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Harriet,  daughter 
of  Joseph  Ilinchcliff,  a  prominent  pioneer  farmer 
of  this  locality.  The  lady  died  during  her  hus- 
band's absence  in  the  war.  Five  children  weie 
born  unto  them,  four  of  whom  are  yet  living, 
Joshua,  a  locomotive  engineer  on  the  Mobile  & 
Ohio  Railroad,  living  in  Murphysboro;  Samuel  B., 
deceased;  Sarah  E.,  Ann  and  Mary  E.  Captain 
Thorp  was  again  married,  his  second  union  being 
with  Mrs.  Cynthia  Reeves,  by  whom  he  has  one 
son, John  R. 

Socially,  Mr.  Thorp  is  connected  with  John  W. 
Lawrence  Post  No.  297,  G.  A.  R.,  of  Carbondale. 
While  living  at  that  place  he  served  as  Supervisor 


450 


PORTRAiT  AND  BlOGfeAPfflCAL  feECOfel). 


for  two  terms.  lie  is  a  man  of  sterling  worth  and 
strict  integrity,  who  lias  a  wide  acquaintance  and 
is  well  liked  by  all  who  i^now  him. 

■^f?  JOSEPH  WELSCH,  who  resides  on  section 
31,  township  3,  range  10,  Monroe  Count}-, 
is  one  of  tlie  worthy  citizens  that  Germany 
^^  has  furnished  to  this  community'.  He  was 
liorn  Decemlx'r  20,  1829,  and  is  one  of  six  chil- 
dren, wiiose  parents,  John  and  Mary  A.  (Werscliem) 
Weisch,  were  also  natives  of  German}'.  The  father 
and  mother  both  acquired  good  educations  in  the 
schools  of  that  land,  and  the  father  followed  farm- 
ing as  a  means  of  gaining  a  livelihood.  In  the 
year  1840  he  emigrated  to  America.  He  landed 
from  a  sailing-vessel  at  New  Orleans,  and  came  di- 
rect to  Monroe  County,  111.,  where  for  a  few  years 
he  rented  a  farm.  With  the  capital  he  had  acquired 
in  that  time  he  then  purchased  two  hundred  acres 
of  land,  and  to  this  he  added  from  time  to  time 
until  he  became  one  of  the  largest  land  owners  in 
the  count}'.  A  few  years  prior  to  his  death  he  re- 
moved to  \Yaterloo,  where  he  spent  his  last  years 
in  retirement  from  business  cares.  He  was  a  man 
of  excellent  business  and  executive  ability,  and 
tlierefore  won  the  success  which  crowned  his  ef- 
forts. I  n  politics  he  was  a  supporter  of  the  Democ- 
racy. His  death  occurred  at  the  age  of  sixty- 
seven  years,  and  his  wife  died  at  the  age  of  seven- 
ty-two, near  the  present  home  of  our  subject. 
Both  were  members  of  the  Catholic  Church.  Five 
of  their  children  are  now  living,  namely :  Mary, 
J.  Joseph,  Catheiine,  Peter  and  Nicholas. 

We  now  take  up  the  personal  history  of  our  sub- 
ject, who  spent  the  first  ten  years  of  his  life  in  his 
native  land,  and  then  came  with  his  parents  to  the 
New  AVorld.  He  early  became  familiar  with  all  the 
duties  of  farm  life  and  worked  in  the  fields,  giving 
his  father  the  benefit  of  his  services  until  twenty- 
four  years  of  age,  when  his  father  gave  him  a  farm 
of  one  hundred  and  thirty  acres,  the  same  on 
which  he  now  resides. 

Mr.  Weisch  then  began  business  for  himself,  and 
the  same  year  was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss 
Elizabeth    Hoecker,   a    native    of    Germany,   who 


when  a  maiden  of  twelve  summers  came  with  her 
I)arents  to  the  United  States,  the  family  locating 
in  St.  Clair  County.  By  this  union  were  born 
twelve  cliildren,  but  six  of  the  number  died  in  in- 
fancy. Tliose  still  living  are,  John,  Christiana, 
Leonard,  Catherine,  Joseph  and  Peter.  The  mother 
of  this  family  was  called  to  her  final  rest  at  the 
age  of  forty-six.  She  w.as  a  devout  member  of  the 
Catholic  Church,  and  had  inan\-  waini  friends  in 
the  community. 

Mr.  Weisch  is  also  a  member  of  the  Catholic 
Church,  and  in  politics  is  a  stanch  Democrat. 
He  has  led  a  busy  and  useful  life,  and  by  well  di- 
rected efforts,  energy  and  enterprise  he  has  accu- 
mulated a  handsome  property.  The  boundaries 
of  his  farm  he  has  extended  from  time  to  time,  un- 
til he  now  owns  seven  hundred  and  twenty  acres 
of  valuable  land,  under  a  iiigh  state  of  cultivation 
and  well  improved.  He  is  one  of  the  largest  land 
owners  in  the  county,  and  is  one  of  the  most 
highly  respected  and  influential  citizens,  for  a  well 
spent  life  has  gained  him  the  warm  regard  of  all 
with  whom  lie  has  been  brought  in  contact. 

3  <  T    >[= —        ' ^ 

\\  AX  ASZMANN,  M.  D.  The  medical  pro- 
fession has  many  representatives  in  this 
county,  men  of  intelligence  in  their  chosen 
field  of  labor  and  in  general  topics  of  in- 
terest, good  judgment  in  the  application  of  theo- 
retical knowledge  and  an  established  reputation  as 
practitioners.  One  of  this  class  is  the  subject  of 
this  brief  notice,  who,  although  a  young  man,  and 
one  new  in  his  profession,  is  destined  to  become 
one  of  the  prominent  physicians  in  the  near  future. 
Dr.  Aszmann  was  born  in  the  city  of  Chester, 
March  26,  1865,  and  is  the  son  of  Dr.  F.  W.  Asz- 
mann, who  also  resides  in  this  city.  The  father  of 
our  subject  was  born  in  Germany,  where  he 
practiced  his  profession  until  coming  to  the  United 
States.  When  coming  to  the  New  World  he  first 
located  in  St.  Louis,  where  he  was  one  of  the  first 
homeopathic  physicians.  In  1858  the  elder  Dr. 
Aszmann  came  to  Chester,  where  he  continued  in 
active  practice  until  his  decease,  August  5,  1880. 
While  driving  down  the  roadway  leading  from  the 


POfetEAlT  ANb  BiOGRATffiCAL  RECORD. 


451 


residences  of  the  Messrs.  Cole,  his  horse  became 
unmanageable  and  dragged  him  a  distance  of  some 
twenty  yaids,  and  when  it  was  stopped  at  Cole's 
Mills  the  Doctor  was  found  to  be  insensible.  He 
was  conveyed  to  the  residence  of  hisson,Sigmund 
Aszmann,  where  his  wounds  were  found  to  be  of  a 
very  serious  nature.  He  was  a  man  advanced  in 
years,  and  although  under  tiie  care  of  four  of  the 
best  ph^'sicians  of  the  place,  he  died  four  days 
later.  He  was  an  old  resident  and  successful  prac- 
titioner of  this  place,  and  a  conscientious  and 
faithful  worker  in  the  field  of  suffering  humanity. 
The  mother  of  our  subject,  who  bore  tlie  maiden 
name  of  Lucy  Propst,  was  also  a  native  of  Ger- 
many, and  departed  this  life  in  Cliester  October 
12,  1887.  She  reared  a  large  family  of  ten  chil- 
dren, of  whoni  our  suiiject  was  the  sixth  in  order 
of  birth.  He  obtained  a  good  education  in  the 
public  schools  of  this  place,  aiid  when  ready  to 
enter  upon  his  medical  studies,  read  medicine  in 
the  office  of  Dr.  Zillikon.  Later  he  took  a  course 
of  lectures  in  the  homeopathic  medical  college  at 
St.  Louis,  from  which  he  was  graduated  in  March, 
1890.  After  receiving  his  degree  of  Doctor  of 
Medicine,  our  subject  opened  an  office  and  com- 
menced practice  in  Frohna,  Perry  County,  Mo., 
where  he  remained  for  two  years.  In  1892 
he  came  to  this  city,  with  whose  interests  he  has 
since  been  identified, and  is  rapidly  building  up  for 
himself  a  lucrative  practice.  In  his  political  views 
he  is  a  decided  Democrat. 

^ ^i^h... ^(Sj 

(^    "^f^' "    Isi 

^  l»,ILLIAM  ROSBOROUGH  was  a  represent- 
\^//  ative  business  man  of  Randolph  County', 
W^  and  well  deserves  representation  in  its 
history.  He  was  born  in  Bally mena,  Ireland,  in  1 802, 
and  when  a  youth  of  sixteen  crossed  the  Atlantic 
to  America,  locating  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  There 
he  entered  the  employ  of  a  Mr.  Mahard,  who  was 
engaged  in  the  commission  business,  and  with 
whom  lie  continued  until   1833. 

In  that  year  Mr.  Rosborougli  married  Miss  Mary 
Mahard,  a  sister  of  his   employer.     To  them  were 


born  five  children.  Elizabeth  is  now  residing  in 
the  old  home  in  Sparta.  Robert  H.,  a  railroad  con- 
tractor and  auditor,  and  also  a  dealer  in  coal, 
married  Elizabeth  MeCutcheon,  and  they  have 
live  children:  William  J.,  a  railroad  conductor; 
Rachel,  Robert  H.,  Jr.,  .John  and  Allen.  Martha 
R.,  the  third  child  of  the  family,  is  the  widow  of 
Dr.  I^eeper,  who  was  born  in  Beaver  County,  Pa., 
in  1832,  and  there  grew  to  manhood.  He  pursued 
his  literary  studies  in  .leffersun  College,  and  studied 
medicine  in  the  State  Universil)'  of  Pennsyl- 
vania at  Philadelphia.  He  began  practice  in  Ches- 
ter, HI.,  and  afterward  removed  to  Coulterville, 
where  he  followed  his  profession  for  twent3--flve 
years.  His  name  is  always  mentioned  in  the  high- 
est terms  of  praise  by  all  who  knew  him.  He 
won  an  enviable  position  in  his  profession,  and 
was  a  liberal  and  public-spirited  citizen.  Anna 
J.,  another  member  of  the  Rosborough  family,  is 
the  wife  of  Daniel  P.  Barker,  of  Sparta,  Secretar}' 
and  Superintendent  of  the  Sparta  Natural  Gas 
and  Oil  Company.  He  served  in  the  Union  army 
as  a  member  of  Company  K,  One  Hundred  and 
Forty-second  Illinois  Infantry,  and  at  the  close  of 
the  war  returned  to  Sparta,  where  he  has  since  re- 
sided. Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barker  have  four  children: 
Albert  M.,  now  connected  with  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tain News;  Lewis,  a  student  in  Champaign,  III.; 
Mary  R.  and  Elizabeth.  Mary  M.,  the  youngest 
member  of  the  Rosborough  family,  is  the  wife  of 
the  Rev.  Hugh  Y.  Leiper,  of  Pravo,  Ohio.  They 
have  had  five  children:  William,  Hugh.  Earl  (de- 
ceased), Donald  and  Mary. 

In  1833  William  Rosborough  came  to  Illinois, 
locating  in  Randolph  County,  where  he  at  once 
embarked  in  merchandising.  In  1840  he  removed 
to  Sparta,  and  continued  general  merchandising 
in  connection  with  tlie  manufacture  of  castor  oil. 
He  also  engaged  in  the  packing  business,  and  later 
in  the  flouring  business.  In  1882  he  laid  aside 
all  business  cares,  and  after  living  retired  for  three 
years,  he  was  called  to  his  final  rest,  at  the  age 
of  eighty-three.  In  the  accumulation  of  property 
he  was  very  successful,  but  at  no  time  did  he  sac- 
rifice his  honor  for  temporal  benefit.  He  had  the 
confidence  of  his  entire  circle  of  acquaintances, 
who    regarded    his    integrity    as   above   question. 


452 


t»OtltttAlt  AKI)  blOGtlAtHlCAL  ilfiCORt). 


His  was  indeed  an  liouorable  life,  well  wortli}'  of 
emulation.  In  liis  early  years  he  belonged  to 
tlie  United  Presbyterian  Cliurch,  but  afterward 
joined  tlie  re<;ular  Presbyterian  Church. 


'  UDGE  FRA^'CI.S  MARION  YOUNGBLOOD 
is  one  of  the  prominent  citizens  of  Illinois, 
having  in  legal  circles  especially  a  wide 
acquaintance  among  the  representative  men 
of  the  state.  He  now  resides  in  Carbondale.  A 
native  of  Perry  County,  he  was  born  March  15, 
1835,  and  is  a  son  of  Isaiah  I.  and  Electa  (Jones) 
Youngblood.  The  family  is  of  Welsh  descent.  The 
father  was  born  in  Georgia  in  1795,  was  a  farmer 
by  occupation,  and  served  in  the  War  of  1812.  lu 
1816,  he  removed  to  Illinois,  becoming  one  of  the 
pioneers  of  Franklin  Count}',  where  he  met  and 
married  Miss  Jones,  who  was  born  in  New  York  in 
1800.  She  was  a  daughter  of  Philip  Jones,  an  early 
settler  of  Franklin  County.  Shortly  afterward 
they  removed  to  Tennessee,  but  about  1828  made  a 
permanent  location  in  Perry  County.  The  mother 
was  well  educated  and  taught  her  husband  all  he 
knew  after  their  marriage.  Mr.  Youngblood  then 
took  a  deep  interest  in  education,  built  a  school- 
house  upon  his  farm  and  did  everything  possible 
for  the  education  of  his  children.  He  met  with 
fair  success  in  business,  and  at  his  death  owned  a 
good  farm  of  two  hundred  acres.  In  politics  he 
was  a  Demociat,  and  he  and  his  wife  were  members 
of  the  Primitive  Baptist  Church,  of  which  he  was 
a  minister  for  many  years.  His  wife  died  January 
7,  1842,  and  his  death  occurred  August  1,  1850. 
Thej'  were  the  parents  of  ten  childien,  eight  now 
living:  Mrs.  Corinna  Sturdevant,  Mrs.  Louisa  H. 
Ford,  Mrs.  Lavina  Hawkins,  Mrs.  vSarah  A.  Haw- 
kins, Mrs.  Rachel  Robertson,  William  J.,  Edmund 
D.  and  Francis  M. 

The  Judge  conned  his  lessons  in  the  old  log 
school  which  his  father  built  and  which  was  taught 
by  his  sister.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  began  work- 
ing on  a  farm  for  his  brother,  with  whom  he  re- 
mained two  years.  He  then  begun  speculating  in 
stock,  but  losing  his  money,  he  turned  his  attention 
to  the  blacksmith's  trade.     He  built  the  Tirst  shop 


in  Tamaroa,  and  after  carrying  it  on  for  two  and 
a-half  years,  he  spent  two  jears  as  a  student  in  a 
private  school.     Later  he  emliarked  in  leaching. 

Mr.  Youngblood  was  married  December  23,  1858, 
to  N.  E.  Eaton,  who  was  born  on  Paradise  Prairie, 
November  17,  1840,  and  was  a  daughter  of  West 
Eaton,  a  native  of  Tennessee,  and  one  of  the  early 
settlers  of  Pen-}-  Country,  111.  After  his  mariiage, 
the  Judge  continued  teaching  for  a  time.  In  No- 
vember, 1859,  he  was  elected  Assessor  and  Treas- 
urer of  Peny  County,  and  filled  the  oHice  for  two 
years.  In  July,  1860,  he  began  reading  law  with 
Judge  William  K.  Parish,  of  DuQuoin,  and  in  the 
summer  of  1861  was  admitted  to  the  Bar.  lleiui- 
mediately  began  practice  in  DuQuoin,  where  he 
continued  until  January,  1862,  when  lie  removed 
to  Benton,  and  there  opened  a  law  office,  carrying 
on  practice  at  that  place  for  some  time.  From 
April,  1874,  until  July,  1875,  he  was  numbered 
among  the  lawyers  of  Shawneetown,  111.,  and  then 
resumed  practice  in  Benton,  where  he  remained  un- 
til his  removal   to  Carbondale,  in  September,  1887. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Y'oungblood  were  born  seven 
children,  five  of  whom  are  yet  living:  Ransom  A., 
of  Benton,  who  married  Nannie  Hubbard,  by  whom 
he  has  four  children;  Dougherty  V.,who  is  in  part- 
nership with  his  father;  Jose|)h  E.,of  Pinckney  ville^ 
who  wedded  Nannie  Gouch,  by  whonj  he  has  one 
child;  Louisa  R.  and  Laura  A.  The  mother  of  the 
family  is  a  member  of  the  Primitive  Baptist  Church, 
and  is  a  most  estimable  lady. 

The  Judge  belongs  to  the  Masonic  fralernity, 
and  for  nine  j'ears  has  been  Master  of  Benton 
Lodge  No.  64,  A.  F.  ife  A.  M.  He  also  belongs  to 
DuQuoin  Chapter,  R.  A.  M.,  and  to  the  Knights  of 
Honor.  His  hearty  support  and  co-opcralion  are 
given  to  the  cause  of  education  and  to  all  enter- 
prises calculated  to  prove  of  public  benefit.  He 
takes  an  active  interest  in  politics,  votes  with  the 
Democratic  party,  and  frequently  serves  as  a  dele- 
gate to  its  conventions.  He  served  as  Prosecuting 
Attorney  for  the  Twenty-sixth  Judicial  Circuit, 
which  comprised  Franklin,  Williamson,  Johnson, 
Saline,  Gallatin  and  Hardin  Counties.  He  was 
elected  in  November,  1868,  and  filled  the  office 
four  years.  In  November,  1872,  he  was  elected 
State    Senator    from    the    Forty-seventh    District, 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


453 


comprising  Franklin,  "Williamson,  Saline  and  Gal- 
latin Counties.  He  served  on  tiie  Railroad,  Ap- 
propriation and  Judiciary  Committees.  In  tlie 
jear  1880  he  was  elected  to  the  State  Legisla- 
ture from  the  same  district,  and  served  on  the 
same  committees.  His  public  and  private  life  are 
alilce  above  reproach,  and  wliile  in  the  Assembly, 
his  straightforward  course,  devoted  to  the  interests 
of  his  constituents,  won  him  high  commendation. 
His  success  as  a  lawyer  has  been  marked.  His 
pleas  are  the  admiration  of  all  who  hear  him,  and 
his  arguments  alw.iys  tell  with  the  jurj'.  His 
prominence  has  been  won  tlirough  merit  and  not 
through  influence  or  outside  aid. 


HARLES  I).  .STAHLBEKG,  deceased,  was 
born  near  Biclfeld,  Prussia,  on  the  17th  of 
December,  1834,  and  was  a  son  of  Gottlieb 
Stahlberg.  The  parents  of  our  subject  both  died 
during  his  childhood.  He  attended  the  public 
schools  of  his  native  land  until  fourteen  ^'ears  of 
age,  when  he  began  learning  the  confectionery 
trade,  serving  a  regular  apprenticeship  of  three 
years.  About  a  year  later  lie  sailed  to  America, 
locating  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  he  secured  a  posi- 
tion as  foreman  in  a  large  confectionery  establish- 
ment, continuing  in  charge  for  seven  years. 

The  year  1860  witnessed  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Stahl- 
berg in  Illinois,  and  saw  him  located  in  what  was 
then  Alma,  but  is  now  Steeleville.  Here  heatouce 
embarked  in  general  merchandising,  which  he  suc- 
cessfully carried  on  until  his  death.  He  filled  his 
store  with  a  complete  line  of  goods,  and  by  fair 
and  honest  dealing  and  courteous  treatment  of  his 
patrons  he  won  a  liberal  patron.age  and  built  up  a 
fine  trade.  After  his  death,  his  widow  carried  on 
the  business  alone  until  her  son,  F.  A.,  became  old 
enough  to  take  part  in  the  same.  Together  thev 
then  carried  on  operations  along  that  line  until 
the  1st  of  January,  1894,  when  she  withdrew,  and 
the  business  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  two  sons, 
F.  A.  and  Charles  D. 

Mr.  Stahlberg  of  this  .sketch  was  married  in 
1857  to  Louise  E.  Long,  daugiiter  of  Carl  Frank 
and    Maiy  E.   (Rullmann)  Long,  both  of  whom 


were  natives  of  Hanover, Germany,  in  which  coun- 
try they  were  reared  and  married.  On  crossing 
the  Atlantic  to  America,  in  1844,  they  settled  in 
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  the  father  died  of  cholera  in 
1849.  His  wife  long  survived  him,  and  departed 
this  life  in  1893,  at  the  age  of  seventy-six  years 
and  six  months.  They  had  a  familj'  of  five  chil- 
dren, but  only  two  of  the  number  are  now  living, 
Mrs.  Stahlberg,  and  Eliza  Long,  who  resides  in  St. 
Louis.  Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Stahlberg  were  born 
seven  children,  of  whom  one  died  in  infancy, 
while  William  Albert  died  at  the  age  of  twenty- 
four.  Those  still  living  are,  Wilhelmina  Louisa, 
wife  of  Dr.  Armbruster,  of  Steeleville;  Frederick 
August,  Anuie,  Matilda  Elizabeth  and  Charles 
Detrich.  All  are  still  living  with  tlieir  mother  ex- 
cept Mrs.  Armbruster.  The  family  is  one  of  prom- 
inence in  the  community,  and  its  members  rank 
higli  in  social  circles. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Stahlberg  were  reared  in  the  Evan- 
gelical Church.  He  was  a  member  of  Steeleville 
Lodge  No.  497,  A.  F.  ife  A.  M.,  and  in  politics  w.is 
a  Republican.  He  passed  away  in  July,  1870,  and 
his  death  was  widel}'  and  deeply  mourned,  for  he 
possessed  many  excellencies  of  character,  was  a 
kind  and  loving  husband  and  father,  a  faithful 
friend  and  a  valued  citizen. 


'  OHN  H.  THIES,  proprietor  of  the  woolen 
mills  of  Steeleville,  is  at  the  head  of  one  of 
the  leading  industries  of  this  place.  His 
business  has  now  assumed  extensive  pro- 
portions, and  be  receives  from  the  public  a  liberal 
patronage,  which  yields  him  a  good  income.  As 
he  is  widely'  and  favorably'  known  in  this  commu- 
nity, we  feel  assured  that  the  record  of  his  life  will 
prove  of  interest  to  man^'  of  our  readers. 

Mr.  Thies  was  born  in  Germany,  January  10, 
1824,  and  is  a  son  of  Frank  Thies.  a  native  of  the 
same  country.  His  mother  died  when  he  was 
quite  young.  *  In  the  family  were  six  children,  of 
whom  he  was  the  fifth  in  order  of  birth.  In  ac- 
cordance with  the  laws  of  his  native  land,  he  at- 
tended the  public  schools  until  fourteen  years  of 
age,  when  he  began  earning  his  own  livelihood  by 


454 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPmCAL  RECORD 


working  as  a  farm  hand,  wliich  pursuit  he  followed 
until  nineteen  years  of  age.  He  then  entered  the 
German  arm}-,  joining  the  Light  Cavah'}',  in  which 
he  served  for  three  ^ears.  During  the  last  year 
he  was  detailed  for  commissary  work,  and  was 
mustered  out  in  Munster,  Germany,  in  the  year 
1846.  The  succeeding  two  years  and  a-half  he 
spent  in  traveling  over  Europe. 

The  spring  of  1849  witnessed  the  emigiation  of 
Mr.  Thies  to  America.  On  reaching  the  New 
World,  lie  located  in  8t.  Louis,  Mo.  Cholera  was 
then  raging,  and  business  was  almost  wholly  sus- 
pended, but  he  at  lengtli  secured  work  in  a  drug 
stole,  where  he  continued  for  six  months.  His 
next  employment  was  the  manufacture  of  saddle 
trees,  and  to  that  he  devoted  his  energies  for  a 
period  of  ten  years.  Previous  to  this  time,  lie  had 
purchased  some  land  in  Randolph  County,  and 
when  a  decade  had  passed  away,  he  came  hither. 
He  had  left  the  city  during  the  summer  months, 
and  when  a  favorable  opportunity  was  presented 
to  purchase  a  tract  of  good  land,  he  would  do  so, 
and  when  the  property  had  risen  in  value,  dispose 
of  it.  In  this  way  he  accumulated  a  considerable 
competence.  In  1859  he  removed  to  a  farm  near 
Steeleville,  and  continued  the  cultivation  of  his 
land  until  his  health  failed  him,  when  he  rented 
liis  property,  and  in  1866  removed  to  the  town. 
Building  the  woolen  mills,  he  has  since  engaged 
in  their  operation  with  good  success.  For  about 
ten  years  he  was  associated  in  business  with  his 
two  brothers-in-law,  but  since  that  time  he  has 
been  alone.  The  mills  have  a  large  output,  and 
the  trade  is  constantly  increasing. 

In  September,  1856,  Mr.  Thies  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Annie  Stahlberg,  and  to  them 
were  born  ten  children,  but  four  of  the  num- 
ber died  in  early  childhood.  Those  still  living 
are:  Louisa,  wife  of  the  Rev.  John  L.  Sternberg,  a 
resident  of  Kansas  City,  Mo.;  Annie  and  Charles, 
at  home;  Minnie,  wife  of  E.  L.  Flouth,  a  promi- 
nent farmer  living  near  Cliester;  Frank  and  Edith, 
who  are  attending  the  home  school.  The  mother 
of  this  family-  was  called  to  the  home  beyond  De- 
cember 19,  1893,  at  the  age  of  fifty-six  years.  She 
was  a  kind  and  loving  wife,  a  faithful  and  de- 
voted mother,  and  was  loved  and  respected  by  all. 


In  politics,  Mr.  Thies  is  a  Republican,  and  sociallj' 
is  a  member  of  Steeleville  Lodge  No.  497,  A.  F.  & 
A.  M.  He  and  his  family  all  hold  membership  with 
the  Methodist  Church,  to  which  his  wife  also  be- 
longed. 

.     • ^)^P • 


\i ^  ENRY  FIENE.    Steeleville  numbers  among 

its  successful  business  men  and  public- 
spirited  citizens  the  gentleman  whose  name 
introduces  this  sketch.  Sold}-  through  his 
own  exertions  Mr.  Fiene  has  gained  success.  From 
boj'hood  he  has  been  self  supporting,  and  such  has 
been  his  judgment  and  foresight  that  he  has 
achieved  prosperity  in  the  midst  of  seemingly  in- 
surmountable obstacles.  Of  German  birth  and  par- 
entage, he  possesses  those  excellent  German  traits 
of  character  that,  descending  from  generation  to 
generation,  transmit  a  solidit}'  and  energy  that 
almost  invariably  bring  success  wiieu  united  with 
American  tact  and  enterprise. 

Born  in  December,  1848,  Heniy  Fiene  was  one 
and  one-half  years  old  when  his  parents  started 
across  the  ocean  to  establish  their  home  in  Amer- 
ica. The  wife  and  mother,  as  well  as  the  only 
sister,  died  before  the  ship  reached  the  harbor, 
and  eonsequentl}'  our  subject  knows  nothing  con- 
cerning the  details  of  his  mother's  life,  and  in  fact 
does  not  even  know  her  name.  Henry  Fiene,  Sr., 
arriving  in  this  countr^y,  came  to  Illinois  and  set- 
tled in  Randolph  County,  where  he  married  a  sec- 
ond time.  He  continued  to  make  his  home  here 
until  his  demise. 

In  the  parochial  schools  of  Randolph  County 
the  subject  of  this  sketch  conducted  his  studies 
until  he  reached  fourteen  years  of  age,  when  his 
school  days  were  ended.  Afterward  he  worked  on 
a  farm  as  a  laborer  and  spent  four  years  at  the 
saddler's  trade.  When  twenty-one,  he  began  car- 
rying the  United  States  mail  between  Murphys- 
boro  and  Sparta,  which  occupation  he  followed 
for  four  j-ears.  He  then  came  to  Steeleville  and 
engaged  in  the  livery  business  and  in  farming  pur- 
suits, which  he  has  since  continued.  In  addition, 
he  has  for  a  number  of  j-ears  dealt  in  furs,  deriv- 
ing a  handsome  income  from  this  source. 
In  1873  Mr.  Fiene  married  Miss  Louise,  daugh- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


455 


ter  of  Ernst  Sickmyer,  formerly  of  Ohio,  but  later 

a  resident  of  Illinois.  Of  this  union  nine  chil- 
dren were  born,  one  of  whom  died  in  infancy. 
Those  living  are,  Edwin,  George,  Adolph,  Ileniy, 
Louis,  Annie,  Albert  and  Onia,  all  of  whom  reside 
with  their  parents.  Mr.  Fiene  and  his  family  are 
members  of  the  Lutheran  Church,  to  the  support  of 
which  he  is  a  generous  contributor.  In  politics  he 
is  a  Republican  and  has  always  cast  his  ballot  for 
the  candidates  and  principles  of  that  party.  He 
has  served  as  Treasurer  of  the  village  of  Steele- 
ville  and  has  also  been  Trustee  of  the  Board  a 
number  of  limes.  As  a  citizen  he  is  interested  in 
all  ineasuies  having  for  their  aim  the  promotion 
of  the  best  interests  6f  the  place  and  the  advance- 
ment of  its  material  welfare. 


'^-- 


=+ 


OHN  McMENOMY,  M.  D.  Widely  known 
and  universally  esteemed.  Dr.  McMenomy, 
^,^1  as  a  citizen  and  honored  physician,  com- 
^^f'  inands  the  esteem  and  conlidence  of  his  fel- 
low-townsmen and  the  general  public.  He  for- 
merly resided  in  Chester,  where  he  was  for  a  time 
Count}'  Physician,  but  recently  removed  to  Percy. 
He  was  born  in  New  York  City,  July  6,  1847,  to 
Patrick  and  Annie  (Hoe)  McMenoni}'.  The  parents 
were  born  in  Ireland,  and  emigrated  to  America 
in  an  early  day,  spending  their  last  days  in  New 
York  City. 

The  earl}'  education  of  our  subject  was  received 
in  the  common  schools  of  his  native  city,  but  when 
a  lad  of  nine  years  he  was  deprived  of  the  care  of 
both  parents.  At  this  time  he  went  to  live 
with  a  man  named  Brown,  who  came  to  Ran- 
dolph County  and  located  on  a  farm  near  Sparta. 
On  this  place  our  subject  at  once  set  to  work  to 
help  bring  it  to  a  fine  state  of  cultivation,  and  so 
continued  until  1863,  when  he  concluded  to  serve 
his  country  in  defending  the  Old  Flag. 

In  the  3'ear  1863  the  name  of  John  McMenomy 
was  enrolled  in  Company  F,  One  Hundred  and 
F^orty-second  Illinois  Infantry,  in  the  one  hun- 
dred days'  service,  and  al  the  expiration  of  that 
time  he  re-enlisted,     This  time  he  joined  the  One 


Hundred  and  Fifty-fourth    Infantry,  and  served 

gallantly  until  the  close  of  hostilities,  when  he  was 
honorably  discharged  as  Second  Corporal  of  Com- 
pany F.  He  was  always  at  his  post  of  dutj-,  and 
took  part  in  many  prominent  engagements  with 
his  regiment. 

After  the  establishment  of  peace,  in  the  winter 
of  1865,  the  subject  of  this  sketch  returned  to 
his  home  and  attended  school  in  Sparta.  The 
following  spring  he  began  clerking  in  the  drug 
store  of  Dr.  Gersage,  where  he  remained  for  three 
years,  learning  the  business  thoroughly.  The  next 
year  was  spent  in  a  drug  store  at  Coulterville, 
whence  he  went  to  Chicago  soon  after  the  great  fire 
in  that  city,  and  there  spent  the  winter.  Being 
desirous  of  becoming  a  phj'sician,  he  then  com- 
menced the  stud}  of  medicine  with  Dr.  Booth,  of 
Sparta,  and  in  the  winter  of  1873-74  attended  the 
medical  college  at  Louisville,  Ky.  In  the  spring 
of  the  last  named  year.  Dr.  McMenomy  commenced 
the  practice  of  his  profession  in  Preston,  HI.,  car- 
rying on  a  lucrative  business  for  two  years.  Then 
removing  to  Baldwin,  this  stale,  he  remained  there 
for  the  next  decade,  whence  he  journe^-ed  to 
Evansville.  After  two  years'  practice  in  the  above 
place,  he  spent  the  winter  in  California,  but  de- 
ciding to  return  to  Evansville,  again  took  up  his 
practice  in  that  city,  where  he  remained  until  De- 
cember 2,  1891.  At  this  time  Dr.  McMenomy  be- 
came a  citizen  of  Chester,  where  he  resumed  the 
practical  duties  of  a  ph3'sician.  He  constantl}-  en- 
deavors to  improve  his  conception  of  the  needs  of 
the  human  system,  to  keep  himself  acquainted 
with  the  latest  investigations  of  anatomists  and 
chemists,  and  to  use  judiciously  the  remedies  that 
are  already  known,  as  well  as  the  new  combina- 
tions that  prove  worthy  of  acceptance. 

In  September,  1878,  the  Doctor  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Loretta  Wiltshire,  a  daughter 
of  Charles  H.  and  Lucy  (Hill)  Wiltshire.  Mrs.  Mc- 
Menomy is  a  native  of  Illinois,  and  is  a  highl}-  ed- 
ucated and  cultured  lady.  One  son  has  been  born 
of  this  union,  who  bears  the  name  of  Albert,  and 
who  is  attending  school  at  Chester. 

The  Doctor  was  elected  to  the  honored  position 
of  County  Physician  of  Randolph  County  in  the 
fall  of  1893,  and  has  not  only  filled  the  office  with 


456 


PORTRAIT  ANT)  lUOCHArH'CAL    RECORD. 


satisfaction  to  the  peoplo,  but  with  credit  to  him- 
self. Dr.  McMenomy  is  (juile  interested  in  social 
orders,  as  is  evinced  by  liis  tnenibersliii)  in  Lodge 
No.  248,  F.  &  A.  M..  of  Red  Bud,  the  Egypt  Star 
Lodge  No.  285,  L  O.  O.  F.,  of  Red  Bud,  and  tlie 
Hercules  Lodge,  K.  of  P.,  at  Chester.  He  is  a  Re- 
publican from  conviction,  and  an  active  worker 
for  the  party  policy,  not  only  supporting  it  bj'  his 
ballot,  but  by  his  influence  and  presentation  of  its 
princii)les  to  liis  acquaintances. 


&ARRISON  CLORE.  The  result  of  energy 
;  and  peiseverance  are  nowhere  better  illus- 
trated than  in  the  career  of  Mr.  Clore,  who 
began  life  with  onlj'  the  natural  ability  with 
which  nature  had  endowed  him,  and  is  at  the  pres- 
ent time  a  well  known  and  prosperous  agriculturist 
residing  on  section  18,  township  7,  range  6.  In 
1879  he  added  gardening  and  the  cultivation  of 
small  fruits  to  his  already  busy  life  as  a  farmer, 
and  to-da^'  is  one  of  the  most  extensive  fruit- 
growers in  southern  Illinois,  and  during  their  sea- 
son almost  entirely  supplies  Chester  with  fine 
strawberries. 

A  native  of  Kentucky,  Mr.  Clore  was  born  in 
Boone  County,  November  22,  1830,  while  his  fa- 
ther, Abraham  Clore,  was  a  native  of  Virginia.  He 
emigrated  with  his  parents  when  quite  young  to 
the  above  county  in  Kentucky.  The  father  of  our 
subject  was  manager  and  overseer  of  a  large  plan- 
tation in  the  Blue  Grass  State  until  coming  to 
Illinois  in  1836.  In  that  year  he  puichaaed  a  farm 
near  Chester,  upon  which  he  located,  and  in  addi- 
tion to  its  cultivation  he  also  followed  his  trade  of 
a  carpenter.  He  was  accompanied  on  the  trip  to 
Illinois  by  his  brother  Isaac,  who  assisted  him  in 
the  conduct  of  his  farm. 

Mrs.  Sarah  (Cornelius)  Clore,  the  mother  of  our 
subject,  was  also  a  native  of  Kentucky,  and  was  the 
daughter  of  Albert  Cornelius.  She  reared  a  fam- 
ily of  five  children,  of  whom  Harrison,  of  this 
sketch,  was  the  eldest.  He  had  few  advantages 
for  obtaining  an  education,  but  availed  himself  to 
the  utmost  of  every  opportunity  for  gaining 
knowledge.  His  father  owning  the  ferry  at  Mary's 


River,  our  subject  had  charge  of  that  until  1843, 
when  he  returned  to  the  farm.  The  next  year  was 
the  date  of  the  big  flood,  and  the  family  were 
happy  in  the  thought  that  they  had  moved  in 
time  U)  escape  the  dangers  which  it  brought  in  its 
path. 

When  fifteen  3'ears  of  age,  our  subject  returned 
to  his  old  home  in  Boone  County,  Ky.,  where  he 
visited  friends  and  relatives  for  some  time. and  on 
the  expiration  of  his  holidaj-  again  took  up  the 
work  on  his  father's  farm,  where  he  remained  un- 
til reaching  his  majorit}'.  January  4,  1854,  he  was 
married  to  Miss  Sabina  N.,  daughter  of  Jacob  and 
Elizabeth  (Kunkle)  Baer,  who  emigrated  from 
Indiana  to  Illinois  and  were  people  ol  prominence 
in  this  state.  Our  subject  and  his  wife  are  mem- 
bers in  good  standing  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church,  in  which  denomination  he  has  been  Trus- 
tee, Steward  and  Superintendent  of  the  Sunday- 
school  for  the  past  twent)--six  years. 

Mr.  Clore  began  his  political  career  as  a  Demo- 
crat, but  on  the  outbreak  of  the  Civil  War  joined 
the  ranks  of  the  Republicans  and  voted  with 
them  until  within  the  last  few  years,  since  which 
time  he  has  been  a  stanch  Prohibitionist. 


(f|^^  ENRY  BUSCHER  resides  in  township  7, 
jfjj,  range  6,  Randolph  County,  where  he  owns 
Is)^^  a  good  estate  of  finel}'  improved  land, 
(^3)  which  he  devotes  to  diversified  crops.  The 
buildings  that  have  been  erected  upon  the  estate 
are  neat  and  substantial,  sutHciently  commodious 
for  their  respective  uses,  and  include  every  neces- 
sary and  convenient  edifice.  Mr.  Buscher  pur- 
sues his  calling  with  zeal  and  intelligence,  winning 
from  the  soil  an  abundant  share  of  the  various 
grains,  and  in  this  wa3'  is  securing  for  himself  and 
family'  all  of  the  comforts  of  life. 

A  native  of  this  count}*,  our  subject  was  born 
near  Percy,  September  10,  1858,  and  is  the  eldest 
son  of  William  and  Elizabeth  (Rury)  Buscher.  His 
father  was  born  in  German}-,  and  came  to  Amer- 
ica when  a  young  man,  locating  in  Chester,  this 
county,  wlure  he  worked  for  a  time  at  his  trade  of 
a  shoemaker.     Later  he  followed    farm    pursuits, 


iyfAA^axdX^    .^^t^^o^eyyiyd-t^^^^-^^yC^ 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


469 


and  owned  a  good  estate  near  Perc}',  where  he  was 
residing  at  the  time  of  his  decease,  November  28, 
1892.  His  wife  is  still  living  and  makes  her  home 
near  Perc}-. 

Henry  Buscher,  of  this  sketch,  alternated  his 
duties  as  a  farmer's  lad  with  attendance  at  the  dis- 
trict school,  and  when  ready  to  choose  a  life  work, 
became  an  .agriculturist.  He  has  pursued  a  course 
which  has  secured  for  him  the  hearty  respect  of 
all  who  know  him,  and  has  given  him  a  good  rank 
among  the  farmers  of  the  county.  In  addition  to 
raising  the  various  grains,  he  has  some  fine  stock 
on  his  place. 

October  30,  1888,  our  subject  and  Miss  Caroline 
Clamp  were  united  in  marriage.  The  parents  of 
Mrs.  Buscher,  Daniel  and  Christina  Clamp,  died 
when  she  was  three  years  of  age.  To  them  has 
been  born  one  child,  a  son,  Albert  Edward.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Buscher  are  members  of  the  German 
Methodist  Church,  and  are  people  of  many  pleas- 
ant and  social  qualities.  Our  subject  possesses  in- 
telligent views  on  all  subjects  of  general  interest, 
particularly  on  political  questions,  and  is  an  ardent 
supporter  of  the  Republican  party. 


<•{•+•!••!•  i 


^^^UGUST  DUDENBOSTEL,  dealer  in  dry 
(@/-J[[     goods,  groceries,  hardware,  boots  and  shoes 

I  (i)  at  Campbell  Hill,  is  a  native  of  Hanover, 
(^  Germany.   He  was  born  February  4, 1838, 

and  is  a  son  of  Henry  Dudenbostel,  a  German 
farmer.  He  was  reared  on  his  father's  farm,  and 
acquired  a  good  education  in  his  native  land.  At 
the  age  of  eighteen  he  entered  the  German  cav- 
alry, enlisting  for  ten  years'  service,  and  was  al- 
ways stationed  at  Hanover.  On  the  expiration  of 
his  term  he  was  discharged,  and  in  the  fall  of  1866 
he  came  to  America,  in  company  with  his  brother, 
E.  A.  Dudenbostel.  Landing  at  New  Orleans,  he 
first  located  at  Chester.  III.,  and  thence  went  to 
Evansville,  where  he  began  clerking  in  his  brother's 
store.  He  there  learned  business  methods  and  the 
English  language. 

After  two  years  Mr.  Dudenbostel  went  to  Rock- 
wood,  and  for  the  two  succeeding  3'ears  was 
employed  as  traveling  salesman  for  a  pursery. 
14 


On  the  expiration  of  that  period  he  opened  a 
general  store  in  Wine  Hill  and  built  up  a  good 
business,  which  he  successfully  carried  on  for  five 
years.  It  was  through  his  efforts  that  the  name  of 
Wine  Hill  was  given  to  the  town  and  precinct,and 
that  the  postoffice  was  established  at  that  place. 
He  also  served  as  the  first  Postmaster.  In  1876,- 
he  sold  out  at  Wine  Hill  and  came  to  Campbell 
Hill,  where  he  bought  out  William  Mohlenbrock 
and  .again  embarked  in  general  merchandising.  He 
w.as  located  just  across  the  street  from  liis  present 
store,  where  he  continued  for  five  years. 

In  1881  Mr.  Dudenbostel  built  a  fine  brick  store 
and  warehouse,  40x60  feet  and  two  stories  in 
height,  at  a  cost  of  #4,500.  He  stocked  it  well 
with  general  merchandise  and  has  since  carried  on 
trade  at  this  place,  doing  a  business  of  $15,000 
per  year.  In  1892  he  built  a  fine  brick  addition 
to  his  store  at  a  cost  of  12,500.  It  is  28x34  feet, 
two  stories  in  height,  with  a  basement,  is  heated  by 
a  furnace  and  is  used  as  a  restaurant.  This  is  the 
finest  store  building  in  the  northern  part  of  Jack- 
son Count3',  and  its  owner  has  accumulated  much 
land.  He  recently'  sold  seven  farms  and  still  re- 
tains two  hundred  acres. 

In  1870  Mr.  Dudenbostel  married  Mary  Dett- 
raerr,  a  native  of  Randolph  County.  Thej'  had 
two  children,  but  both  are  now  deceased,  and  the 
mother  died  in  1875.  In  1876  our  subject  mar- 
ried Sophia  Knop,  also  a  native  of  Randolph 
County.  The^'  have  eight  sons,  Louis,  Arnold, 
Edwin,  Ernest,  Adelbert,  Herbert,  Earnhardt  and 
Hugo.  The  parents  are  members  of  the  Evan- 
gelical Lutheran  Church,  are  very  prominent  in 
church  work  and  contribute  liberally  to  its  sup- 
port. 

Mr.  Dudenbostel  is  a  member  of  the  Masonic 
fraternity  and  has  served  as  Senior  Deacon.  In 
politics  he  has  always  been  a  stalwart  Democrat 
and  does  what  he  can  for  his  party's  interest.  He 
is  now  serving  his  third  term  as  Supervisor  of 
Bradley  Township.  In  1892  he  was  strongly  urged 
to  become  a  candidate  for  the  Legislature,  but 
declined  on  account  of  business  interests.  From 
187C  until  1880  he  served  as  Postmaster  at  Camp- 
bell Hill,  was  again  appointed  in  1884  for  a  four 
years'  term,  and  in  1892  was  once  more  given  the 


460 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


position  he  yet  fills.  He  has  several  times  been 
President  of  the  Village  Board,  and  in  all  pub- 
lic positions  has  discharged  iiis  duties  with  a 
promptness  and  fidelity  tliat  have  won  liim  high 
commendation.  He  may  truly  be  called  a  self- 
made  man,  and  the  success  of  iiis  life  is  the  just 
reward  of  his  labors. 


..{..^.{..j.  i 


i.-5"{-*4 


n4..j..j..5.i^^<  ****! 


1r^ 


"iffUDGE  JOHN  MORRISON.  A  long  resi- 
dence in  a  community  gives  to  an  individ- 
ual a  standing  that  can  scarcely  be  secured 
otherwise,  especially  if  he  has  made  for 
himself  an  honorable  record  as  a  citizen.  Doubt- 
less no  one  in  Randolph  County  is  more  widely 
known  than  Judge  Morrison,  who  resides  on  town- 
ship 6,  range  5.  He  has  witnessed  the  develop- 
ment of  tlie  county  from  a  sparsely  settled  and 
uninviting  tract  of  land  to  a  eommunit}'  of  thriv- 
ing villages  and  fine  farms,  the  abode  of  an  intel- 
ligent and  prosperous  people.  The  Judge  is  of 
Irish  birth,  having  been  born  near  Londonderry, 
in  1822.  His  [larents  were  James  and  Jane  (Park- 
hill)  Morrison,  tlie  former  of  whom  came  to  Amer- 
ica in  an  early  day  and  died  here.  At  tlie  age  of 
seventeen,  John  came  to  America  to  visit  his  ma- 
ternal uncles,  who  resided  in  Virginia.  He  accom- 
panied an  uncle  from  the  Old  Dominion  to  Illinois 
and  settled  near  Steeleville,  where  he  still  lives. 
He  has  but  the  kindest  of  words  to  say  of  the 
people  who  were  here  when  he  came  and  who 
were  hospitable  and  generous,  though  their  means 
were  limited.  For  a  number  of  years  he  worked 
at  anything  he  could  find  to  do,  and  for  five  years 
was  employed  on  Captain  Cliaplin's  farm.  He  fin- 
ally purchased  property  in  township  6,  range  5, 
where  he  has  since  resided.  So  long  has  he  lived 
here  that  he  is  now  considered  one  of  the  land- 
marks. He  expresses  tlie  highest  gratitude  to  Col. 
Gabriel  Jones,  who  bought  the  tract  of  one  hun- 
drefl  and  twenty  acres  the  Judge  still  owns,  and 
who  had  the  deeds  made  out  to  the  latter  without 
Ills  knowledge. 

The  first  marriage  of  Judge  Morrison  united 
him  with  Miss  Mahala,  daugliter  of  Archibald 
Steele,  a  pioneer  of  Randolph  County.     They  be- 


came tlie  parents  of  four  sons  and  four  daughters. 
Those  living  are,  Matilda,  wlio  inarricd  William 
McCoy,  a  resident  of  Alma,  111.;  Jane,  the  widow 
of  John  L.  Hart,  and  a  resident  of  Steeleville; 
William  A.,  who  married  Carrie  Nolte,  and  lives 
near  Rockwood;  and  Henry,  who  is  yet  single 
and  is  working  in  St.  Louis.  About  1864  Mrs. 
Mahala  Morrison  died,  and  the  Judge  remained  a 
widower  for  many  years.  In  1876  he  married 
Mrs.  Luiana  (Simons)  Brown,  a  daughter  of  Ed- 
ward and  Eunice  (Kelly)  Simons.  Four  children 
have  blessed  this  union:  Charles  E.,  Grace  B.,  Car- 
rie B.,  and  Lawrence  S.,  who  are  attending  the 
home  schools. 

In  religious  connections,  the  Judge  and  his  wife 
are  identified  with  the  Presbyterian  Church,  and 
he  is  serving  as  Elder.  Socially,  he  is  a  member 
of  Steeleville  Lodge  No.  497.  Politically,  he  has 
always  been  a  stanch  Democrat,  and  upon  the 
ticket  of  that  party  he  has  been  elected  to  numer- 
ous local  positions,  including  that  of  County  Com- 
missioner, in  which  he  has  served  for  a  number  of 
years.  His  life  has  been  distinguished  by  rare  en- 
ergy, stability  of  character  and  prompt  and  syste- 
matic business  habits,  and  he  enjoys  an  enviable 
reputation  as  a  man  of  firm  princiiiles  and  strict 
morality. 

■ ^^P • 


i^jr-5)  T.  ROBINSON,  who  devotes  his  time  and 
,/<^^^  attention  to  agricultural  pursuits  and  makes 
%^^  his  home  on  his  good  farm  on  section  33, 
Pomona  Township,  Jackson  Count}',  was  born  on 
the  old  homestead  February  28,  1835.  His  par- 
ents were  Urbane  E.  and  Penelope  (Bradshaw) 
Robinson,  and  were  born  in  1805,  in  Kentucky 
and  Tennessee,  respectively.  In  1809  Mr.  Rob- 
inson came  with  his  parents  to  Illinois,  locating 
at  Big  Hill,  near  where  the  town  of  Grand  Tower 
now  stands.  They  are  among  the  first  settlers  of 
this  region, and  Indians  were  still  numerous  in  the 
neighborhood,  while  bears  and  other  wild  animals 
were  frequently  seen.  The  Bradshaw  family  also 
came  to  Jackson  County  about  the  same  time  as 
the  Robinsons.  The  parents  of  our  subject  were 
married  in  Jackson  County,  and  sixty-three  years 
ago   settled    on    section    28,   Pomona   Township, 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


461 


upon  a  tract  of  wild  land,  from  which  Mr.  Robin- 
son developed  a  fine  farm.  The  last  years  of  his 
life  were  spent  in  retirement  in  Murphysboro, 
where  his  death  occurred  in  1888.  His  wife  passed 
away  in  1865.  In  early  life  they  were  Methodists, 
but  afterward  joined  the  Baptist  Church.  He 
took  an  active  part  in  public  affairs  and  did  much 
toward  the  upbuilding  of  the  county.  Prior  to 
the  war  he  was  a  Democrat,  but  on  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Republican  party  joined  its  ranks.  He 
served  as  Justice  of  the  Peace  and  County  Com- 
missioner, and  was  defeated  in  the  race  for  County 
Treasurer.  He  raised  a  com})any  for  the  Civil 
War,  but  it  was  never  mustered  in.  His  son 
John  Wesley,  now  deceased,  served  in  the  Mexi- 
can War,  and  two  sons  were  iu  the  late  war.  The 
family  numbered  eight  children,  but  only  three 
are  now  living:  Franklin  T.,  of  Pomona  Township, 
Jackson  County;  T.  T.,  of  this  sketch;  and  Mrs. 
Margaret  J.  Gregory,  of  East  St.  Louis. 

No  event  of  special  importance  occurred  during 
the  childhood  of  our  subject,  which  was  quietly 
passed  on  the  old  home  farm,  where  he  remained 
until  twenty-one  years  of  age.  He  then  engaged  in 
milling  for  a  time,  and  later  settled  ui)on  a  tract 
of  wild  land,  which  he  began  to  cultivate  and  im- 
prove, transforming  it  into  rich  and  fertile  fields. 
He  has  added  to  it  from  time  to  time,  until  he 
now  owns  five  hundred  acres,  the  greater  part  of 
which  is  well  developed. 

In  1859  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  Mr. 
Robinson  and  Mary  A.  Gregory,  who  was  born  in 
Jackson  County  in  June,  1840,  and  is  a  daughter 
of  Isaac  and  Christina  Gregory,  who  came  from 
North  Carolina  to  southern  Illinois  iu  an  early 
day.  They  have  two  children:  Clementine,  who 
is  now  the  wife  of  Henry  Stewart,  of  Colorado, 
and  has  three  children,  and  Daisy,  at  home. 

Mr.  Robinson  manifested  his  loyalty  to  the 
Government  during  the  late  war  by  enlisting,  Au- 
gust 11,  1862,  in  Company  B,  One  Hundred  and 
Ninth  Illinois  Infantry.  He  was  commissioned 
Second  Lieutenant,  went  to  Columbus,  Ky.,  thence 
to  Boliver,  Tenn.,  and  served  throughout  the 
Yicksburg  campaign.  He  was  in  command  of  his 
company  in  186.3,  when  the  regiment  was  consoli- 
dated with   the  Eleventh  Illinois  Infantry  and  he 


returned  home.  He  now  belongs  to  the  Grand 
Army  post  and  to  Makanda  Lodge  No.  44,  A.  F. 
&  A.  M.  In  religious  belief  he  and  his  wife  are 
Baptists,  and  he  is  now  serving  as  Clerk  of  the 
church,  also  as  Trustee.  For  fourteen  years  he  was 
a  member  of  the  Board  of  Home  Missions,  and  was 
Trustee  of  the  Pecle  Fund.  He  has  served  as  Su- 
perintendent, and  his  wife  has  been  a  teacher  iu 
the  Sunday-school. '  He  takes  quite  an  active  part 
in  [jolitics,  is  a  stalwart  advocate  of  the  Democ- 
racy, and  has  frequently  been  a  delegate  to  the 
conventions  of  his  party.  He  has  served  as  Jus- 
tice of  the  Peace  and  is  Cliairman  of  the  present 
Board  of  County  Supervisors.  He  was  a  member 
of  one  of  the  first  boards  of  the  county.  In  1879  he 
was  elected  to  the  Thirty-first  General  Assembly 
and  served  on  the  committees  on  roads  and  bridges, 
public  buildings  and  charitable  institutions.  In 
1888  he  was  nominated  for  Congress,  but  was  de- 
feated. His  fellow-townsmen  have  manifested 
their  confidence  in  him  by  frequentl}'  calling  him 
to  office,  and  in  the  various  positions  he  has  filled 
he  has  ever  been  found  faithful  and  true.  He  was 
a  valiant  soldier,  an  efficient  officer,  a  progressive 
citizen,  and  well  deserves  representation  in  the 
history  of  his  native  county. 


H-!''3"5"!'  ^^.•3"5-*5**i 


'•J-i-t-f'^W'-S-S-^+F 


OUJS  VOGT,  who  has  for  more  than  two  dec- 
ades been  the  owner  of  one  of  the  best  es- 
tates in  township  1,  ranges  9  and  10  west, 
Monroe  County',  is  classed  among  tlie  well-to-do 
farmers  of  his  section.  He  is  a  native  of  Prussia, 
and  was  born  November  11,  1842.  He  was  be- 
reft of  both  parents  when  but  an  infant  and  was 
reared  by  his  uncle,  Frank  Jasper  Vogt,  who  came 
to  the  United  States  when  our  subject  was  but 
four  jears  old  and  located  in  this  county.  He 
was  a  man  of  means,  and  at  once  purchased  a  farm, 
comprising  one  iiundred  and  fiftj'  acres.  He  was 
never  married,  and  his  sister,  Mary  Frances,  kept 
house  for  him.  He  died  in  1856.  Our  subject  re- 
mained on  this  farm  until  his  marriage,  which  oc- 
curred when  he  was  twenty-four  years  of  age. 

The   early    education  of  young  Louis  was  re- 
ceived in  the   common    and  Catholic  schools,  to 


462 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


which  faith  he  was  reared.  While  residing  with 
his  uncle  he  became  familiar  with  all  the  details 
of  farming,  and  chose  that  vocation  as  his  life 
work.  At  the  time  of  his  marriage,  in  1867.  he  be- 
gan renting  land,  but  in  1873  was  enabled  to  pur- 
chase land  of  his  own,  which  comprised  one  hun- 
dred broad  and  fertile  acres.  He  has  since  been 
engaged  in  general  fanning  and  stock-raising  to 
some  extent,  in  which  he  has  been  very  prosperous. 
Some  years  ago  he  disposed  of  ten  acres  of  his 
land,  leaving  him  at  the  present  time  one  hundred 
and  seventy  acres,  all  of  which  are  under  the  best 
state  of  cultivation. 

The  lady  who  became  the  wife  of  our  subject 
bore  the  maiden  name  of  Catherine  Janson,  a 
daughter  of  Valentine  and  Elizabeth  (Seibert) 
Janson.  To  them  were  born  nine  children,  six  of 
whom  3'et  are  living,  and  are  named:  Elizabeth, 
Louis,  Anna,  John,  Maggie  and  Edward.  Eliza- 
beth is  the  wife  of  Michael  Schaff,  and  Louis  is 
married  to  Lena  Petri.  The  children  have  all  re- 
ceived tlie  best  advantages  for  good  educations  in 
the  public  and  Catliohc  schools.  Socially,  Mr. 
Vogt  is  a  member  of  the  Catholic  Knights  of  Illi- 
nois, and  politically  is  a  stanch  Democrat.  In 
1890  he  was  chosen  County  Commissioner  on  his 
ticket  and  has  since  been  re-elected.  He  also 
served  as  School  Director  and  Road  Commissioner 
of  his  township. 


AMUEL  BOU.SCHER.  In  giving  their 
lues  to  the  pioneers  of  southern  llli- 
is,  the  pen  of  an  historian  is  needed  to 
perpetuate  their  names  and  deeds  for  pos- 
terity, who  with  llie  onward  march  of  time  will 
learn  to  appreciate  them  at  their  full  value.  It  is 
doubtful  if  those  sturdy  characters  themselves 
realized  the  magnitude  of  the  work  they  had  be- 
gun and  the  results  which  were  to  follow.  Not 
only  did  their  labors  affect  themselves  personally, 
but  the  works  of  each  man  contributed  to  make 
a  grand  whole  in  the  development  of  a  rich  sec- 
tion of  the  country,  which  is  looked  upon  with 
pride  by  the  people  to-day.  The  fact  that  Mr. 
Bouscher  came  to  Somerset  Township  prior  to  the 


founding  of  the  city  of  Murphysboro  is  sufficient 
to  establish  him  among  the  prominent  men  of 
Jackson  County,  and  the  further  fact  that  he  has 
labored  industriously  and  lived  worthily  forms 
for  him  one  of  the  most  enduring  monuments  that 
can  be  erected  to  man. 

The  parents  of  our  subject,  Henry  .■iiul  Elizabeth 
(Wright)  Bouscher,  were  natives  of  Pennsylvania, 
and  were  of  German  descent.  Samuel  was  born 
in  Somerset  County,  Pa.,  Febiuary  28,  1814,  and 
was  reared  to  manhood  in  the  Keystone  State, 
having  from  childhood  engaged  in  agricultural 
pursuits.  In  the  subscription  schools  of  the 
home  neighborhood  he  received  a  rudimentary 
education,  and  the  knowledge  there  gained  has 
since  been  supplemented  by  extensive  reading 
and  close  observation.  In  October,  1838,  in  Penn- 
sylvania, he  was  united  in  marri.ige  with  Miss 
Catherine  Enos,  who  was  born  in  Somerset  Coun- 
t}-,  that  state,  being  a  daughter  of  George  and 
Catherine  Enos.  A  large  family  of  children  re- 
sulted from  this  union,  of  whom  the  following 
survive:  Marj'  A.,  wife  of  Daniel  Kimmel;  Ava  A., 
who  married  G.  G.  AVill  (see  sketch  presented  on 
another  page);  William  H.;  Emma  F.,  wife  of  Ed- 
ward Whipke}';  Albina,  who  married  Joseph  Im- 
hoff;  and  Alpheretta,  wife  of  D.  Bradley. 

In  1839,  accompanied  by  his  family,  Mr.  Bou- 
scher came  to  Illinois,  and  two  years  later  he  set- 
tled upon  his  present  farm.  After  building  a  log 
cabin  he  commenced  the  work  of  clearing  the  land, 
which  he  developed  until  it  was  under  excellent 
cultivation.  He  now  owns  a  valuable  farm  con- 
sisting of  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres,  underl-aid 
with  coal;  also  two  hundred  and  forty  acres  in 
Levan  Township,  and  one  hundred  acres  on  Cedar 
Creek.  As  an  agriculturist  he  has  been  very  suc- 
cessful, and  his  energy  and  judicious  management 
have  aided  him  in  the  accumulation  of  his  prop- 
erty. 

In  his  religious  belief,  Mr.  Bouscher  is  identified 
with  the  Lutheran  Church,  in  all  the  good  works 
of  which  he  is  an  active  worker.  He  was  deeply 
bereaved  when,  on  the  18th  of  February,  1882, 
his  wife  was  called  from  earth.  During  all  the 
years  of  their  wedded  life,  she  was  his  helpmate 
and  devotee^  counselor,  and   m  her   demise    the 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


463 


family  suffered  a  deep  loss.  As  a  citizen,  Mr. 
Bouscher  lias  ever  favored  all  public-.spirited  meas- 
ures, and  perhaps  no  resident  of  Somerset  Town- 
ship has  contributed  more  liberally  to  its  develop- 
ment than  has  he.  In  politics  Mr.  Bouscher  is  a 
stanch  Republican. 


II^'RANCIS  MOORE,  who  carries  on  general 
Ir^t©  farming  in  Randolph  Count}',  owns  and 
IWi  operates  two  hundred  and  tliirt}'  acres  of 
good  land.  lie  was  born  in  Count}-  Monaghan, 
Ireland,  in  1839,  and  is  a  son  of  William  and  Mar- 
garet (Dunn)  Moore,  who  were  also  natives  of  the 
same  county.  The  father  was  born  in  1812,  and 
in  1838  married  Miss  Dunn,  b}-  whom  he  had  two 
children,  Francis  and  Eliza  Jane.  The  latter  mar- 
ried .John  S.  Clendening,  and  they  had  two  chil- 
dren, William  James  and  Anna  Jane.  After  the 
death  of  her  first  husband.  J^liza  married  John 
Beatty,  of  Sparta.  In  1841  William  Moore  crossed 
tlie  Atlantic  with  his  famil}',  arriving  at  Chester 
in  February.  He  made  a  settlement  near  Evans- 
ville,  HI.,  where  he  spent  his  remaining  days,  his 
death  occurring  in  1844.  By  occupation  he  was  a 
farmer. 

Our  subject  was  only  two  Aears  old  when 
brought  by  his  parents  to  the  New  World.  lie 
remained  at  iiome  until  twenty-two  3'ears  of  age, 
and  in  the  public  and  subscription  schools  ac- 
quired his  education.  On  leaving  home  be  set- 
tled on  Lively  Prairie,  and  still  owns  a  farm  of 
one  hundred  and  sixty  acres  there.  He  continued 
to  make  it  his  home  until  1881,  when  he  removed 
to  his  present  farm,  which  now  comprises  two 
hundred  and  thirty  acres  of  valuable  land,  all  un- 
der a  high  state  of  cultivation  with  the  exception 
of  ten  acres.  Upon  the  place  are  a  good  residence 
and  outbuildings,  together  with  all  the  accessories 
of  a  model  farm.  Mr.  Moore  raises  a  good  grade 
of  stock,  in  fact  there  is  nothing  inferior  upon 
the  farm,  which  is  neat  and  thrifty  in  appearance 
and  indicates  to  the  passer-by  the  supervision  of  a 
practical  and  progressive  owner. 

Mr.  Moore  has  been  twice  married.  He  first 
wedded  Sarah  Jane  Boyd,  a   native  of  Randolph 


County,  who  died  in  1863.  She  was  a  member  of 
the  United  Presbyterian  Church  of  Springfield. 
In  1865,  Mar}  J.  Adair  became  his  wife.  She  is 
also  a  native  of  this  county,  and  a  daughter  of 
William  and  Rebecca  (Taggart)  Adair,  who  were 
natives  of  South  Carolina.  Her  father  served  as 
a  Major  in  the  Black  Hawk  War.  In  the  Moore 
family  are  five  children:  William  B.,  at  home;  Mrs. 
Rebecca  A.  Temple;  James  D.,  at  home;  Francis  C, 
who  married  Minnie  Perkins,  by  whom  he  has  one 
child,  Carroll  L.;  and  Slargaret  E.,  at  home. 

In  his  political  affiliations,  Mr.  Moore  is  a  Dem- 
ocrat, and  for  two  terms  he  has  served  as  Justice 
of  the  Peace.  Both  he  and  his  wife  are  members 
of  the  United  Presbyterian  Church  of  Springfield, 
in  which  he  serves  as  Deacon.  He  is  also  serving 
as  Trustee  with  the  Sparta  congregation.  This' 
worthy  cOH[)le  are  widely  and  favorably  known 
throughout  the  community,  and  have  a  large 
circle  of  friends,  who  hold  them  in  high  esteem  on 
account  of  their  many  excellencies  of  character. 


^r^iOBERT  ROBERTSON.  This  venerable  gcn- 
jbiir  tleman,  though  born  across  the  water  in 
■r^\  Renfrewshire,  Scotland,  was  an  early  scl- 
'^^tlerof  Randolph  County,  and  the  tiact  of 
land  on  section  29,  township  4,  range  5,  where  he 
located  in  1849,  he  has  ever  since  made  his  home. 
He  is  now  enjoying  its  peaceful  comfort  in  retire- 
ment from  the  hard  labor  of  his  early  years,  by 
which  he  developed  one  of  the  fine  farms  for 
which  this  locality  is  noted. 

The  parents  of  our  subject,  William  and  Jeanette 
(McCurdy)  Robertson,  lived  and  died  in  the  old 
country.  They  reared  a  family  of  seven  children, 
of  whom  James,  who  is  living  in  Australia,  and 
our  subject  are  the  only  members  living.  The 
father  was  a  weaver  by  trade,  and  with  his  wife 
was  a  devoted  member  of  the  Established  Church 
in  Scotland.  Robert  grew  to  man's  estate  in  his 
native  country,  where  he  received  a  common- 
school  education  and  learned  the  trade  of  a  car- 
penter and  joiner,  which  he  followed  for  some 
time  in  Paisley.  When  ready  to  establish  a  home 
of  his  own,  he  was  married,  November  11,  1844,  to 


464 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Miss  Jane  Duncan,  a  native  of  Scotland,  where  her 
birth  occurred  in  1826.  She  is  the  daugliter  of 
Joiin  and  Isabella  (McFee)  Duncan,  both  of  whom 
departed  this  life  in  the  Old  Country.  Mrs.  Rob- 
ertson is  the  eldest  of  five  children,  and  besides 
her  brotlier  Daniel,  who  lives  in  New  Zealand,  is 
the  only  one  living,  llcr  father  was  a  member  of 
the  Gielic  Church,  while  her  mother  was  of  the  Old 
Ligiit  Covenanter  faith. 

Prior  to  making  a  permanent  location  in  the 
New  World,  our  subject  came  on  a  prospecting 
tour  in  1811,  and  returning  home  a  few  months 
later,  remained  until  the  spring  of  1849,  when  he 
emigrated  with  his  family,  landing  in  America 
July  9.  His  brother,  who  had  previously  come  to 
this  country,  was  living  in  township  4,  range  6, 
of  this  county,  and  hither  our  subject  came.  He 
resided  upon  a  portion  of  his  laud  until  1852, 
since  which  time  he  has  lived  on  his  present  farm 
on  section  29.  When  locating  here  the  propert3' 
included  only  eighty  acres,  all  in  a  primitive  con- 
dition, and  many  were  the  privations  and  hard- 
ships he  and  his  family  weie  called  upon  to  endure 
before  he  had  subdued  the  soil  and  brought  it  to  a 
high  state  of  cultivation,  making  the  various  im- 
provements that  have  so  greatly  increased  its 
value.  He  now  has  two  hundred  and  sixt^'-five 
broad  acres,  all  under  the  plow  witli  the  exception 
of  a  small  tract. 

Of  the  family  of  eight  children  born  to  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Robertson  onlj'  five  are  living,  of  whom  we 
make  the  following  mention:  Isabella  married 
John  T.  B'inley,  and  resides  in  Washington  Coun- 
ty, this  state;  William,  Janet,  Agnes  and  John  W. 
live  at  home.  The  youngest  son  completed  his 
studies  in  the  Sparta  High  School,  and  in  1889  was 
graduated  from  the  Beaumont  Medical  College,  at 
St.  Louis,  Mo.  He  is  now  engaged  in  the  practice 
of  his  profession  in  Tilden,  this  county. 

Mr.  ajid  Mrs.  Robertson  are  influential  members 
cif  the  Presbyterian  Church  of  Sparta.  Our  sub- 
ject, who  in  early  life  was  a  Republican,  now  votes 
the  Prohibition  ticket.  He  has  been  School  Di- 
rector in  liis  district,  and  at  all  times  has  done  his 
part  in  furthering  the  best  interests  of  his  town- 
ship. He  has  in  his  possession  an  old  clock,  eight 
feet  high,  which  is  one  hundred  and    ninety  years 


old  and  has  been  in  the  family  during  that  entire 
period.  Besides  his  fine  farm  he  is  a  stockiiolder 
in  the  creamery  at  Sparta  and  is  a  man  of  untiring 
energy,  being  classed  among  the  best  citizens  of 
Randolph  County.  After  an  absence  of  thirty 
years,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Robertson  visited  their  old 
home  in  Scotland,  where  they  renewed  their  ac- 
quaintance with  man}'  friends  of  their  younger 
years. 


,y^ILLIAM  MOULIC,  proprietor  of  a  drug 
store  in    Percy,  and  an  enterprising  and 

V^  successful  business  man,  was  born  in 
Thornton,  Cook  County,  111.,  February  11,  1859, 
and  is  one  of  five  ciiildren,  whose  parents  were 
Vensel  and  Mary  Moulic.  The  fatiier  was  born  in 
Bohemia,  and  there  resided  until  thirtj'-five  years 
of  age,  when  he  came  to  America  with  his  family. 
This  was  in  1854.  He  was  a  gunsmith  by  trade 
and  followed  that  occupation  for  a  number  of 
years.  Removing  from  Cook  County  to  Cliester, 
111.,  in  the  year  1860,  he  there  plied  his  tradeuntil 
after  the  death  of  his  wife  in  1868,  when  he  re- 
moved to  a  farm  in  Jackson  County,  where  his 
death  occurred  in  Marcli,  1872. 

In  early  life  the  subject  of  this  sketch  attended 
school  in  Chester,  but  at  the  tender  age  of  eight 
began  earning  his  own  livelihood,  for  his  father 
was  in  very  limited  circumstances.  He  went  to 
live  with  a  farmer  near  Rockwood,  111.,  and  was 
employed  as  a  farm  hand  until  sixteen  years  of 
age,  receiving  for  his  services  his  board  and  clothes. 
At  that  time  he  was  given  $10  per  month,  and  in- 
stead of  attending  the  social  gatherings  whicii  are 
usually  the  resort  of  young  people,  he  borrowed 
books  and  spent  his  leisure  hours  in  study.  On 
the  expiration  of  three  years  he  had  saved  about 
$500.  His  idea  was  to  make  a  physician  of  liira- 
self,  and  when  he  had  accumulated  |!l,000  to  enter 
the  University  at  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,  and  complete 
a  course  of  study  in  that  school.  About  this  time, 
however,  he  was  greatly  surprised  to  receive  an 
offer  from  J.  M.  Malone  to  enter  his  drug  store  in 
Steeleville,  111.,  as  a  clerk.  Mr.  Moulic  concluded 
to  accept  the  offer,  and  spent  two  3'ears  in  learning 
the  drug  business,  on  the  expiration  of  which  period 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD 


465 


he  bought  out  the  drug  store,  which  he  is  still  carrj-- 
ing  on  in  Perc}-. 

In  1890,  Mr.  Moulic  was  married  to  Emma  Begge- 
raan.  a  daughter  of  Fritz  and  Mary  (Jay)  Begge- 
nian.  By  their  marriage  has  been  born  one  son, 
William  Edison.  The  parents  are  members  of  the 
Methodist  Church,  in  which  our  subject  has  served 
as  Steward,  and  in  church  and  benevolent  work 
they  take  an  active  part,  doing  all  in  their  power 
to  promote  the  best  interests  of  the  community. 

Socially,  Mr.  Moulic  is  connected  with  Chester 
Lodge  No.  57,  I.  O.  O.  F.,  has  filled  all  of  its  chairs 
and  is  now  serving  as  Past  Grand.  In  politics  he 
is  a  stalwart  Republican,  enthusiastic  in  support  of 
the  party's  principles.  He  has  served  as  Trustee  of 
Percy,  and  is  at  present  holding  tlie  oftice  of  Police 
Magistrate.  For  eleven  years  he  has  been  Post- 
master of  the  town,  and  is  now  filling  the  position 
of  Notary  Public  in  a  creditable  and  acceptable 
manner.  He  is  true  to  eveiy  trust,  whether  public 
or  private,  and  has  won  the  confidence  and  high 
regard  of  all  with  whom  business  or  social  relations 
have  brought  him  in  contact.  In  connection  with 
his  drug  stock,  Mr.  Moulic  also  carries  a  line  of 
groceries,  and  is  now  doing  a  good  business  in  both 
lines.  He  has  a  large  trade,  the  result  of  his  fair 
and  honest  dealing  and  courteous  treatment.  He 
may  truly  be  called  a  self-made  man,  for  he  started 
out  in  life  emptj^-handed,  and  by  well  directed 
efforts  has  won  fine  success. 


\I;OHN  Q.  A.  NISBET.  This  name  will  be 
j  recognized  as  that  of  one  of  the  leading 
j^  '  business  men  of  Randolph  County,  who  is 
'J^/'  probably  better  known  than  any  other  man 
within  its  bounds.  He  is  one  of  those  men  whose 
energy  and  talents  allow  of  their  engaging  in  va- 
rious branches  of  business  with  success.  He  is  the 
present  banker  of  Coulterville,  where  he  is  resid- 
ing, and  is  Secretar.y,  Treasurer  and  General  Man- 
ager of  the  Coulterville  Flour  Mills.  He  also  owns 
and  carries  on  the  only  livery  stable  in  the  village, 
and  IS  the  proprietor  of  a  valuable  farm  of  one 
hundred  and  five  acres  located  near  Sparta. 

The  father  of  our  subject,   Robert  Nisbet,  was 


born  in  Tennessee,  April  9,  1809,  and  was  the  son 
of  Samuel  Nisbet,  a  native  of  Ireland,  where  his 
birth  occurred  in  1782.  The  maternal  grandmother 
of  our  subject,  Mrs.  Nanc_\  (Morris)  Nisbet.  was 
married  in  1805,  and  accompanied  her  husband  in 
the  fall  of  that  year  on  his  removal  to  Tennessee, 
where  they  remained  until  1819.  That  year  they 
came  to  Illinois,  where  the  grandfather  entered 
a  tract  of  land  on  .section  9.  township  5,  range  5, 
Randolph  County,  at  a  time  when  neighbors  were 
few  and  far  between.  Here  he  followed  farming 
and  resided  until  his  decease  in  1874.  His  good 
wife,  who  reared  a  family  of  six  children,  preceded 
him  to  the  better  land  by  man}-  years. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  was  born.Ianuary  31, 
1820,  in  Tennessee  and  bore  the  maiden  name  of 
Sarah  Adams.  She  was  married  to  Robert  Nisbet 
after  coming  to  Randolph  County,  and  the3'oung 
couple  located  on  the  farm  on  section  9,  which 
joined  the  estate  of  Samuel  Nisbet.  The_v  had  five 
children  who  grew  to  mature  ^-ears.  Sally,  now 
Mrs.  W.  C.  Craig;  J.  Q.  A.,  of  this  sketch;  Melissa, 
Mrs.  Adams;  F^dward  F".:  and  Carrie,  the  wife  of 
James  Livingston.  The  mother  of  this  family  died 
July  8,  1873. 

The  father  of  our  subject  had  been  twice  mar- 
ried previous  to  his  union  with  Miss  Adams,  and 
by  his  first  union  were  born  two  children,  John 
Watson,  of  Sparta,  and  Hugh  B.  By  his  second 
marriage  he  also  became  the  father  of  two  chil- 
dren, one  who  died  in  infancy  and  a  son.  James. 
The  latter  was  Captain  of  Company  K,  Fifth  Illi- 
nois Cavalry,  during  the  late  war,  and  died  while 
in  the  service.  The  father  of  our  subject,  who 
was  also  a  Union  soldier,  enlisted  at  the  organiza- 
tion of  Company  I,  Forty-ninth  lUnois  Infantry, 
and  was  mustered  into  the  service  September  13, 
1861.  He  entered  the  army  as  a  private,  was  soon 
promoted  to  Sergeant,  and  died  December  23, 1864, 
from  the  effects  of  wounds  received  in  front  of 
Nashville,  Tenn.  His  remains  were  brought  home 
and  lie  buried  in  the  old  Sparta  Cemetery.  AVith 
his  wife  he  was  a  member  of  the  United  Presb\-te- 
rian  Church. 

John  Q.  A.  Nisbet  was  born  Febiuary  18,  1844, 
on  the  old  homestead  on  section  9,  and  grew  to 
manhood  in  this  county,  receiving  his  primary  ed 


466 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


ucation  in  the  district  schools  and  completed  his 
studies  in  the  Sparta  Academy.  He  then  taught 
school,  and  continued  to  reside  upon  the  home  farm 
until  his  marriage  to  Miss  Ida  Emma  De  Muth,  in 
1869.  Mrs.  Nisbet  was  born  in  Ohio.  October  26, 
1849,  and  by  her  union  with  our  subject  bore  him 
two  children,  Harry  and  Kale.  She  departed  this 
life  May  24,  1882. 

The  following  extract  is  taken  from  the  obituary 
notice  of  Mrs.  Ida  Nisbet,  published  in  the  Coul- 
tervillc  paper:  "She  was  born  in  the  quiet  little 
vilhge  of  Onadenhutlen,  Tuscarawas  County, 
Ohio,  and  in  the  cemeter3-  at  that  place  her  mother 
lies  buried,  having  died  when  Ida  was  twelve  years 
old.  After  the  dece.ise  of  her  mother,  Mrs.  Nisbet 
removed  with  her  father  to  Martinsburg,  Ohio,  and 
in  1867  came  to  Illinois.  She  was  a  very  hand- 
some and  finely  educated  lady  and  made  friends 
with  every  one  she  met.  She  died  from  a  very 
severe  attack  of  neuralgia,  after  fourteen  days  of 
intense  suffering." 

Mr.  Nisbet  came  to  Coulterville  in  June,  1870, 
and  launched  out  into  the  mercantile  business,  in 
which  he  continued  for  ten  3-ears.  He  then  pur- 
chased a  half-interest  in  the  coal  mine  in  this 
place,  and  disposing  of  his  share  six  years  later,  he 
soon  afterward  opened  a  banking  establishment, 
which  is  the  only  financial  institution  in  the  vil- 
lage. As  stated  in  the  opening  paragraph,  he  is 
engaged  in  various  enterprises  and  is  manager  of 
the  flouring  mills,  whicli  were  put  in  operation 
November  10,  1890.  They  are  equipped  with  a 
full  roller  system  and  have  a  capacity  for  turning 
out  seventy-five  barrels  of  the  best  flour  daily. 
They  find  a  market  for  their  product  in  St.  Louis, 
Knoxville,  Atlanta,  and  other  points  in  the  south. 
Mr.  Nisbet  is  also  interested  in  real  estate,  and  in 
investing  his  monev  in  this  manner  is  always  sure 
to  reap  a  good  profit. 

December  26.  1883,  our  subject  married  Miss 
Katie,  the  only  daughter  of  Michael  Adami.  Mrs. 
Nisbet  was  born  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  besides  hav- 
ing a  good  collegiate  education,  has  received 
thorough  musical  instruction.  She  has  become  the 
mother  of  one  child,  a  daughter,  Krma.  Our  sub- 
ject is  a  member  of  the  United  Presbyterian 
Church.     In    politics  he  has  been  a  life-long  Re- 


publican. He  has  served  as  Treasurer  of  his  town- 
ship for  many  years,  has  been  President  of  the 
village  for  two  terms,  and  served  on  the  Board  of 
Aldermen  for  a  long  time.  He  is  interested  in 
school  affairs  and  has  given  entire  satisfaction  as  a 
Director. 

■ ^#P • 

H.  BOST  is  a  farmer  and  stock-raiser  of 
@/4l;  Vergennes Township, and  although  3'oung 
Is  in  years,  he  is  numbered  among  llie  most 
substantial  and  prosperous  agriculturists 
of  Jackson  Count3'.  He  is  descended  from  one  of 
the  oldest  and  most  highly  respected  families  of 
this  community,  his  father  being  AV.  A.  Bost.  who 
removed  to  southern  Illinois  in  1853,  and  first  lo- 
cated on  Nine  Mile  Prairie,  in  Perr\-  Count3',  where 
he  purchased  a  farm.  Subsequently",  he  erected 
and  carried  on  a  flouring  mill  in  De  Soto.  He  was 
twice  married,  his  first  wife  dying  two  years  after 
their  marriage.  His  second  wife  bore  the  maiden 
name  of  Arranda  Crews. 

A.  H.  Bost  was  born  in  De  Soto  July  26,  1868. 
Under  the  parental  roof  he  was  reared  to  manhood, 
and  in  the  public  schools  acquired  his  education. 
No  event  of  special  importance  occurred  during 
his  boyhood.  After  he  had  attained  bis  majority, 
he  was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Lizzie 
Schroder,  daughter  of  J.  M.  Schroder,  a  resident 
of  Murphysboro.  By  their  union  has  been  born 
one  child,  a  daughter,  Edith. 

Mr.  Bost  is  the  owner  of  a  fine  farm,  comprising 
one  hundred  and  thirt3'-»ix  acres  of  valuable  land, 
on  which  abundant  crops  are  growing.  He  is  also 
extensively  engaged  in  stock-raising,  in  fact  it  is 
the  main  part  of  his  business.  He  makes  a  spe- 
cialty of  breeding  Hainbletonian  horses,  which  have 
a  fine  pedigree  and  make  good  records.  He  has 
some  fine  Hamblelonian  stallions  at  his  stables  in 
Vergennes.  He  also  raises  thorough-bred  Poland- 
Cliina  hogs,  and  makes  extensive  shipments  of 
them  to  markets  far  and  near.  Upon  his  farm  he 
now  has  a  boarding  stable  for  fine  horses.  Mr. 
Bost  thoroughly  understands  his  business,  and  al- 
though 3'et  a  young  man,  he  has  met  with  excel- 
lent success  in  life,  for  he  is  industrious  and  enter- 
prising and   makes  the   most  of  his  opportunities. 


RESIDENCE   OF  W.  J  .  WALKER,  5  EC.  25. ,T.  6.  R..  2.,  PERRY    CO.,  ILL. 


RESIDENCE    OF   A.H.   B  05T  ,  5  EC    :..j  ,  vERGEI'i  N  l5   i  ^•■,  JmCK^ON  CO  ,  i  LL 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


469 


He  has  a  wide  circle  of  friends  and  acqaintances 
in  this  community,  where  he  has  alwa3'S  lived,  and 
his  excellencies  of  character  are  recognized  by  his 
fellow-townsmen.  The  best  interests  of  the  com- 
munity find  in  him  a  friend,  and  he  is  a  valued 
citizen. 


^ 


^ 


w 


?*[ — + — r 


lylLLIAM  J.  WALKKR.a  well  known  farmer 
residing  on  section  25,  township  6,  range 
2,  of  Perry  County,  was  born  in  this  com- 
munity, August  24,  1831.  His  father,  Jeremiah 
Walker,  was  one  of  the  first  settlers  of  Peny 
County.  He  was  born  in  Wavne  County,  Ky., 
and  there  married  Martha  Thompson,  daughter  of 
James  Thompson.  In  his  native  stale  he  fol- 
•lowed  farming.  In  company  with  his  father-in- 
law,  George  Martin,  John  Hansford  and  .Samuel 
Brannon,  he  came  to  Perry  County,  and  spent  the 
first  winter  in  Pinckne3'Ville.  In  the  spring  he  lo- 
cated a  claim  of  fort^'  acres  of  Government  land, 
and  afterward  entered  other  tracts,  until  he  had 
three  hundred  and  twenty  acres  on  Four  Mile 
Prairie.  There  he  developed  a  line  farm,  upon 
which  he  made  his  home  until  his  death.  He  was 
a  member  of  the  Missionary  Baptist  Church,  and 
was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the  first  church  ever 
built  on  Four  Mile  Prairie.  He  was  also  one  of 
the  honored  pioneers  of  the  community,  and  took 
a  prominent  part  in  public  affairs.  In  the  family 
were  ten  children,  eight  of  whom  grew  to  mature 
years,  while  four  are  3-et  living:  Mrs.  Martha  Jane 
Walker,  of  Piatt  Station;  Cassandra,  widow  of 
Frank  Hester,  and  a  resident  of  Perry  County;  and 
Simeon,  who  lives  at  Piatt  Station. 

Upon  the  old  homestead  William  J.  Walker  was 
reared,  and  the  subscription  schools  of  the  early 
daj-s  afforded  him  his  educational  privileges.  With 
the  exception  of  one  summer  si)ent  in  Minnesota, 
in  the'employ  of  the  Indian  department,  he  has 
always  lived  within  six  miles  of  the  old  place.  He 
married  Xove'iiber  7,  1857,  Miss  Keziah,  daughter 
of  Joseph  A.  Taylor,  a  native  of  Tennessee,  who 
came  with  his  parents  to  Illinois  when  six  months 
old.     The  family-  settled   in  Kaskaskia,  afterward 


went  to  Mississippi,  but  Mrs.  Walker's  father  re- 
turned to  Illinois,  and  locating  in  Jackson  County, 
married  Edith  Pyle-  He  afterward  removed  to  a 
farm  a  short  distance  from  the  Walker  homestead, 
where  he  entered  land.  Subsequently  he  returned  to 
Mississippi  and  purchased  the  home  of  his  parents. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Taylor  had  twelve  children,  of  whom 
ten  grew  to  adult  age,  but  only  six  are  now  living: 
Sarah,  widow  of  Patrick  Vancil;  Rebecca  Jane, 
wife  of  William  Davis,  of  Jackson  Count3-;  Mrs. 
Walker;  Electa,  widow  of  John  Byers;  Pha-be, 
wife  of  Lyman  P^ie;  and  Giles,  who  lives  in  Law- 
rence County,  Mo. 

In  1864  Mr.  Walker  was  called  upon  to  mourn  the 
loss  of  his  wife,  who  died  on  the  2d  of  May.  They 
had  three  children,  two  of  whom  are  jet  living: 
Naomi,  wife  of  R.  G.  Rees,  a  farmer  and  stock-raiser 
of  Idaho;  and  Joseph  T.,  at  home.  John  W.  died  at 
the  age  of  eight  months.  Mr.  Walker  was  married 
August  15,  1864,  to  Elizabeth  Taylor,  sister  of  his 
first  wife,  and  to  them  were  born  nine  children,  of 
whom  seven  are  yet  living:  Peter  H.,a  resident  of 
Du  Quoin;  Mary  L.,  at  home;  Solomon  T.;  Will- 
iam N.,  who  is  living  in  Newton  Count}-,  Mo.; 
Hiram  A.,  a  student  in  Union  College;  Roscoe  C. 
and  Blanche  E.  Martha  died  at  the  age  of  eigh- 
teen months,  and  another  child  died  in  infancy'. 

Mr.  Walker  is  the  owner  of  a  fine  farm  of  four 
hundred  and  fifteen  acres,  and  at  one  time  owned 
six  hundred  acres,  but  has  given  some  to  his  sons. 
The  land  is  highly  cultivated  with  the  exception 
of  forty  acres  of  timber,  and  the  improvements 
upon  it  are  in  keeping  with  those  of  a  model  farm. 
His  present  residence  was  erected  in  1890.  His 
farm  work  was  interrupted  on  the  15th  of  August, 
1861,  when  he  enlisted  in  Company  A, Thirty-first 
Illinois  Infantry-,  on  President  Lincoln's  call  for 
three  hundred  thousand  volunteers.  He  became 
Corporal  of  the  company,  but  was  discharged  De- 
cember 27,  1861,  for  he  lost  an  arm  at  the  battle 
of  Belmont  on  the  7th  of  November.  In  politics 
he  is  a  stalwart  Republican,  and  has  held  the  offices 
of  Count}'  Commissioner  and  other  official  posi- 
tions. He  is  a  member  of  the  Missionary  Baptist 
Church,  as  is  his  wife.  Socially,  he  belongs  to 
Brookings  Post  No.  106,  of  Du  Quoin,  and  has 
been  its  Vice-Commander.     He  is  a  man  of  sterling 


470 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


worth,  a  valued  citizen  of  the  community,  and  has 
the  high  regard  of  all  with  whom  he  has  been 
brought  in  contact. 


^^ 


-r^^-r 


%oJlf     ful   agncultui 
\l//^l     have  contribu 


ILI.IAM  J.  CRAIG.  Among  the  suceess- 
rists  and  stock-raisers  who 
ted  materialiv  to  the  culti- 
vation and  development  of  township  7,  range  6, 
Randolph  County,  we  may  well  mention  the  name 
of  William  .J.  Craig,  for  no  one  is  better  known  for 
industrj'  and  devotion  to  duty,  as  well  as  for  tlie 
intelligent  management  of  affairs,  than  he. 

A  native  of  Glasgow,  Scotland,  our  subject  w.as 
born  July  9,  1838,  his  parents  being  John  and 
Sarah  Craig.  The  father  was  also  a  native  of  Scot- 
land, and  lived  there  until  1840,  when  he  emi- 
grated to  America  with  bis  family  and  settled  on 
a  farm  in  Randolph  County,  the  same  on  which 
our  subject  yet  resides.  The  country  at  that  time 
was  one  vast  wilderness,  and  the  family  endured 
the  hardships  and  privations  of  pioneer  life.  Tlie 
father  died  of  cholera  in  1849,  just  after  his  re- 
turn from  a  visit  to  his  mother  in  Scotland.  The 
mother  of  our  subject  bore  her  husband  twelve 
children,  of  whom  William  J.  is  the  3'oungest, 
and  all  are  deceased  with  the  exception  of  him- 
self, his  sister  Sarah,  who  married  Arthur  Mc- 
Kenn\-,  and  lives  in  Chester;  Eliza,  who  is  the 
wife  of  Andrew  Douglas  and  makes  her  home  in 
this  count}';  Jane,  the  wife  of  William  McAdam, 
of  Chester;  and  Mary,  who  married  John  Fleming, 
of  this  county. 

Our  subject  attended  the  common  district  schools 
in  his  youth  and  aided  his  father  in  his  farm 
work,  gaining  a  good  insight  into  the  duties  of 
agriculture.  When  he  was  three  years  old  his 
mother  died,  and  his  father  died  eight  years 
later,  throwing  him  on  the  care  of  his  brothers 
and  sisters,  but  when  fifteen  years  old  he  hired 
out  as  a  farm  hand.  At  this  he  continued  until 
reaching  his  majority,  when  he  took  charge  of  the 
old  homestead  and  conducted  agriculture  jjros- 
perously  until  1864.  At  this  date  he  was  enlisted 
in  Company  I,  Tenth  Illinois  Infantry,  in  defense 
of  the  Union  cause,  and  was  mustered  in  at  Quiucy, 


111.,  under  Colonel  Morgan.  His  first  engagement 
was  at  Kenesaw  Mountain,  and  he  afterward  partic- 
ipated in  many  of  the  important  struggles  of  the 
war.  He  was  in  active  service  with  the  excep- 
tion of  two  months,  when  he  lay  in  the  hospital 
at  New  Albany,  Ind.,  until  July,  1865.  the  date  of 
his  honorable  discharge  at  Chicago,  111. 

On  his  return  from  the  war,  'Mv.  Craig  again 
took  up  farming  as  his  life  work,  and  since  that 
time  has  given  his  entire  attention  to  his  chosen 
occupation.  On  this  estate  is  to  be  found  some 
(Ine  blooded  stock.  Neat  and  substantial  build- 
ings have  been  erected,  and  his  residence  is  one 
of  convenience  and  comfort.  The  farm,  taken 
as  a  whole,  is  one  of  the  finest  and  most  attrac- 
tive in  southern  Illinois.  From  time  to  time  Mr. 
Craig  has  added  land  to  the  original  .acreage  until 
three  hundred  and  seventy-five  acres  are  com- 
prised in  this  splendid  estate. 

August  22,  1866,  Mr.  Craig  and  Miss  Louisa, 
daughter  of  John  and  Louisa  (Cale)  Snyder,  were 
united  in  marriage.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Snj'der  emi- 
grated from  Germantown,  Pa.,  to  St.  Louis  in 
1849,  and  there  the  mother  died.  Mrs.  Craig  is 
the  youngest  of  ten  children,  and  all  her  brothers 
and  sisters  are  deceased  except  Kate,  the  wife  of 
O.  L.  Burdick.  who  lives  in  Florida;  Rebecca,  the 
wife  of  John  Foj'e.  of  Boston,  Mass.;  and  William. 
a  resident  of  Pittsburg,  Pa. 

To  our  subject  and  his  estimable  wife  thirteen 
children  were  born,  six  of  whom  died  in  infancy. 
Those  living  are,  Albert  E..  William  C,  Cora 
Ma^-.  Maggie  Belle,  .Sarah  Louisa,  Nellie  McKenzie, 
and  Gilmer  John,  all  of  whom  are  yet  with  their 
parents.  The  parents  of  this  large  family  are  de- 
voted members  of  the  Presbyterian  Church.  Mr. 
Craig  always  casts  his  vote  with  the  Republican 
party,  but  ha.s  never  been  desirous  of  public  office, 
being  content  to  do  his  duty  as  a  loyal  citizen  at 
the  polls.  In  1871  Mr.  Craig  visited  his  birth- 
place in  Scotland. 


.-^<:^-^nOMAS  R.  .STEWART.  Among  the  success- 
ful agriculturist-s  who  have  contributed 
materially  to  the  cultivation  and  develop- 
ment of  township  7,  Randolph  County,  we  m-ay 
well   mention    the   name  just  given,  for  none  are 


PORTRAIT  AND  BlOGtlAPmCAL  RECORD. 


4  71 


better  known  for  industry  and  devotion  to  duty, 
as  well  as  for  tlie  intelligent  management  of  his 
affairs,  than  Thomas  R.  Stewart.  He  has  been  a  resi- 
dent of  this  county  all  his  life, being  born  in  Ches- 
ter Precinct,  April  25,  1841.  The  Stewarts  are  of 
Scotch  descent. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  William  Stewart,  was 
born  in  Hamilton  County,  Ohio,  and  came  to  the 
Prairie  State  when  a  young  man.  He  married  Miss 
Nancy,  daughter  of  Lott  and  Johanna  (Hay)  Doug- 
las, who  were  natives  of  Scotland,  and  their  union 
resulted  in  the  birth  of  five  children,  all  of  whom 
are  deceased  with  the  exception  of  our  subject 
and  his  sister  Jobanna.  The  latter  is  the  wife  of 
Charles  Rupert  and  makes  her  home  in  Chester 
Precinct. 

When  a  lad  of  nine  years,  Thomas  R.,  of  this 
sketch,  was  deprived  of  the  care  of  his  father,  and 
he  continued  to  aid  his  mother  in  carrying  on 
the  home  farm,  thus  supporting  the  family  until 
reaching  his  seventeenth  year.  At  that  time  he 
went  to  work  for  his  uncle,  Adam  Douglas,  who 
lived  in  this  township,  and  while  there  was  per- 
mitted to  attend  school  during  the  winter  season 
for  tliree  years.  When  twenty  years  of  age,  he  was 
very  desirous  of  doing  what  he  could  toward  pre- 
serving the  union  of  the  states  and  enlisted  in  Com- 
pany I,  Tenth  Illinois  Infantry,  and  was  mustered 
into  service  at  Cairo,  under  Col.  James  D.Morgan. 
He  was  engaged  in  many  hard  fought  battles  of 
that  period  and  was  present  at  Shiloh  and  Corinth. 
He  was  with  vSherman  on  his  march  to  the  sea,  and 
when  mustered  out  of  service,  in  Jul}',  1865,  had 
been  promoted  to  be  Sergeant. 

After  the  close  of  hostilities  Mr.  Stewart  returned 
to  his  home  in  this  count}',  and  engaged  to  work 
on  the  farm  of  Isaac  Russ,  by  whom  he  was  em- 
ployed for  three  years.  At  the  end  of  that  time 
he  purchased  property  of  his  own,  and  has  since 
engaged  in  tilling  the  soil,  in  which  he  has  been 
more  tban  ordinarily  successful.  He  has  been  iden- 
tified with  the  advancement  of  his  home  interests 
for  many  years,  and,  widely  known,  is  highly  es- 
teemed for  his  business  ability  and  sterling  integ- 
rity of  character. 

In  May,  1867,  our  subject  was  married  to  Miss 
Debby,  daughter  of  Levi  Moore,  and  of  their  union 


five  children  have  been  born.  Clara,  who  married 
D.  Lorton,  makes  her  home  in  Fayette  County,  this 
state:  William  T.  resides  with  his  parents;  Mayctta 
is  a  type-writer  in  St.  Louis;  Levi  is  at  home,  and 
Eva  is  engaged  in  teaching  school  in  Williamson 
County,  this  state.  Mrs.  Debby  Stewart  died  Sep- 
tember 27,  1876,  and  the  lady  to  whom  our  subject 
was  married  October  23,  1879,  w.as  Miss  Rcky  Zang. 
To  them  have  been  born  seven  children,  of  whom 
Virgil  R.,  Robert  T.,  Aaron  Z.  G.,  Blanchard,  Em- 
mitt  E.  and  Olis  L.  are  living. 

A  prominent  Grand  Army  man, our  subject  is  a 
member  of  Swanwick  Post  No.  212  at  Chester,  and 
until  1892  was  a  strong  Republican  in  politics.  He 
is  now  rather  conservative,  and  henceforth  will 
vote  for  the  best  man  regardless  of  party. 

■jir^ATHER  JAMES  ECKERLE,  one  of  the  rep- 
lU-^';  resentative  and  leading  citizens  of  Madon. 
/1\  ^  naville,  claims  German}' as  the  land  of  his 
birth,  which  occurred  on  the  28th  of  July,  1852. 
His  parents,  Philip  and  Margaret  (Leibrecht) 
fk'kerle,  were  both  natives  of  Germany,  and  by 
their  union  were  born  three  children,  two  of  whom 
are  yet  living,  James  and  Stephen.  The  father  was 
a  farmer  by  occupation,  and  followed  that  pursuit 
in  his  native  land  until  1866,  when  with  his  family 
he  emigrated  to  the  New  World  and  took  up  his 
residence  in  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  where  he  worked  as 
a  farm  hand.  He  afterward  lived  with  our  subject. 
In  politics  he  was  a  supporter  of  the  Democratic 
party.  His  death  occurred  near  New  Design  at 
the  age  of  seventy-one  3'ears.  His  wife  also  died 
near  New  Design  when  sixty-two  years  of  age. 
She  was  a  member  of  the  Catholic  Church. 

Mr.  Eckerle  began  his  education  in  Germany, 
where  he  attended  school  until  fourteen  years  of 
age,  when  with  his  parents  he  came  to  America. 
When  a  youth  of  fifteen,  he  became  a  student  in 
St.  Francis  College,  which  is  located  near  Milwau- 
kee. For  a  period  of  nine  years,  he  pursued  his 
studies  in  that  institution,  and  was  then  graduated 
therefrom,  successfully  passing  the  examinations. 
He  ranked  among  the  best  in  the  class  and  com- 
pleted the  course  with  honor. 

Mr.  Eckerle  was  then  made  a  priest  of  the  Cath- 


4?2 


Portrait  and  BioGRAi'HiCAL  record. 


olic  Church,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty-four  he  was 
called  to  tlie  pastorate  of  the  Catliolic  Church  in 
Centralia,  111.,  where  he  remained  for  five  years. 
On  the  expiration  of  that  period  he  removed  to 
New  Design,  Monroe  County,  becoming  pastor  of 
the  Catholic  Church  of  tliat  place,  where  he  con- 
tinued his  labors  for  eight  years.  His  next  charge 
was  in  Cairo,  111.,  where  he  continued  for  about 
fifteen  months.  It  was  in  the  year  1891  that  lie 
came  to  Madonnaville,  Monroe  County,  where  he 
has  since  remained  in  charge  of  the  church  of  his 
denomination.  He  is  also  pastor  of  the  Harrison- 
ville  Catholic  Ciiurch.  Tlie  church  is  in  a  thriving 
condition,  having  a  membership  of  about  sixty- 
five  families. 

Father  Eckerle  is  a  liiglily  educated  man,  and  in 
the  work  which  he  lias  undertaken  is  meeting  with 
good  success.  He  lias  the  high  regard  of  his  con- 
gregation and  those  under  his  care.  In  politics  lie 
is  a  stalwart  Democrat,  who  warmly  advocates  the 
principles  of  his  partj'  and  does  all  in  his  power  to 
insure  its  success. 


B.  PAUKIXSON,  A.  M.,  who  since  1874 
)j]  has  occupied  tlie  chair  of  physics  and 
chemistry  in  the  Southern  Illinois  St-ite 
Normal  University  of  Carbondale,  has  the 
honor  of  being  a  native  of  this  state.  He  was 
born  iu  Madison  County,  September  6.  1845,  and 
comes  of  a  family- of  English  origin.  His  grand- 
father, Washington  Parkinson,  removed  from 
North  Carolina  to  Tennessee,  wlieie  Alfred  J.  Park- 
inson, father  of  our  subject,  was  born  in  1816.  In 
St.  Clair  County,  III.,  he  wedded  Mary  E.  Baldwin, 
who  was  born  in  Delaware  County,  N.  Y.,  in  1818, 
and  was  a  daughter  of  Ezra  Baldwin,  a  native  of 
Connecticut,  who  in  early  life  emigrated  to  the 
Empire  State.  Upon  their  marriage,  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Parkinson  loc:ited  near  Highland,  Madison  Coun- 
tv,  III.,  and  the  famih'  lived  in  the  same  home  for 
forty  years  before  the  family  circle  was  invaded 
bv  death.  The  mother  passed  awa}-  iu  Januaiy, 
1891,  but  the  father  is  still  living  on  the  old  home- 
stead. They  had  nine  children,  of  whom  the  fol- 
lowing 3'et  survive:    George  W.,  who   lives   upou 


the  old  home;  D.  B.;  Rev.  Edward  H.,  a  minister 
of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church;  Charles  \V.,  of 
Vandalia,  III.;  Oscar  L.,  of  Ottawa.  Kan.;  Arthur 
E.,  an  attorney  of  Kansas  City,  Mo.;  and  Mary  Em- 
ma, wife  of  Dr.  J.  W.  McKee,  of  Kansas  Cily,  .Mo. 
The  parents  were  members  of  the  Methodist  Epis- 
copal Church.  The  father  and  one  other  gentle- 
man cast  the  onl^'  two  votes  for  .John  C.  Fremont 
in  1856  in  their  precinct.  Thus  early  he  joined 
the  Republican  party,  but  he  is  now  a  Prohibition- 
ist. He  served  as  State  Senator  from  1878  uutil 
1882,  and  takes  an  active  interest  in  everything 
that  pertains  to  the  welfare  of  the  community. 

Upon  the  old  home  farm.  Professor  Parkinson 
spent  the  days  of  his  boyhood  and  \-outli,  and 
completed  his  education  by  his  graduation  from 
McKendree  College,  in  the  Class  of  '68.  He  was 
then  for  one  j'ear  Principal  of  the  Carini  (HI.) 
schools,  and  for  three  j'eai's  was  a  teacher  of  natu- 
ral sciences  in  Jennings  Seminary  of  Aurora,  111. 
Later  he  spent  one  year  as  a  special  student  in  the 
Northwestern  Univeisit3'  of  Evanston,  and  in  the 
spring  of  1874  was  elected  to  the  chair  of  physics 
and  chemistr}',  which  position  he  has  since  filled 
with  credit  to  himself  and  to  the  satisfaction  of 
all.  For  nineteen  years,  he  has  been  Secretary  of 
the  faculty.  He  not  only  cultivates  the  brains  of 
his  students,  but  also  provides  for  their  social  en- 
tertainment by  frequent  receptions  at  his  own 
home.  In  1892,  he  was  elected  Registrar.  He  is 
a  member  of  the  National  Education  Association, 
and  at  its  session  in  1888,  in  San  Francisco,  he 
read  a  paper  on  '-The  Use  of  Classic  Literature  in 
Teaching  Reading." 

Professor  Parkinson  was  married  December  28, 
1876,  to  Miss  .Julia  F.  Mason,  an  associate  teacher. 
She  was  a  native  of  Ogle  County,  111.,  and  a  daughter 
of  Allen  Mason,  deceased.  She  died  August  6,  1879, 
leaving  one  son,  Daniel  M.  On  July  30,  1884.  Mr. 
Parkinson  was  again  married,  his  second  union  be- 
ing with  Miss  Mary  Alice  Raj-mond,  also  an  asso- 
ciate teacher,  born  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.  She  was 
born  July  26,  1856,  and  is  a  daughter  Charles  Fisk 
and  Jennie  F.  Raymond.  They  have  two  children. 
Raymond  and  Marj'  Alice.  Boih  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Parkinson  are  prominent  members  of  and  active 
workers  in  the   Methodist   Episcopal   Church,  and 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


473 


he  is  now  serving;  on  the  Official  Board.  They  are 
prominent  in  Sundaj-sehool  work,  and  Professor 
Parkinson  is  actively  interested  in  the  Young 
IM^n's  Christian  Association.  He  is  a  member  of 
its  State  Committee,  and  was  a  delegate  of  the 
ctmvention  of  United  States  and  Canada  held  by 
tiiat  organization  in  Toronto  in  1876.  He  was 
also  a  delegate  to  the  World's  Sunday-scliool  Con- 
vention wliich  convened  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  1893. 
As  an  educator,  he  is  extremel3'  successful,  and 
pupils  and  associate  teachers  ever  hold  liira  in  the 
highest  regard. 


^1  AMES  C.  SPENCE  is  a  dealer  in  agricultural 
implements  of  Carbondale.  He  has  by  fair 
and  honest  dealing,  and  courteous  treat- 
ment of  his  customers,  secured  a  liberal 
patronage.  While  his  well  directed  efforts,  his 
industry  and  enterprise  have  gained  for  him  a 
comfortable  competence. 

Mr.  Spence  lias  the  honor  of  being  a  native  of 
Jackson  County,  his  birth  having  occurred  in  Ma- 
kanda  Township,  Maj'  .5,  1853.  A  sketch  of  his 
father,  William  Spence,  appears  on  another  page 
of  this  work.  In  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads, 
our  subject  spent  the  days  of  his  boyhood  and 
youth.  He  was  educated  in  the  district  schools  of 
the  county,  to  which  he  had  to  walk  a  distance  of 
two  and  a-half  miles  each  d.a}'.  He  began  business 
for  himself  at  the  age  of  nineteen  years,  operating 
a  farm  in  his  native  township.  He  was  thus  em- 
ploj'ed  for  two  3'ears,  when  he  returned  home  and 
engaged  in  the  operation  of  the  home  farm  for  a 
period  of  seven  years.  His  next  home  was  on  sec- 
tion 6,  Makanda  Townsliip,  where  he  carried  on 
agricultural  pursuits  until  1889,  when  he  deter- 
mined to  engage  in  commercial  business  and  came 
to  Carbondale. 

Here  Mr.  Spence  formed  a  partnership  with 
Henry  Crawshaw,  and  they  began  business  as  deal- 
ers in  farm  implements,  opening  a  store  on  the 
south  side  of  the  square.  Their  trade  has  con- 
stantly increased  until  it  has  now  assumed  exten- 
sive proportions.  In  connection  with  farm  ma- 
chinery, they  handle  grass  seed,  hay,  lime,  cement, 


etc.,  and  deal  to  some  extent  in  live  stock.  They 
are  now  assignees  for  a  harness  store  which  is  be- 
ing closed  out.  ISIr.  Spence  was  also  interested  in 
the  Carbondale  Real  Estate  and  Loan  Company. 
He  helped  to  organize  the  same,  and  served  as  its 
Treasurer  for  a  time. 

In  1878,  Mr.  Spence  was  united  in  mairiage  with 
Harriet  M.  Winchester,  daughter  of  the  Rev.  Rus- 
sell and  Mary  (Fowler)  Wincliester,  of  North  Caro- 
lina. Her  father  was  a  minister  of  the  Baptist 
Church.  Mrs.  Spence  is  a  native  of  North  Caro- 
lina, and  a  prominent  member  of  and  an  active 
worker  in  the  Methodist  Church.  To  our  subject 
and  his  wife  were  born  six  children,  of  whom  five 
are  yet  living:  Viola,  Bertha,  Gracie,  Mamie  and 
Edith.  The  eldest  daughter,  though  only  thirteen 
years  of  age,  holds  a  second-grade  certificate. 

Mr.  Spence  is  a  member  of  the  Masonic  frater- 
nity, and  has  served  as  Senior  Deacon.  He  also 
aided  in  the  organization  of  the  Farmers'  Club. 
The  cause  of  education  finds  in  him  a  warm  friend 
and  he  has  served  as  a  member  of  the  School  Board. 
He  exercises  his  right  of  franchise  in  support  of 
the  Democratic  part3',  takes  an  active  interest  in 
all  that  pertains  to  the  growth  of  Democracj',  and 
has  frequently  served  as  a  delegate  to  the  conven- 
tions of  his  party. 


^j^EORGE  W.  PARROTT  is  a  representative 
III  J-—  farmer  of  Monroe  County,  residing  on  sec- 
^^^Jiji  tion  12,  township  4,  range  9  west.  He 
owns  and  operates  four  hundred  and  twenty  .acres 
of  land,  of  which  three  hundred  are  on  section  12, 
eighty  acres  on  section  14,  and  twent3'  acres  on 
section  13,  of  the  same  township.  He  devotes  his 
time  principally  to  the  raising  of  grain,  and  has  a 
neat  and  thrifty  farm  supplied  with  all  the  mod- 
ern accessories  and  conveniences. 

The  owner  of  this  desirable  place  was  born  in  De- 
partment Du  Dou,  France,  on  the  11th  of  October, 
1818,  and  at  the  age  of  nine  came  to  America  with 
his  parents,  who  located  in  Stark  Count}-,  Ohio, 
where  he  grew  to  manhood.  His  education  was 
acquired  in  tlie  district  schools  of  the  neigbor- 
hood  and  in  the  school  of  experience.     He  is  now  a 


474 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL    RECORD. 


well  informed  man,  and  speaks  English,  French 
and  German.  On  the  18lh  of  April,  1840,  he  came 
lo  Randolph  County  and  settled  upon  a  farm 
which  his  brother  had  entered  from  the  Govern- 
ment in  1838.  He  made  it  his  home  for  three 
3'ears.  Since  that  time  he  has  bought  and  sold  a 
number  of  places,  until  he  at  length  took  up  his 
residence  upon  his  present  farm,  one  and  one- 
fourth  miles  from  liis  first  home. 

In  April,  1856,  Mr.  Parrott  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Virginia  Vallat,  and  then  made 
his  home  upon  the  farm  which  he  now  owns  and 
operates.  His  wife  died  December  4,  1891,  and 
five  of  their  family  of  eight  children  are  living. 
Louis,  the  eldest,  born  August  3,  1857,  died  Sep- 
tember 23,  1858;  Monroe,  born  in  1859,  is  still  liv- 
ing in  this  locality;  Rosanna,  born  May  25,  1861, 
married  Barney  Dunn,  who  was  engaged  in  the 
livery  business,  but  their  happiness  was  suddenly 
terminated  by  her  death  August  25,  1884;  Ran- 
dol|>h,  born  October  28,  1863,  married  Miss  Alice 
Murphy,  daughter  of  a  highl3'  respected  farmer  of 
the  neighborhood,  and  is  engaged  in  farming  in 
his  locality;  George,  Jr.,  born  February  18,  1866, 
married  Miss  Barbara  Goettlemann,  the  daughter 
of  a  neighboring  farmer,  and  they  occup}-  a  farm 
in  this  vicinity;  Nora  V.  was  born  July  16,  1868, 
and  died  Julj-  29,  1870;  Mary,  born  January  27, 
1871,  is  the  wife  of  John  Rapp,  who  is  engaged  in 
teaching  school  in  Red  Bud;  A.  Francis,  born  No- 
vember 8,  1876,  is  still  with  his  father. 

Mr.  Parrott  started  out  in  life  for  himself  bj'  sell- 
ing clocks,  traveling  from  house  to  house  on  foot 
carrying  his  goods.  He  got  a  start  in  this  waj-,  for 
he  was  industrious  and  frugal,  and  in  course  of  time 
he  had  acquired  a  sufficient  capital  to  enter  a  con- 
siderable amount  of  land  from  the  Government. 
Through  his  dealings  in  real  estate  he  has  ac- 
quired a  handsome  competency-.  He  may  truly  be 
called  a  self-made  man,  and  his  example  should 
serve  to  encourage  others  who,  like  himself,  have 
to  start  out  in  life  em[)ty-handed. 

In  connection  with  the  ancestral  history  of  our 
subject,  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  his  mother's 
maiden  name  was  Eagle,  and  thus  b}'  the  union  of 
the  Parrott  and  Eagle  an  alliance  was  formed 
which  lasted  over  a  half-centurj-,  the  father  living 


to  be  eight^'-two  years  old,  and  the  mother  attain- 
ing ninety-three  years. 

In  his  political  views  Mr.  Parrott  is  a  Democrat, 
but  h.is  never  been  an  office-seeker,  as  he  prefers 
to  give  his  time  and  attention  to  his  business  in- 
terests. He  is  a  Protestant,  but  his  wife  and  fam- 
ily are  members  of  the  Catholic  Church.  Few  set- 
tlers in  this  community  have  so  long  resided  here 
as  Mr.  Parrott,  for  almost  fifty-four  \-ears  have 
passed  since  his  arrival.  He  has  ever  borne  his 
part  in  the  advancement  and  upbuilding  of  the 
community,  and  his  name  is  inseparably  connected 
with  its  historv. 


H^= 


--^ 


^S^ELSON  C.  MANSKER.  An  honorable  po- 
ll jjj  sition  among  the  agriculturists  of  township 
)l\.ij.  8,  range  6,  Randolph  Count}-,  is  held  by 
the  gentleman  above  named,  who  is  the  fortunate 
possessor  of  a  fine  tract  of  land.  The  well  tilled 
farm  is  devoted  to  raising  mixed  crops  and  the 
ordinary  amount  of  stock,  both  grain  and  animals 
being  of  good  quality.  A  homelike  dwelling  and 
various  outbuildings  indicate  to  the  passer-by  that 
the  land  is  occupied  by  a  family  of  enterprise  and 
good  judgment. 

Our  subject  is  a  son  of  Samuel  and  Nancj-  (Nel- 
son) Mansker,  whose  life  history  will  be  found 
elsewhere  in  this  volume.  He  was  born  on  sec- 
tion 2  of  this  township,  November  3,  1858,  and 
was  reared  on  the  home  farm  receiving  a  good 
education  in  the  Clifton  district  schools.  When 
starting  out  for  himself  in  life  at  the  age  of  twen- 
ty-one years,  he  began  by  working  a  tract  of  one 
hundred  and  fortj'-six  acres  of  his  father's  land. 
He  worked  hard,  and  gradually  accumulated  the 
means  with  which  to  purchase  his  present  fine 
estate.  The  family  residence  is  located  on  a  tract 
comprising  one  hundred  and  seventy-seven  acres 
among  the  hills,  while  another  piece  of  one  hun- 
dred and  twenty  acres  on  the  river  bottom  is 
owned  and  cultivated  by  him.  His  attention  is 
principally  given  to  the  raising  of  wheat,  and  a 
goodl}'  amount  of  corn  is  also  raised  each  year. 

The  marriage  of  Mr.  Mansker  and  Miss  Emma 
Moore  was  solemnized  September  20,  1880,  at  the 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


475 


honie  of  the  bride's  parents.  Mrs.  Mansker  is  a 
daugliter  of  Owen  and  Eliza  (Sievert)  Moore,  na- 
tives of  Illinois  and  Indiana,  respectively.  The 
father  was  a  son  of  Robert  and  Lavisa  (Miller) 
Moore,  probably  natives  of  North  Carolina,  while 
the  mother  was  the  daughter  of  William  and 
Barbara  (Tinney)  .Sievert,  natives  of  Pennsyl- 
vania. 

To  our  subject  and  his  estimable  wife  seven 
children  were  born,  as  follows:  Alonzo  E.,  born 
July  9,  1881,  and  died  October  3,  1881;  Cora  B., 
born  September  17,  1882;  Murray,  May  25,  1884; 
Charles  E.,  November  9,  1886;  Elva  R.,  October 
22,  1888;  Una,  born  October  2,  1890,  and  died 
November  3,  1891;  and  Claudie  A.,  born  October 
12,  1892. 

Mr.  Mansker  is  an  ardent  Democrat  in  his  po- 
litical views,  and  upholds  the  principles  of  that 
party  on  ever^-  occasion.  He  has  never  been  an 
aspirant  to  office,  preferring  the  quietude  of  do- 
mestic life. 

■ ^^^^P • 


,,.y  LBERT  L.  WILSON,  the  popular  and  effi- 
l(^^J]i  cient  cashier  of  the  Merchants'  Exchange 
Bank  of  Sparta,  was  born  in  this  place  in 
1855,  and  is  the  second  in  order  of  birth 
in  a  family'  of  seven  children,  whose  parents  were 
Andrew  and  Mary  J.  (Hill)  Wilson.  The  Wilson 
family  is  of  Scotch-Irish  descent.  The  grandpar- 
ents, George  and  Susanna  (Anderson)  Wilson, 
were  both  natives  of  South  Carolina,  and  in  1804 
emigrated  to  Illinois,  settling  near  Baldwin.  The 
former  served  in  the  Black  Hawk  War.  He  was  a 
very  prominent  man  and  a  prosperous  farmer. 

Andrew  Wilson  was  born  January  17,  1823,  in 
a  fort  in  Randolph  County,  which  was  erected  for 
protection  against  the  redmen.  He  remained  on 
his  father's  farm  until  he  had  attained  his  major- 
ity, when  lie  began  dealing  in  wood  in  Rockwood, 
111.,  supplying  steamboats  with  that  fuel.  In  1850 
he  went  to  California,  where  he  engaged  in  min- 
ing about  three  years.  He  then  returned  to  Sparta 
and  carried  on  merchandising  until  the  breaking 
out  of  the  late  war,  when  he  was  elected  Captain 
of  Company  G,  Eightieth  Illinois  Infantry.  He 
was  captured  at  Rome,  Ga.,  and  was  an  inmate  of 


southern  prisons  for  twenty-two  months,  being 
confined  in  Libb}'  for  one  year.  When  the  war 
was  over,  he  returned  to  Sparta,  where  he  engaged 
in  the  clothing  business.  Later  he  became  Post- 
master, and  filled  that  office  until  his  death,  which 
occurred  Ma^'  12,  1881.  In  early  life  he  was  a 
Democrat,  but  afterward  became  a  stanch  Repub- 
lican. He  belonged  to  Hope  Lodge  No.  162,  A.  F. 
&  A.  M.,  and  was  an  active  member  of  the  First 
Presbyterian  Church  of  Sparta.  An  honorable,  up- 
right life  won  him  high  regard  and  made  his  death 
deeply  mourned.  His  wife,  who  still  survives 
him,  is  a  native  of  Randolph  County,  and  is  of 
Scotch-Irish  descent.  Her  parents,  Samuel  and 
Elizabeth  Hill,  were  natives  of  South  Carolina, 
and  emigrated  to  Illinois  in    1805. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wilson  were  married  in  1848,  and 
to  them  were  born  seven  children.  Elizabeth  is  the 
wife  of  E.  J.  Murph}-,  of  East  St.  Louis.  The  latter 
was  formerly  a  member  of  the  Illinois  Legislature 
from  Randolph  County,  and  also  held  the  offices 
of  Sheriff  of  the  county  and  Warden  of  the  South- 
ern Illinois  Penitentiary.  He  is  now  engaged  in 
the  coal  and  feed  business  in  East  St.  Louis.  They 
have  two  children,  Alice  and  William.  Our  sub- 
ject, S.  Dora,  of  St.  Louis,  and  M0II3'  F.,  who  died 
at  the  age  of  eight  years,  are  next  in  order  of 
birth.  Anna  M.  is  the  wife  of  J.  A.  Gemmil,  who 
is  Superintendent  of  the  Sparta  Creanieiy,  and 
they  have  become  the  parents  of  three  children: 
Ethel,  Bessie  and  Josephine.  May  is  the  wife  of 
Judge  Henry  T.  Matthews,  an  attorney  of  Santa 
Anna,  Cal.,  and  who  is  also  Major  in  the  State  Mili- 
tia. They  have  one  son,  Ilarr^-.  Ulysses  G.,  an 
insurance  agent,  married  Florence  Staiiim,  of  St. 
Louis,  and  they  have  tvvo  children,  Grant  and 
Lewis. 

Mr.  Wilson  of  this  sketch  was  born  in  Sparta 
in  1855,  and  there  continued  to  make  his  home  un- 
til 1875.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  was  apprenticed 
to  the  printing  business,  which  he  carried  on  in 
this  place  for  two  years,  when  he  became  a  clerk 
in  the  bank  of  S.  P.  Smith,  where  he  remained  for 
the  same  length  of  time,  after  which  he  was  with 
Sproul  &  Brother  for  one  3ear.  lie  then  went  to 
Red  Bud,  where  he  organized  the  bank  of  Ohl- 
wine,  Schrieber  h  Co.,  with  a  capital  stock  of  only 


476 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


$10,000,  but  a  responsibility  of  $200,000.  Our 
subject  was  then  but  twenty  3'ears  of  age,  but  was 
made  Casliier  and  Manager.  Tlie  stock  was  after- 
ward increased  to  $20,000,  and  he  continued  his 
connection  with  the  bank  for  seventeen  years, 
wlien  he  returned  to  Sparta,  and  assumed  the  po- 
sition of  cashier  of  the  Merchants'  Exchange  Bank, 
wliich  was  organized  as  a  stale  bank  at  that   time. 

In  1877,  Mr.  Wilson  married  Miss  Am^'  Steven- 
son, a  native  of  Eden,  III., and  a  daug!iter  of  Capt. 
John  and  Jane  C.  (Wilson)  Stevenson,  natives  of 
Scotland  and  Illinois,  respectively.  The  father 
was  a  Captain  of  a  Missouri  company  during  the 
late  war,  and  now  makes  his  home  in  Salina,  Kan. 
The  mother  passed  away  in  1891.  To  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Wilson  were  born  four  children:  Prentiss  S., 
E.  Jerome,  Evangeline  and  Nellie  Ruth. 

Mr.  Wilson  was  at  the  age  of  fifteen  thrown 
upon  his  own  resources,  and  has  made  his  way  in 
life  unaided.  His  enterprise  and  industry  were 
his  capital  on  which  to  found  a  fortune.  His  well 
directed  efforts  have  brought  him  success,  and  his 
real  estate  in  Illinois,  together  with  his  bank  stock, 
is  worth  at  a  low  estimate  $15,000.  In  politics  he 
is  a  Republican,  and  socially  belongs  to  the  Sons 
of  Veterans.  He  and  his  wife  hold  membership 
with  the  Presbyterian  Church,  in  which  he  is  now 
serving  as  Elder,  and  they  are  numbered  among  its 
leading  workers. 


+-- 


'-■^ 


ll ,  ENRY    W.  HAHN,  who  is    part  owner  and 

fijij  the  manager  of  the  Percy  Flouring  Mills, 
/4U^  of  Perc3',  111.,  is  recognized  as  one  of  the 
[^j  leading  business  men  of  this  place,  and  is 
one  of  the  prominent  and  progressive  citizens,  who 
is  wide  awake  to  the  best  interests  of  the  commu- 
nit}^  in  which  he  makes  his  home.  He  is  numbered 
among  the  native  sons  of  Illinois,  his  birth  having 
occurred  in  Red  Bud,  on  the  7th  of  November, 
1867.  He  is  the  eldest  child  of  John  P.  F.  and 
Catherine  (Kurtz)  Hahn.  His  father  was  a  native 
of  Germany,  and  when  a  young  man  he  came  to 
America.  He  is  a  shoemaker  b}-  trade,  and  in  the 
old  home  followed  that  pursuit.  On  arriving  in 
this  country  he  carried  on  a  shoe  store  in  St,  Louis 


for  a  number  of  years,  but  at  length  his  store  and 
stock  were  destro^yed  bj'  fire,  and  having  no  in- 
surance to  cover  his  losses,  he  did  not  re-engage  in 
business  there.  He  became  connected  with  city 
affairs  in  St.  Louis  and  continued  there  to  make 
his  home  until  1859,  when  he  removed  to  Red 
Bud.  For  ten  3-ears  he  there  carried  on  a  shoe 
store,  after  which  he  returned  to  St.  Louis  and  was 
employed  on  the  police  force  for  some  time. 
Later  he  engaged  in  the  retail  liquor  business  in 
that  city,  and  subsequently  engaged  in  the  same 
trade  for  eight  j-ears  in  Red  Bud.  He  then  again 
resumed  shocmaking,  which  he  still  follows.  He 
has  held  the  offices  of  City  Marshal  and  City 
Treasurer,  and  his  prompt  and  faithful  discharge 
of  public  duty  has  won  him  high  commendation. 
Both  he  and  his  wife  are  still  living  in  the  enjoy- 
ment of  good  health. 

We  now  take  up  the  personal  history  of  our 
subject,  who  is  widel}'  and  favorably  known  to 
the  readers  of  this  volume.  He  acquired  his  edu- 
cation in  Red  Bud,  and  at  the  age  of  fifteen  left 
school,  at  which  he  began  learning  the  milling 
trade,  which  he  followed  in  his  native  town  for  a 
year.  He  then  went  to  St.  Louis,  where  he  was 
employed  in  various  ways  for  four  months,  after 
which  he  entered  the  Eggers  Mills,  of  that  cit>-,  con- 
tinuing with  the  same  for  two  and  a-half  j'ears  as  an 
employe.  On  the  expiration  of  that  period  he  was 
appointed  head  miller  of  the  concern,  which  posi- 
tion he  held  for  three  years  in  an  able  and  satis- 
factory manner.  In  the  year  1888  he  went  to 
Roodhouse,  III.,  and  for  eight  months  had  charge 
of  the  mills  at  that  place,  after  which  he  went  to 
Campbell  Ilill,  where  he  was  in  charge  of  the  mills 
for  three  years.  He  than  began  business  for  him- 
self. A  new  mill  was  built  in  Percy  by  him  and 
his  brother,  and  removing  to  this  place,  Mr.  Hahn 
has  since  conducted  the  Percy  Mills.  They  are 
supplied  with  the  latest  roller  system  and  all  mod- 
ern conveniences  along  that  line. 

On  the  1st  of  July,  1888,  Mr.  Hahn  married 
Maggie  S.Lynden,  daughter  of  Catherine  Lynden, 
of  Ireland.  Two  children  have  been  born  to  them, 
Olivia  and  Lillian,  who  are  still  with  their  parents. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hahn  are  members  of  the  Roman 
Catholic  Church,    In  politics  he  has  followed  in 


rii 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


479 


the  footsteps  of  his  father  and'  is  now  a  stanch 
advocate  of  the  Republican  party.  He  has  never 
sought  office,  however,  as  he  prefers  to  give  his 
entire  time  and  attention  to  liis  business  interests. 
He  has  steadily  worked  his  way  upward  unaided, 
overcoming  the  difficulties  and  obstacles  in  his 
path,  and  is  now  recognized  as  one  of  the  leading 
citizens  of  the  communit3-. 

eAPT.  THOMAS  G.  CHADWICK.  There 
is  always  a  vast  amount  of  interest  felt  in 
the  private  life  of  those  brave  men  who 
gave  up  home,  family  and  friends  to  fight  for 
their  country,  and  there  undergo  all  the  priva- 
tions and  hardships  characteristic  of  the  soldier's 
life.  Our  subject,  who  is  a  prominent  lumber 
merchant  of  Chester,  became  a  member  of  Com- 
pany D,  Sixt^-fourth  Missouri  Militia,  in  1863, 
and  fought  valiantly  for  his  country's  flag  until 
the  close  of  the  war. 

A  native  of  Berkshire  County,  Mass.,  our  sub- 
ject was  born  September  29,  1822,  and  is  the  son 
of  John  and  Candis  (Garfield)  Chadwick,  also  na- 
tives of  the  Bay  State.  The  father  followed  the 
occupation  of  a  merchant  in  his  native  state,  and 
during  the  latter  part  of  his  life  removed  to  Ot- 
sego County',  N.  Y.,  where  he  purchased  a  tract  of 
land.  There  he  resided  until  his  decease,  which 
occurred  in  1840.  He  was  excecdingl3'  popular  in 
his  community,  and  was  a  Whig  in  politics.  The 
mother  of  our  subject  also  died  in  the  Empire 
State,  her  decease  occurring  in  Jefferson  County 
in  1845. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  passed  his  boyhood 
and  youth  on  his  father's  farm,  and  was  given  a 
good  education  in  the  common  school.  On  reach- 
ing his  twentieth  j-ear  he  returned  to  Massachu- 
setts and  engaged  in  the  lumber  business  for  two 
years.  Wishing  to  find  a  more  suitable  location 
in  which  to  carry  on  his  business,  in  1844  he  took 
a  trip  through  the  western  states,  and  later,  retiirn- 
ing  east,  located  in  Lycoming  County,  Pa.,  and 
purchased  a  steam  sawmill,  which  he  operated  for 
three  3'ears.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time  he  re- 
turned to  the  west  and  located  in  Kankakee  Coun- 
15 


ty,  near  Kankakee  City,  where  he  purchased  a  farm 
which  he  cultivated  for  three  years  and  a-half.  He 
then  sold  his  farm  and  moved  to  northern  Iowa, 
where  he  became  the  proprietor  of  a  good  estate, 
and  there  resided  during  the  winter. 

Not  liking  the  climate  of  northern  Iowa,  in 
1854  Mr.  Ciiadwick  went  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where 
he  stayed  with  his  brother,  James  B.  After  being 
with  him  for  some  time,  in  1858  he  removed  to 
Perr}'  Count}',  Mo.,  where  he  purchased  a  tract  of 
land  on  the  Mississippi  bottoms.  This  land  he 
farmed  successfully  until  1866,  the  date  of  his  ad- 
vent in  Ciiester.  He  purchased  land  to  the  amount 
of  two  hundred  and  thirty-five  acres  in  the  Mis- 
sissippi bottoms,  across  the  river  from  Chester,  and 
this  he  still  operates. 

The  lady  whom  Mr.  Chadwick  married,  in  1840, 
was  Miss  Eliza  J.  Pixle^',  a  native  of  Great  Bar- 
rington,  Mass.  B}-  her  union  with  our  subject  she 
has  become  the  mother  of  two  children,  Charles  E. 
and  Georgie  A.,  both  of  whom  remain  with  their 
parents. 


(^ 


.^M\ 


(3= 


'-^^l 


LEXANDER  BICKET,  whose  sketch  now 
claims  attention,  is  one  of  those  agreeable 
(4)  men  whom  it  is  a  pleasure  to  know,  and 
who  in  all  instances  rank  high  in  the  es- 
timation of  the  community  in  which  they  reside. 
He  is  at  present  engaged  in  carrying  on  a  fine 
farm  of  one  hundred  and  fort}'  acres,  which  is 
pleasantly  located  on  section  17,  township  4,  range 
5,  Randoli)li  County. 

Gavin  Bicket,  the  father  of  our  subject,  was 
born  in  1815,  in  A^'rshire,  Scotland,  and  on  com- 
ing to  America,  in  1841,  made  his  way  to  this  coun- 
ty. He  located  upon  what  was  known  as  Hickory 
Grove,  which  place  he  owned  in  company  with 
Hugh  Easdale,  an  old  pioneer  of  this  section,  and 
which  later  formed  the  northern  part  of  the  Eas- 
dale farm.  He  was  a  shrewd,  hard  working  man, 
and  has  aided  greatl}'  in  developing  the  agricult- 
ural resources  of  this  county. 

Mary  Ann  (Anderson)  Bicket,  the  mother  of 
our  subject,  was  born  in  Glasgow,  Scotland,  in 
1822,  and  was  the  daughter  of  John  Anderson, 


480 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


who  came  to  America  in  1843,  becoming  one  of 
the  pioneers  in  township  4,  range  5.  The  par- 
ents of  our  subject  were  married  in  1844,  and  con- 
tinued to  reside  on  the  old  homestead  until  1873, 
when  they  removed  to  Nevada,  Mo.,  where  they 
are  still  living  advanced  in  j-ears.  Of  their  large 
family  of  nine  children,  seven  are  living.  They 
are  both  members  of  the  Presb3-terian  Church,  and 
in  political  matters  the  father  is  a  stanch  Repub- 
lican. 

Alexander  Bicket,  of  this  sketch,  was  born  April 
8,  1845,  on  the  old  home  farm  in  this  county,  and 
resided  under  the  parental  roof  until  reaching  his 
twent3'-fifth  3-ear,  in  the  meantime  having  acquired 
a  good  education  in  the  common  schools.  In  1870, 
when  ready  to  establish  a  home  of  his  own,  he 
was  married  to  Jane  Ann,  the  daughter  of  Will- 
iam Edmislon,  of  whom  a  sketch  appears  on  an- 
other page  in  this  Record.  Mrs.  Bicket  was  born 
June  18,  1852,  and  after  her  marriage  with  our 
subject,  located  with  him  in  Tilden,  this  countj-, 
where  he  erected  the  first  dwelling  in  the  town. 
Nanc}-  Blanch,  their  eldest  daughter,  was  the  first 
child  born  in  Tilden.  In  those  days  a  well  built 
structure  of  the  kind  of  which  he  was  the  owner 
was  looked  upon  as  a  home  of  comfort,  and  un- 
doubtedl}'  afforded  as  pleasant  a  shelter  as  dwell- 
ings of  more  modern  construction.  In  that  house 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bicket  continued  to  reside  until  1884, 
when  they  removed  to  Vernon  County,  Mo.,  and 
carried  on  farming  for  nine  years. 

In  1892  Mr.  Bicket  returned  to  this  county  and 
located  on  his  present  farm  on  section  .17,  where 
he  is  engaged  in  mixed  farming.  He  takes  pride 
in  raising  fine  poultry-,  and  for  the  past  twent}-- 
two  years  he  has  been  a  breeder  of  Buff-Cochin 
and  Rose-Comb  White  Leghorn  chickens.  He  has 
exhibited  his  poultry  at  county  fairs,  and  has 
never  failed  to  carry  off  the  blue  ribbon.  He  has 
had  at  one  time  as  manj'  as  twenty-nine  varieties, 
and  some  of  his  chickens  have  been  valued  at  $15 
apiece. 

To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bicket  were  born  six  children, 
viz.:  Xanc}'  Blanch,  the  wife  of  Roy  Palmer, 
who  makes  her  home  in  Missouri;  Charles,  Mary 
Ann,  William  Gavin,  George  W.  and  Jennie  May, 
who  died  in  infancy.     The   parents  are  actively 


W 


connected  with  the  United  Presbyterian  Church 
at  Prosperit}-,  but  while  residing  in  the  west,  Mr. 
Bicket  was  a  member  of  the  Methodist  Cliurch. 
He  has  at  all  times  been  interested  in  the  Sunday- 
school,  and  for  six  j-ears  was  Superintendent. 

Our  subject  is  a  Republican  in  polities,  and  has 
been  Constable.  The  reliable  manner  in  which  he 
has  ever  performed  the  duties  devolving  upon 
him  has  won  the  esteem  of  all  who  know  him,  and 
his  wife  and  family-  are  accorded  their  due  measure 
of  regard  likewise. 


ILLIAM  THIELEN,  one  of  the  honored 
early  settlers  of  Randolph  Countj-,  and 
W^  one  of  the  highh-  respected  citizens  of  Red 
Bud,  whose  friends  are  manj-  throughout  the  com- 
munit}-,  is  a  native  of  Prussia,  Germany,  born  in 
1825.  The  da\-s  of  his  boj-hood  and  j-outh  were 
passed  in  that  country,  where  he  continued  to  re- 
side until  1852,  when  he  bade  adieu  to  friends  and 
Fatherland  and  sailed  for  America,  accompanied 
bj'  his  sister  and  brother-in-law,  William  Heining. 
Thev  made  their  way  to  St.  Louis,  and  in  1854  our 
subject  came  to  Red  Bud.  He  also  had  another 
sister,  Mrs.  Frohning,  who  came  to  America,  and  a 
brother,  who  never  left  his  native  land. 

Immediatelj-  after  locating  in  Red  Bud,  Mr. 
Thielen  embarked  in  the  butchering  business, 
which  he  has  since  continued,  and  in  the  years 
which  have  passed  he  has  built  up  an  extensive 
trade,  which  now  yields  to  him  a  handsome  in- 
come. As  a  companion  and  helpmeet  on  life's 
joumej',  he  chose  Miss  Caroline  Koenig,  their 
union  being  celebrated  in  Red  Bud.  By  their 
marriage  has  been  born  a  family  of  seven  children, 
five  of  whom  are  j-et  living:  Henry;  Odilda,  wife 
of  Rudolph  Lehnherr,  a  resident  of  Chester,  111.; 
William,  of  this  place;  Theodore,  who  makes  his 
Ijome  in  Chicago;  and  Oscar,  who  completes  the 
number.  The  two  eldest  sons  are  engaged  with 
their  father  in  the  meat-market.  His  sons  are  all 
respected  young  men,  held  in  high  regard  through- 
out the  community-. 

In  his  political  views,  'Mr.  Thielen  is  a  Republi- 
can and  warmly  advocates  the  principles  of  that 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


481 


party,  but  though  he  takes  an  active  interest  in 
everything  pertaining  to  its  growth  and  success, 
he  has  never  souglit  or  desired  public  office,  pre- 
ferring to  devote  liis  entire  time  and  attention  to 
his  business  interests.  He  was  reared  in  the  Cath- 
olic faith,  while  his  wife  is  a  member  of  the  Lu- 
theran Church.  Mr.  Thielen  is  widely  known  in 
Red  Bud  and  throughout  the  vicinit}',  and  is  a 
popular  gentleman,  universally  respected.  Pleas- 
ant and  genial  in  manner,  he  wins  many  friends 
and  always  retains  their  warm  regard.  He  is  lib- 
eral in  the  support  of  every  worthy  enterprise  cal- 
culated to  prove  of  benefit  to  the  public,  and  does 
all  in  his  power  to  promote  the  general  welfare. 
He  came  to  this  country  with  the  hope  of  better- 
ing his  financial  condition,  and  his  expectations 
have  been  more  than  realized,  for  by  earnest  effort 
he  has  won  success. 

tB  -    ^^  ■< .  A  ,>  f^   .0^     .      .    e 


AVID  C.  JOPLIN.  Through  the  energetic 
iV  prosecution  of  agricultural  enterprises, 
Mr.  Joplin  has  become  well  known 
throughout  Jackson  County  as  a  success- 
ful farmer  of  Somerset  Township.  His  farm  ranks 
with  the  best  in  the  township  and  consists  of  one 
hundred  and  twenty  acres  on  section  6,  upon 
which  have  been  placed  substantial  buildings,  in- 
cluding a  commodious  house  and  a  number  of  out- 
buildings for  the  storage  of  machinery  and  shelter 
of  stock. 

Throughout  Missouri  the  name  of  Joplin  is  well 
known,  especially  among  the  pioneers  of  the  state, 
and  the  city  of  Joplin,  one  of  the  most  progressive 
and  thrifty  there,  was  founded  b^'  the  father  of 
our  subject.  That  gentleman.  Rev.  Harris  G.  Joplin, 
was  a  native  of  North  Carolina  and  was  descended 
from  Irish  ancestors.  Becoming  a  minister  in  the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church  South,  he  preached  the 
Gospel  in  western  Missouri  and  met  with  an  un- 
usual degree  of  success  in  his  labors.  In  1835  he 
located  in  Greene  County,  Mo.,  he  and  two  other 
gentlemen  being  the  first  settlers  of  what  is  now 
the  city  of  Springfield. 

Subsequently  locating  in  Jasper  County,  Mo., 
Rev.  Mr.  Joplin  became  identified  witii  its  early 


history,  and  the  city  of  Joplin  was  named  in  his 
honor.  In  the  discharge  of  his  ministerial  duties 
he  was  accustomed  to  ride  on  horseback  to  meet 
his  different  appointments.  His  life  was  one  of 
usefulness  and  untiring  activity, and  in  his  death, 
in  1853,  the  ministry  of  the  state  met  with  a  severe 
loss.  His  wife,  whose  maiden  name  was  Holly  N. 
Sims,  was  born  in  Tennessee.  Her  father,  as  well 
as  our  subject's  paternal  grandfather,  served  with 
valor  in  the  War  of  the  Revolution. 

Our  subject  is  one  in  a  family  of  five  children, 
namely:  David  C,  Wilber  F.;  Mary  F.,  wife  of  John 
Martin;  John  F.;  and  Margaret  H.,  wife  of  Smith 
Stouffer.  In  southwestern  Missouri  our  subject 
grew  to  manhood,  receiving  his  primary  education 
in  the  subscription  schools  of  the  home  district, 
and  afterward  entering  Ebenezer  College,  in 
Greene  County,  Mo.,  where  he  conducted  his 
studies  for  three  terms.  Afterward  he  engaged  in 
teaching  school  for  a  time  in  that  state.  In  the 
fall  of  1861  he  enlisted  as  a  member  of  Company 
B,  Sixteenth  Missouri  Infantry,  C.  S.  A.,  and  at 
different  times  served  in  the  command  of  Generals 
Price,  Hindman  and  Kirby  Smith.  At  Helena  he 
was  taken  prisoner,  and  for  about  twenty  months 
was  in  the  Federal  prisons.     . 

The  first  marriage  of  Mr.  Joplin  united  him  with 
Miss  Parolee  Harris,  and  they  became  the  parents 
of  four  children,  John  F.;  Mary  F.,  wife  of  Harri- 
son Childers;  Laura,  who  married  John  Doty;  and 
Etta,  wife  of  Elijah  Jackson.  In  October,  1871, 
Mr.  Joplin  married  Mrs.  Mary  A.  McDowell,  the 
widow  of  John  McDowell,  formerly  a  prominent 
resident  of  this  county.  Mr.  McDowell  lost  his 
life  by  an  accident  on  the  railroad  at  Mt.  Carbon, 
being  emploj'ed  on  the  road  at  that  time.  Mrs. 
Joplin  was  born  in  Guernsey  County,  Ohio,  Octo- 
ber 15,  1837,  and  was  reared  in  that  state,  where 
her  parents,  John  and  Sarah  (Moreland)  Kimble, 
continued  to  reside  until  death. 

In  religious  belief  both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Joplin  are 
identified  with  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church 
South,  in  which  he  has  served  as  Steward,  delegate 
to  the  annual  conference  and  Treasurer  of  the 
joint  board  of  finance.  He  has  been  chosen  dele- 
gate to  the  general  conference,  which  will  meet  at 
Memphis,  Tenn.,  in  May,  1894.     While  not  a  zeal- 


482 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


ous  partisan,  he  always  votes  the  Democratic  ticket 
and  supports  the  principles  of  that  party.  Since 
1865  he  lias  been  a  resident  of  Jackson  County, 
and  in  1873  settled  upon  the  farm  where  he  has 
since  resided.  His  first  home  was  a  log  cabin,  but 
as  prosperit}'  crowned  liis  labors  he  was  enabled  to 
erect  the  present  substantial  structure  in  which  he 
resides.  He  engages  in  mixed  farming  and  suc- 
cessfully raises  Short-horn  cattle. 


IS). ^imm  ,(a)J 


eHARLES  SCHRIEBER,a  well  known  farmer 
of  township  4,  range  8,  Randolph  County, 
was  born  in  Rusbend,  Germany,  in  1816, 
and  in  1835,  at  the  age  of  nineteen  years,  came 
alone  to  America.  His  elder  brother,  Fred,  emi- 
grated to  the  New  World  in  1836,  and  at  his  death, 
which  occurred  in  this  county,  left  a  family  of  five 
sons.  His  parents,  Charles  and  Caroline  (Hart- 
mer)  Schrieber,  were  also  natives  of  Germany,  and 
in  1838  the}'  crossed  the  ocean,  bringing  with  them 
their  daughter  Caroline. 

Charles  Schrieber  learned  the  carpenter's  trade, 
and  for  three  j'ears  after  reaching  America  he  fol- 
lowed that  occupation  in  New  York  City.  He 
then  came  to  Randolph  County,  111.,  and  located 
upon  the  farm  which  has  now  been  his  home  for 
fifty-five  years.  He  at  first  secured  a  forty-acre 
tract  of  land,  and  with  characteristic  energy  began 
its  development.  From  time  to  time,  as  he  found 
it  possible,  he  increased  his  possessions,  and  at 
length  became  the  owner  of  eighteen  hundred 
acres,  but  much  of  this  he  has  since  disposed  of, 
although  he  yet  owns  nearly  a  section  of  land  in 
Randolpii  and  Etlingham  Counties. 

Mr.  Schrieber  was  married  in  this  county  in 
in  1843,  the  lady  of  his  choice  being  Miss  Magde- 
lena  Huth,  and  unto  them  were  born  nine  chil- 
dren, of  whom  the  following  reached  mature  3'ears: 
Charlie,  now  a  resident  of  Washington  County; 
August,  Hermany,  Louie;  Sophia,  wife  of  Charles 
Thieman;  and  Ernst,  who  is  living  on  the  old 
home  farm.  The  mother  of  this  family  was  called 
to  the  home  beyond  in   1884,  and   afterward  Mr. 


Schrieber  married  his  brother  Frederick's  widow. 
Aside  from  his  farming,  our  subject  has  been  in- 
terested in  other  business  dealings.  He  was  one 
of  the  organizers  of  the  Ohiwine,  Schrieber  & 
Co.'s  Bank,  of  Red  Bud,  and  at  one  time  had  the 
only  mercantile  establishment  in  that  city.  At 
length  he  turned  over  his  store  to  his  sons,  and 
the  firm  of  Schrieber  Brothers  &  Co.  now  does  the 
largest  business  of  the  kind  in  the  count}',  having 
a  first-class  general  mercantile  establishment.  The 
family  holds  membership  in  the  Lutheran  Church, 
which  was  organized  by  our  subject,  his  father  and 
Mr.  Moss.  For  twenty  years  after  its  organiza- 
tion he  served  as  one  of  the  church  ofticers,  and 
has  ever  been  one  of  its  leading  members  and  lib- 
eral contributors.  He  and  his  sons  are  all  Demo- 
crats. Mr.  Schrieber  is  numbered  among  the  hon- 
ored pioneers  of  the  county,  and  has  witnessed  its 
development  from  an  almost  unbroken  region. 
The  experiences  and  hardships  of  the  frontier  he 
has  undergone,  and  in  the  work  of  public  advance- 
ment and  improvement  he  has  ever  borne  his  part, 
being  a  public-spirited  and  progressive  citizen. 


(^ 


^m 


(^ 


^m 


^^. 


-^^ 


^- 


=0 


W/ESSE  H.  De  SPAIN.  All  loyal  Americans 
will  agree  that  the  old  soldiers  who  sacri- 
ficed home  comforts,  endured  hardships 
and  braved  dangers  during  the  days  of  the 
nation's  peril  are  deserving  of  remembrance.  The 
historian  cannot  detail  the  lives  spent  on  the 
tented  field,  but  he  can  mention  the  chief  events 
by  which  the  gallant  soldier  secured  victory,  too 
often,  alas,  at  the  price  of  manly  vigor  and  miss- 
ing limbs.  Were  it  for  no  other  reasons  than  for 
his  army  life  we  should  be  glad  to  present  to  our 
readers  an  outline  of  the  history  of  Jesse  De  Spain, 
a  worthy  farmer  of  Randolph  County,  now  living 
in  township  5,  range  7. 

Mr.  De  Spain  was  born  in  Green  County,  Ky., 
September  13,  1842,  and  is  the  son  of  Silas  and 
Abigail  (Edwards)  De  Spain.  The  father,  who 
was  also  born  in  the  Blue  Grass  State,  died  in  the 
above  county  in  1857,  while  the  mother  of  our 
subject  departed  this  life  in  1851.     Silas  De  Spain 


Portrait  and  biographical  record. 


483 


was  in  early  life  a  farmer,  and  later  became  a 
merchant,  which  was  his  occupation  for  ten  years 
in  Green  County.  The  paternal  grandfather  of 
our  subject  was  Peter  De  Spain,  of  English  de- 
scent, while  his  mother's  father  bore  the  name  of 
Hugh  Edwards. 

Our  subject  passed  the  first  eighteen  years  of 
his  life  in  Green  County,  Ky.,  where  he  received 
a  limited  education,  and  on  coming  to  Randolph 
Count}-,  in  March,  1865,  hired  out  to  work  b}'  the 
month  for  Judge  Thompson.  Later,  having  saved 
his  earnings,  he  operated  a  farm,  which  he  rented 
until  his  marriage  with  Miss  Agnes  Crozier  in 
1867.  The  lady  was  born  in  Randolph  County, 
and  soon  after  her  marriage  removed  with  her 
husband  upon  their  forty-acre  farm,  which  was 
located  one  mile  east  of  Preston,  and  which  forms 
a  part  of  his  present  fine  estate.  Mrs.  Agnes  De 
Spain  bore  her  husband  two  children,  and  departed 
this  life  in  1873.  Edward  II.  is  residing  in  this 
townsliip,  and  Abigail  is  the  wife  of  Henry  Red- 
path.  The  lady  to  whom  our  subject  was  married 
in  1877  was  known  as  Miss  EUeu  J.  Bratney,  and 
to  them  have  been  born  four  children:  Laura,  Le- 
roy,  James  B.  and  Bessie  E. 

In  1861  Mr.  De  Spain  enlisted  in  the  Union 
army,  becoming  a  private  in  Company  H,  Thir- 
teenth Kentucky'  Infantry,  and  took  part  in  the 
battles  of  Shiloh,  East  Tennessee,  Buzzard's  Roost, 
Harper's  Ferr}',  Campbell  Station,  Atlanta  (Ga.), 
Louisville  (Ky.)  and  Corinth  (Miss.).  He  remained 
in  the  latter  place  for  about  four  weeks  on  account 
of  sickness,  when,  receiving  his  honorable  dis- 
charge, January  12,  1865,  he  returned  home  with 
his  health  greatly  impaired.  He  has  never  re- 
gained his  strength,  and  is  unable  to  do  any  hard 
manual  labor.  As  a  reward  of  meritorious  con- 
duct he  was  promoted  from  the  ranks  to  the  posi- 
tion of  Corporal,  then  Second  Sergeant,  later  First 
Sergeant,  and  was  First  Lieutenant  in  command 
of  the  company  at  the  time  of  his  discharge. 

By  hard  work  and  economy  Mr.  De  Spain  has 
accumulated  a  handsome  property,  being  the  pro- 
prietor of  three  hundred  and  fift}'  acres  of  valu- 
able land  in  township  5,  range  7.  He  still  has 
his  farm  under  his  management,  though  he  does 
but   little    hard   work    himself,   and    he   and    his 


good  wife  are  living  in  peace  and  contentment, 
enjoying  the  fruits  of  their  united  labors.  Mr. 
De  Spain  has  so  conducted  himself  in  both  public 
and  private  life  as  to  honor  the  citizenship  of  this 
phace,  and  has  borne  an  important  part  in  its  civil 
life.  He  has  held  the  office  of  Highway  Commis- 
sioner for  many  years,  and,  although  on  two  occa- 
sions appointed  Justice  of  the  Peace,  declined  to 
accept  the  office.  ■  For  twenty-four  years  he  has 
served  as  School  Director  in  this  district.  He  cast 
his  first  vote  for  Abraham  Lincoln, and  has  alwajs 
stood  stanchly  by  the  Republican  party.  For 
twelve  3'ears  he  was  a  member  of  the  United  Pres- 
byterian Church,  but  having  been  reared  in  the 
faith  of  the  Missionary  Baptists,  he  still  maintains 
a  preference  for  that  denomination. 


■jf/  OHN  SCHELTGEN.  It  has  been  often  said 
that  invincible  determination  will  accom- 
^^^  plish  any  desired  result,  and  already  are 
^^^  the  effects  of  its  constant  exercise  visible 
in  the  life  of  this  gentleman,  who  has  won  a  re- 
spected position  for  himself  in  the  community  by 
reason  of  his  industry,  perseverance  and  genial 
nature.  His  well  directed  efforts  have  been  rewarded 
by  the  accumulation  of  a  considerable  amount  of 
land  and  the  machinery  and  stock  necessary  for 
carrying  on  a  first-class  farm.  He  was  born  in 
Luxemburg,  German}',  March  15,  1827,  and  was 
about  twenty  years  old  when  he  emigrated  to 
America. 

The  early  schooling  of  our  subject  was  obtained 
in  his  native  country,  attending  until  about  fif- 
teen years  old.  His  first  settlement  in  this  coun- 
try w.as  near  Belleville,  in  St.  Clair  County,  this 
state,  where  he  commenced  in  life  by  working  out 
on  a  farm  in  the  vicinity.  In  1861  he  located  on 
a  farm  of  his  own,  which  he  purchased  with  the 
money  he  had  earned,  and  which  comprised  fifty- 
eight  acres  in  township  6,  range  7,  it  being  the 
present  home  of  the  family.  He  has  added  to  it 
from  time  to  time  until  now  he  is  the  happ}'  pos- 
sessor of  three  hundred  and  seventy-five  broad 
and  fertile  acres,  which  are  under  excellent  tillage 
and   bear    numerous    improvements.      The    farm 


484 


f»ORTRAlT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


house  and  accompanying  buildings  are  well  built 
and  sufficiently  commodious  for  the  purposes  for 
which  the}'  were  designed,  and  include  wliatever 
will  add  to  the  convenience  of  the  family  in  car- 
rying on  the  household  and  farm  economy.  About 
eight  3'ears  ago  Mr.  Scheltgen  was  stricken  with 
paralysis,  and  has  since  been  unable  to  peiform 
any  manual  labor. 

In  1857  our  subject  was  married  to  Miss  Rosa 
Yerlin,  who  is  of  French  parentage.  To  them 
have  been  born  four  children,  viz.:  John,  who  is 
single;  Nicholas,  who  married  Lizzie  Pauless  and 
resides  near  his  father's  place;  Marj',  who  is  at 
home;  and  Harriet,  the  wife  of  Charles  Con- 
stanzers,  residents  of  Clinton  County,  III.  The 
entire  family  are  devout  members  of  the  Catholic 
Church.  In  politics  our  subject  always  casts  his 
ballot  in  favor  of  the  Democratic  candidates. 

The  worthy  parents  of  our  subject  bore  the 
names  of  John  and  Margaret  (Ilonson)  Scheltgen. 
They  were  both  natives  of  Oermany  and  lived 
and  died  in  the  Fatherland,  the  mother  passing 
away  when  our  subject  was  quite  young. 


^^EORGE  L.  RIESS,  County  Superintendent 
III  ,-—,  of  schools  of  Randolph  County,  and  a 
^^Jj  well  known  resident  of  Red  Bud,  has  the 
honor  of  being  a  native  of  Illinois,  for  he  was  born 
in  St.  Clair  County,  in  1838,  and  is  the  second  of 
three  children  whose  parents  were  John  J.  and 
Charlotte  (Henckler)  Riess,  the  former  a  native  of 
Wurlemberg,  and  the  latter  of  Nassau,  Germany. 
Tlie  parents  were  married  in  Millstadt,  St.  Clair 
County,  111.,  where  they  located  in  an  early  day. 
The  father  was  educated  in  Basel,  German}',  and 
came  as  an  Evangelical  missionary  to  this  countrj', 
devoting  his  whole  life  to  missionar}'  work.  He 
labored  in  Illinois  and  St.  Louis,  establishing  a 
number  of  churches.  He  was  an  active  Christian 
worker,  and  the  church  on  Fourteenth  and  Madi- 
son Streets  in  St.  Louis  bears  his  name.  His  first 
wife  died  when  Louie  was  onl}'  fouiteen  months 
old,  after  which  he  returned  to  France,  and  about 
1842  married  Victoria  Petit.  He  then  returned 
with  his  wife  to  his  Illinois  home.     In  his  family 


were  nine  children,  but  only  six  gl-ew  to  mature 
years.  One  son',  Alfred  E.,  graduated  from  both 
an  allopathic  and  liomeoi)athic  medical  college  in 
this  countr}',  and  then  graduated  from  a  noted 
medical  school  of  Vienna,  Austria.  During  the 
Franco-Prussian  War,  he  was  commissioned  Sur- 
geon, and  at  its  close  he  returned  to  his  home  in 
St.  Louis,  but  his  death  occurred  soon  after.  The 
father  died  in  that  city,  Julj'  8,  1855. 

Mr.  Riess  whose  name  heads  this  record  was 
reared  to  manhood  in  St.  Louis,  where  the  family 
located  in  1844.  In  1850,  they  removed  to  Quincy, 
but  after  three  years  returned  to  the  former  cit}'. 
George  received  but  limited  educational  advanta- 
ges, for  after  his  father's  death  he  was  thrown 
upon  his  own  resources.  In  Waterloo,  111.,  where 
he  had  been  engaged  as  a  teacher  for  seven  years, 
he  was  married  to  Sarah  A.  Turk,  daughter  of  John 
Turk,  a  miller  of  Belleville,  111.,  and  one  of  the  old 
millers  of  that  city.  Mr.  Turk  was  the  inventor  of 
the  first  smut  machine  used  to  separate  the  chaff 
from  the  wheat  in  a  mill. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Riess  were  born  seven  chil- 
dren, six  of  whom  are  still  living.  Louie  died  in 
early  childhood;  George  W.  is  the  present  Post- 
master of  Red  Bud;  Charles  E.  is  now  Secretary 
in  the  master  mechanics'  ofiSce  of  the  Mobile  & 
Ohio  Railroad,  in  Murphysboro;  John  T.  is  success- 
full}'  engaged  in  teaching  in  Randolph  County; 
Gus  K.  is  now  employed  in  his  father's  office,  but 
is  a  telegraph  operator  by  profession;  Alfred  D.  is 
a  student  in  the  University  at  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.; 
and  Sadie  A.  C.  is  at  home. 

While  a  resident  of  Monroe  Count}',  Mr.  Riess 
served  as  Deputy  Sheriff,  and  was  then  elected 
Assessor.  He  also  filled  the  office  of  Treasurer  for 
two  terms,  was  appointed  State's  Attorney  for  one 
year,  and  was  then  elected  to  that  office  for  four 
years.  His  law  studies,  pursued  while  teaching 
school,  well  qualified  him  for  the  office.  He  also 
served  as  Justice  of  the  Peace  and  Police  Magis- 
trate for  many  years,  and  his  duties  were  ever  per- 
formed with  a  faithfulness  and  fidelity  which  won 
him  high  commendation.  In  1872,  he  established 
a  law  office  in  connection  with  John  Micham,  then 
State's  Attorney  of  the  district. 

Since   coming    to   Red   Bud,  Mr.   Riess  has  also 


PORTRAIT  ANt)  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


485 


been  prominent  in  public  affairs.  From  1882  un- 
til 1886,  he  was  County  and  Probate  Judge,  and 
since  the  latter  year  has  been  Notary  Public.  In 
the  fall  of  1890,  he  was  elected  County  Superintend- 
ent of  the  schools  of  Randolph  County,  and  in 
the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  that  position  has 
won  the  high  commendation  of  all  concerned.  In 
politics  he  is  a  stanch  Democrat,  who  warmly  advo- 
cates his  part}''s  principles.  Socially,  he  is  con- 
nected with  the  Knights  of  Honor  and  the  Odd 
Fellows' societies.  His  public  and  private  life  are 
alike  above  reproach,  and  an  honorable,  upright 
career  has  gained  him  the  warm  regard  of  all  with 
whom  he  has  been  brought  in  contact. 


I  EV.  ALEX  KEOWN.  who  now  resides  on 
a  farm  on  section  33,  Carbon  dale  Town- 
ship, Jackson  County,  has  the  honor  of 
^[^ being  a  native  of  Illinois,  for  his  birth 
occurred  in  Madison  County,  August  19,  1832. 
He  is  the  youngest  child  of  Andrew  and  Sarah 
(Goodwin)  Keown.  The  great-grandfather, Thomas 
Keown,  was  a  native  of  Ireland,  and  about  1775 
emigrated  with  his  family  to  America,  locating  in 
the  Abbey  ville  District  of  South  Carolina.  His  son, 
John  Keown,  was  born  in  County  Down,  Ireland, 
March  17,  1767,  and  was  a  farmer  by  occupation. 
The  father  of  our  subject  was  born  in  the  Abbey- 
ville  District  of  South  Carolina,  October  15,  1791 
On  the  2d  of  December,  1819,  he  married  Miss 
Goodwin,  who  was  born  in  1800,  in  Butler  Coun- 
ty, Ky.,  whither  her  father,  John  Goodwin,  a  na- 
tive of  South  Carolina,  removed  in  an  early  day. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Keown  resided  in  Kentucky  until 
1825,  which  year  witnessed  their  removal  to  Mad- 
ison County,  111.  They  located  on  a  tract  of 
wild  land  near  the  present  town  of  Alharabra, 
and  there  the  father  developed  a  fine  farm,  which 
became  a  valuable  piece  of  property.  He  and  his 
wife  held  membership  with  the  Presbyterian 
Church,  and  were  highl3'  respected  people.  His 
death  occurred  February  22,  1879,  and  his  wife 
died  October  7,  1881.  Their  family  numbered 
six  children,  of  whom  four  are  yet  living:  John, 
born  in    1822;  Mary,  in    1826;  Calvin,    in    1830; 


and  Alex.  Those  deceased  are  Elizabeth  Ann, 
who  was  born  in  1820;  and  Andrew  M.,  who  was 
born  in  1824. 

In  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads  our  sub- 
ject spent  the  days  of  his  boyhood  and  youth. 
His  early  education  was  supplemented  by  one 
year's  attendance  at  an  academy  in  vSullivan, 
111.,  and  he  then  engaged  in  teaching  school  for 
one  term.  On  the  24th  of  February,  1859,  he 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Deborah  A.,  daughter 
of  Henry  and  Eleanor  (Talbot)  Warderman.  Her 
parents  settled  near  Columbia,  Monroe  County, 
111.,  in  1817,  and  her  father  was  a  prominent  citi- 
zen of  the  locality.  He  served  as  a  soldier  in  the 
War  of  1812.  Mrs.  Keown  was  born  in  Monroe 
County  December  17,  1834. 

After  their  marriage,  Mr.  Keown  located  on  a 
farm  near  his  father's,  in  Madison  County,  where 
he  made  his  home  until  1866.  He  enlisted  August 
12,  1862,  in  Company  G,  One  Hundred  and  Sev- 
enteenth Illinois  Infantry,  was  mustered  in  at  Camp 
Butler,  and  for  over  a  year  did  guard  duty  at 
Memphis,  Tenn.  He  participated  in  the  battles  of 
Meridian,  Lafa3'ette,  Canton,  Tupelo,  Oldtown 
Creek,  Hurricane  Creek,  Franklin,  Nashville,  and 
the  siege  and  capture  of  Ft.  Blakely,  after  which 
he  remained  in  Montgomery,  Ala.,  until  the  close 
of  his  service.  He  was  mustered  out  at  Camp 
Butler  August  5,  1865,  having  for  three  \'ears  worn 
the  blue  as  a  defender  of  the  Union. 

In  1866  Mr.  Keown  came  to  his  present  farm, 
and  many  of  the  improvements  upon  the  place 
are  the  work  of  his  own  hands.  He  has  ninety 
acres  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation,  and  the 
place  is  neat  and  thrifty  in  appearance.  A  great 
deal  of  his  time  has  been  given  to  church  work. 
At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  became  a  member  of  the 
Presb^'terian  Church,  and  about  ten  years  later  he 
transferred  his  membership  to  the  Methodist  Epis- 
copal Church,  and  has  since  earnestly  endeavored 
to  follow  in  his  Master's  footsteps.  In  1871  he 
was  ordained  and  licensed  to  preach  the  Gospel, 
and  has  since  been  a  local  preacher.  He  is  also  a 
prominent  worker  in  the  Sunday-school,  and  has 
served  as  its  Superintendent. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Keown  were  born 
eight  children,  six  of  whom  are  yet  living.    Will- 


486 


KUtTRAlT  AKD  moGRAPinCAL  HECORD. 


iam  L.,  born  Februar3-  9,  1860,  married  Janet  Car- 
son, and,  with  bis  wife  and  two  children,  resides 
in  Centralia;  Edward  M.  was  born  April  27, 
1866;  Hettie  I.,  November  17,  1868;  Perry  W., 
Febriiar3-  4,  1871;  John  V.,  February  10,  1874; 
and  Frank  A.,  September  15,  1877.  The  familj- 
is  one  of  prominence  in  the  community,  and  its 
members  rank  high  in  social  circles  where  true 
worth  and  intelligence  are  received  as  the  pass- 
ports into  good  society.  In  1845  Mr.  Keown 
joined  the  Masonic  fraternitj-.  He  also  belongs 
to  the  Grand  Army  post  of  Carbondale.  He  has 
served  as  a  member  of  the  School  Board  for  man3' 
years,  and  has  done  effective  service  in  the  inter- 
est of  education.  He  is  now  serving  his  second 
term  as  Justice  of  the  Peace.  In  politics  he  is  a 
Republican,  and  is  a  man  whose  upright  life  has 
made  him  a  valued  citizen. 

W  OHN  M.  WRIGHT.  There  are  few  men  of 
I  the  present  day  more  successful  or  more 
I  worthy  of  honorable  mention  than  the  sub- 
ject of  our  present  sketch,  who  is  one  of 
the  prominent  druggists  of  Chester.  A  record  of 
his  life  fully  illustrates  what  may  be  accomplislied 
b}'  a  determined  will  and  perseverance,  for  through 
his  own  efforts  he  has  risen  to  his  present  high  po- 
sition in  the  community,  and  is  well  and  favora- 
bly" known  throughout  the  countv. 

Born  at  a  time  when  the  education  of  children 
did  not  receive  especial  attention,  young  Wright 
obtained  only  a  limited  amount  of  literary  train- 
ing, but  at  an  early  age  evinced  a  special  tendency 
toward  the  profession  of  a  druggist,  and  through 
liis  own  unaided  efforts  worked  his  way  up,  until 
at  the  present  time  he  is  one  of  the  prominent 
business  men  of  the  community'.  His  birth  oc- 
curred in  Shepherdstown,  W.  Va.,  August  4,  1836. 
He  is  the  son  of  Charles  and  Julia  Ann  (Entler) 
Wright,  natives  respectively  of  Jacobstown,  Burl- 
ington County,  N.  J.,  and  Virginia.  The  father 
was  a  millwright  b^'  trade,  and  the  son  of  John 
and  Elizabeth  (Bullock)  Wright.  Charles  Wright 
died  in  1889,  aged  seven tj'-f our  j-ears,  and  his 
good  wife  died  in  1877. 

John  M.,  of  this  sketch,  was  the  eldest  in  a  fami- 


I3'  of  nine  children  born  to  his  parents,  of  whom 
seven  are  living.  He  accompanied  his  parents  on 
their  removal  to  this  place  in  1844,  where  the  fa- 
ther carried  on  his  trade  until  his  decease,  which 
occurred  June  2,  1889.  He  was  preceded  to  the 
better  land  b}'  his  good  wife,  who  died  in  1877. 
Having  been  a  clerk  in  the  drug  store  of  Hall  A' 
Anderson  for  some  time,  our  subject  acquired  a 
full  knowledge  of  the  details  of  that  business,  and 
on  November  7,  1881,  purchased  the  stock  of  his 
emploj'ers  and  has  since  conducted  the  business  at 
the  old  stand.  His  store  is  well  equipped  with  a 
full  line  of  drugs  and  medicines,  and  bj'  the  courte- 
ous treatment  of  his  patrons  he  is  conducting  a 
splendid  and  paj'ing  business. 

The  lad^-  who  became  the  wife  of  our  subject, 
Februarv  7,  1870,  was  Mary  T.,  a  daughter  of 
Chambers  and  Ellen  Anderson.  Mrs.  ATright  is  a 
native  of  this  city,  and  has  borne  her  husband 
seven  children,  one  son  and  six  daughtere,  namely: 
Lizzie,  now  the  wife  of  O.  W.  Gottman;  Daisy, 
Homer,  Blanche,  Fannie,  Clata  and  Hazel.  He  is 
an  ardent  Democrat  and  is  influential  in  the  polit- 
ical life  of  his  community.  His  fellow-townsmen 
have  elected  him  to  various  local  positions,  and  he 
served  on  the  School  Board  very  satisfactorily  for 
three  years.  In  addition  to  his  drug  business,  our 
subject  owns  a  neat  little  farm  comprising  four- 
teen acres,  upon  which  are  to  be  found  a  comfort- 
able residence  and  all  the  modern  machinery  for 
its  operation. 


I 


^^EORGE  WEHRIIEIM.  a  progressive  mer- 
II  J-—,  chant  of  Baldwin,  has  the  honor  of  being  a 
^^5)  native  of  Randolph  County.  He  was  born 
near  Red  Bud,  and  is  a  son  of  John  and  Elizabeth 
(Rediesh)  Wehrheim,  who  were  honored  pioneers 
of  this  community.  They  were  born  and  reared 
in  Germany,  and  in  the  Fatherl.ind  were  married. 
About  1842,  the3-  bade  adieu  to  the  home  of  their 
childhood  and  crossed  the  brinv'  deep  to  the  New 
World.  The3'  first  located  in  Monroe  County,  111., 
but  afterwards  settled  near  Red  Bud,  Randolph 
Count3'.  In  1852,  the3'  went  to  Evansville,  where 
the  father  built  the  mill  which  is  now  operated  by 


O^^O^rlyU-c^^Ct:^^ 


POUTRAlT  AND  BtOGRAtHlCAt  RECORD. 


489 


Sauer  Brothers.  He  resided  in  Evansville  until 
Ins  death.  He  .came  to  this  countrj-  a  poor  man, 
but  won  his  wa}-  upward  until  he  was  numbered 
among  the  leading  and  representative  business 
men  of  the  county.  On  his  arrival  in  Randolph 
County,  he  purchased  a  farm  which  was  heavily 
timbered,  and  being  a  cooper  by  trade,  he  began 
making  his  timber  into  barrels,  and  in  the  winter 
season  employed  a  large  force  of  men  along  this 
line.  Success  attended  his  efforts,  aud  from  the 
sale  of  his  barrels  he  soon  acquired  enough  to  pa}- 
off  all  indebtedness  on  liis  farm.  Not  long  after 
this  was  accomplished  he  sold  out  and  embarked 
in  milling  in  Evansville,  as  before  stated,  shipping 
by  boat  to  New  Orleans  and  St.  Louis.  He  died 
in  1873,  .and  his  wife  has  also  passed  awa3'. 

Our  subject  was  the  third  in  order  of  birth  in 
the  family  of  seven  children.  He  was  reared  to 
maniiood  under  the  parental  roof,  and  became 
familiar  with  the  occupations  in  which  his  father 
was  engaged.  He  followed  milling,  also  worked 
upon  the  home  farm  and  clerked  in  his  father's 
store.  In  1872,  he  went  to  Kansas,  where  he  spent 
one  year.  After  his  return  to  Illinois,  in  1873,  he 
engaged  in  business  in  Evansville,  where  he  con- 
tinued for  about  four  3'ears. 

In  1874  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  Mr. 
Wehrheim  and  Miss  Augusta  Dicknian,  the  step- 
daughter of  'Squire  John  Stoehr,  a  well  known 
resident  of  Red  Bud.  In  1877,  they  removed  to 
Baldwin,  which  at  that  time  was  in  its  infanc}', 
and  our  subject  established  a  general  merchandise 
store,  which  he  still  carries  on.  He  began  on  a 
small  scale,  but  has  steadily  enlarged  his  facilities 
to  meet  the  growing  demand,  until  he  now  has  a 
large  trade.  He  also  has  added  a  stock  of  m.a- 
chinery,  and  does  an  extensive  business  in  that 
line  as  well. 

The  union  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wehrheim  has  been 
blessed  with  eight  children,  namely:  William. 
Annie.  Arthur,  Lydia,  Cora,  Clara,  John  and  Al- 
bert. The  family  circle  yet  remains  unbroken, 
and  all  are  still  under  the  parental  roof.  The 
parents  hold  an  enviable  position  in  social  circles, 
and  are  numbered  among  the  best  and  most  prom- 
inent citizens  of  the  community*.  In  his  political 
views,  Mr.  Wehrheim   is  a  stanch   Re[mblican,  aud 


his  wife  is  a  member  of  the  Presbyterian  Church. 
By  good  business  ability  he  has  won  a  well  merited 
success.  He  is  industrious  and  enterprising,  and 
his  diligence  and  well  directed  efforts  have  placed 
him  among  the  substantial  citizens  of  the  county. 


(^ 


.^m\\ 


e;r- 


^^11 


jg^, 


^ 


^ 


MW.  KIMBALL  for  many  years  officiated 
as  Deputy  County  Clerk  of  Jackson  Coun- 
^  ^  ty,  resigning  that  position  in  April,  1894, 
in  order  to  accept  the  chief  clerkship  in  the  office 
of  the  Revenue  Collector  of  the  Thirteen tli  Dis- 
trict at  Cairo,  111.  Competence  has  won  him  this 
responsible  place  and  has  numbered  him  among 
the  leading  business  men  of  southern  Illinois.  He 
was  born  in  Golconda,  Pope  County,  III.,  January 
16,  1860,  and  is  the  eldest  of  eight  children  whose 
parents  were  John  B.  and  Malinda  H.  (Phillips) 
Kimball.  The  father  was  born  in  Indiana,  and  the 
paternal  grandfather,  William  Kimball,  was  born 
in  the  east  and  was  of  Scotch-Irish  descent.  By 
trade  he  was  a  miller. 

When  a  young  man,  John  B.  Kimball  remov- 
ed to  Golconda,  111.,  and  in  the  fall  of  1860  he 
went  to  Carbondale.  The  following  3'ear  he  came 
to  Murphj'sboro,  where  he  operated  a  mill  until 
1871.  He  was  then  elected  County  Sheriff  for  a 
term  of  two  years,  and  he  has  also  served  as  Alder- 
man of  this  place.  For  a  time  he  carried  on  mill- 
ing, and  also  followed  merchandising.  He  still 
makes  his  home  in  Murphysboro,  and  is  a  highly 
respected  man.  Mrs.  Kimball  was  born  in  Union 
County, 111.,  and  was  a  daughter  of  W.  H.  Phillips, 
who  located  in  that  county  at  a  veiy  earl}'  da^-. 
Her  death  occurred  in  1881.  Mr.  Kimball  was 
again  married,  and  has  one  child  bj-  this  second 
union.  Two  sons  and  three  daughters  of  the  first 
marriage  are  still  living. 

In  the  state  of  his  nativity  W.  W.  Kimball  was 
reared  to  manhood,  and  the  common  schools  af- 
forded him  his  educational  privileges.  From  early 
bo}iiood  he  was  familiar  with  the  milling  business, 
and  for  some  years  worked  for  his  father  along 
that  line.  He  spent  one  j'ear  as  book-keeper  for 
the  Jackson  County  Milling  Company,  then  went 


490 


PORtRArr  AKD  SlOGRAPmCAL  RECORD. 


to  St.  Louis  and  became  book-keeper  in  a  commis- 
sion house. 

Mr.  Kimball  was  married  in  Murphj-sboro  in 
October,  1887,  the  lady  of  his  choice  being  Miss 
Eva  D.  Risling,  a  native  of  Jackson  Count}-  and  a 
daughter  of  C.  C.  Risling,  one  of  the  early  set- 
tlers of  this  communit}'.  He  was  for  years  con- 
nected with  the  Mt.  Carbon  r.iilroad  shops  as  mas- 
ter pattern  worker,  and  still  follows  that  business. 
Mrs.  Kimball  has  a  very  fine  musical  education 
and  is  a  lady  of  high  culture.  The  familj-  now 
numbers  two  children,  Thelraa  and  Helen. 

Mr.  Kimball  is  a  prominent  Democrat,  and  for 
four  3'ears  served  as  Secretary  of  theCountj-  Dem- 
ocratic Central  Committee.  He  is  a  member  of 
Mt.  Carbon  Lodge  No.  434,  1.  O.  O.  F.,  and  of 
Lincoln  Encampment  No.  109.  He  also  belongs  to 
the  Masonic  fraternity.  He  aided  in  the  organi- 
zation and  was  a  Director  of  the  first  Board  of  the 
Jackson  County  Building  and  Loan  Association, 
and  also  of  the  Southern  Illinois  Building  and 
Loan  Association.  In  1883  he  was  appointed 
Deputj-  County  Clerk  under  John  R.  Kane,  and 
held  the  ofDce  for  seven  years.  In  1891  he  en- 
gaged in  the  abstract  business,  and  in  December, 
1892,  became  one  of  the  organizers  of  the  Jackson 
County  Abstract  and  Title  Guarantee  Company, 
of  which  he  was  made  Secretary.  In  November, 
1892,  he  was  appointed  Deputy-  County  Clerk  by 
Edward  Crawford,  which  position  he  held  with 
credit  to  himself  and  satisfaction  to  his  constitu- 
ents until  April,  1894.  He  then  accepted  the  chief 
clerkship  in  the  Revenue  Collector's  office  of  the 
Thirteenth  District,  at  Cairo,  111.,  under  W.  K. 
Murphy,  and  this  place  he  is  filling  to  the  satisfac- 
tion of  all  concerned.  He  is  an  expert  accountant, 
a  ver\- genial,  courteous  gentleman, and  has  a  wide 
circle  of  friends. 


(|  MLLIAM  A.  BOST.  The  labors  of  this 
\rJ//  honest,  upright  and  well-to-do  citizen 
\li/^  have  resulted  in  the  possession  of  about 
three  hundred  acres  Ij'ing  on  section  1,  Somerset 
Township,  Jackson  Count3\  The  greater  part  of 
this  farm  the  proprietor  cleared  from   the  forest, 


and  labored  early  and  late  for  many  years  in  order 
to  bring  it  to  its  present  condition.  By  the  exer- 
cise of  great  industry,  frugality  and  good  man- 
agement he  has  accumulated  sufficient  means  to 
protect  him  against  want  in  his  declining  years, 
while  his  career  as  a  citizen  has  been  such  as  to  es- 
tablish him  in  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  his 
neighbors. 

The  parents  of  our  subject,  John  and  Rachel 
(Lipe)  Host,  were  natives  of  North  Carolina  and 
descendants  of  German  ancestry-.  Grandfather 
Bost  was  a  soldier  in  the  Colonial  army  during 
the  War  of  the  Revolution.  William  A.  was  born 
in  Rowan  County,  N.  C,  December  15,  1826,  and 
in  childhood  received  a  rudimentarj'  education  in 
the  schools  of  the  home  neighborhood.  At  that 
time  both  the  "temple  of  learning"  and  the 
method  of  instruction  were  of  a  character  most 
crude.  The  house  was  built  of  logs,  with  a  plank 
floor,  slab  seats  resting  on  wooden  legs,  and  an 
open  fireplace  with  a  chimney  made  of  rocks  laid 
in  mortar.  The  writing  desk  was  made  of  a  plank 
extending  the  entire  length  of  the  wall  and  sup- 
ported bj'  pegs  driven  in  the  logs. 

In  the  spring  of  184C  Mr.  Bost  came  to  Illinois, 
and  until  the  fall  of  the  same  j-ear  sojourned  in 
Montgomery  Count}',  going  thence  to  Perry  Coun- 
tj'.  In  the  spring  of  1852  he  came  to  Jackson 
County  and  located  on  Elk  Prairie,  but  soon  re- 
moved to  De  Soto  Township,  where  he  remained 
for  a  short  time.  From  there  he  came  to  .Somer- 
set Township,  and  purchasing  his  present  farm, 
commenced  the  work  of  clearing  and  improving 
the  land.  For  a  time  he  lived  in  a  log  cabin,  but 
later  constructed  a  frame  house,  in  which  he  lived 
until  1893,  when  he  completed  his  elegant  and 
modern  residence,  one  of  the  finest  in  the  township. 

The  first  marriage  of  Mr.  Bost,  which  occurred 
in  1849,  united  him  with  Miss  Lucretia  Robinson, 
and  ■  resulted  in  the  birth  of  a  son,  John.  He 
afterward  married  Amanda  Crews,  and  they  be- 
came the  parents  of  ten  children,  viz.:  William 
A.,  Edward,  George,  Ibson;  Rachel,  wife  of  George 
Bradley;  Ann,  who  married  Ellis  Moon;  Ruth, 
Hardy,  Manning  and  Daniel.  The  mother  of  these 
children  was  a  lady  of  kindly  disposition  and 
a   devoted  member   of  the  Methodist   Episcopal 


PORTRAlf  AND  BIOGRAPmCAL  RECORD. 


491 


Church, and  her  death,  April  5, 1893,  was  mourned 
by  the  members  of  that  denomination  and  b}'  all 
who  knew  her. 

Politically,  Mr.  Bost  is  a  stanch  supporter  of 
the  principles  of  the  People's  part}-.  He  has 
served  with  effleiency  as  Collector  of  Somerset 
Township,  and  has  also  represented  the  township 
as  a  member  of  the  County  Board  of  Supervisors. 
For  some  years  be  has  been  identified  with  the 
Farmers'  Mutual  Benefit  Association,  belonging 
to  Lodge  No.  95.  in  De  Soto  Township.  Mr.  Bost 
has  become  well  known  as  a  law-abiding  citizen, 
and  has  a  comfortable  home,  where  are  frequently 
welcomed  the  many  friends  whom  he  has  made 
during  his  long  sojourn  in  the  county. 


/^^\  ILES  J.  SNIDER,  who  carries  on  farming 
on  section  23,  Carbondale  Township,  Jack- 
Is  son  County,  was  born  October  21,  1836, 
on  Eight  Mile  Prairie,  Williamson  Coun- 
ty, 111.  His  grandfather,  Solomon  Snider,  was  a 
native  of  Virginia,  and  about  1806  emigrated  to 
Union  Count}-,  111.  A  short  time  afterward  he  re- 
moved to  Eight  Mile  Prairie,  where  he  built  a  log 
house,  which  is  still  standing.  Later  he  removed 
to  Six  Mile  Prairie,  in  Franklin  Count}-,  where  he 
made  a  permanent  location,  and  in  the  midst  of 
tlie  wilderness  developed  a  fine  farm.  He  had  one 
of  the  first  horse-mills  of  that  locality.  He  mar- 
ried Polly  Smith,  and  to  them  were  born  ten  chil- 
dren, three  yet  living:  Mi-s.  Nancy  McElvain,  of 
Perry  Comity;  Solomon,  who  lives  on  the  old 
home  farm  in  Franklin  County,  and  Mrs.  Sophro- 
11  ia  Kimmel,  of  Elkville,  Jackson  County. 

Ephraim  Snider,  father  of  our  subject,  was  born 
in  L'nion  County,  April  9,  1809,  and  married 
Elizabeth  Herrin,  a  native  of  Herrin's  Prairie, 
Williamson  County,  born  May  1,  1819.  Her  fa- 
ther, David  Herrin,  was  born  in  South  Carolina  on 
the  15th  of  August,  1793,  and  accompanied  her 
grandfather,  John  Herrin,  to  Hopkins  County,  Ky., 
when  a  boy.  February  21,1814,  in  Kentucky,  oc- 
curred his  marriage  with  Sarah  Herring,  who  was 
born  in  South  Carolina,  October  9,  1792,  and  died 
July  31,  1856.     On   the    10th    of   February,   1819, 


they  came  to  Herrin's  Prairie,  Williamson  County, 
111.,  w-here  they  continued  to  reside  until  their  de- 
mise. They  reared  a  family  of  six  children,  viz.: 
Delila  P.,  Alfred  J.,  F^lizabeth,  Oliver,  Ele.anor  and 
Martha  C.  The  father  of  this  family  died  Septem- 
ber 1,  1870. 

John  Herrin,  great-grandfather  of  our  subject, 
was  probably  a  native  of  South  Carolina;  he  mar- 
ried Elizabeth  Collins,  who  was  born  in  Ireland. 
Another  great-grandfather,  the  Rev.  Isaac  Her- 
ring, was  one  of  the  early  settlers  of  Kentucky, 
removing  thither  from  South  Carolina  in  1812. 
Later,  accompanied  by  his  wife  and  six  of  their 
children,  Jonathan,  James,  Reuben,  Moses,  Rachel 
and  Rebecca,  he  removed  to  Illinois  and  settled  at 
Herrin's  Prairie,  Williamson  County.  There  his 
death  occurred  June  29,  1845,  aged  seventy -seven 
years.  His  wife.  Lenity,  was  born  in  Ireland  in 
1770,  and  passed  away  July  23,  1846.  He  was  a 
pioneer  Missionary  Baptist  preacher  of  ability,  and 
aided  in  the  organization  of  the  Franklin  B.iptist 
Association. 

The  Rev.  Isaac  Herring  and  David  Herrin,  in 
whose  honor  Herrin's  Prairie  was  named,  were 
numbered  among  the  first  settlers  of  this  part  of 
Illinois.  At  the  time  of  settling  here,  they  found 
the  country  infested  with  tribes  of  Indians  as  well 
as  almost  every  variety  of  wild  animals  and  game. 
By  occupation  they  were  farmers,  and  though  sub- 
jected to  the  many  hardships  endured  by  the  first 
settlers  of  a  new  country,  were  successful  finan- 
cially. Their  children  became  useful  and  honored 
citizens,  and  hundreds  of  their  descendants  are 
now  numbered  among  the  progressive  residents  of 
this  locality. 

The  parents  of  our  subject  were  married  Sep- 
tember 24,  1835,  and  located  on  Eight  Mile  Prai- 
rie, in  Williamson  County,  where  they  resided  un- 
til 1856.  The  farm  upon  which  they  lived  is  still 
in  the  family.  They  then  came  to  Jackson  Coun- 
ty, and  in  1859  built  a  brick  house,  then  the  finest 
in  the  county.  The  father  began  life  a  poor  man, 
but  accumulated  a  large  estate.  He  died  Decem- 
ber 28,  1867,  and  his  wife  passed  away  July  7, 
1888.  Both  lie  buried  in  Snider  Cemetery,  where 
a  fine  marble  monument  marks  their  last  resting 
place.     In    the    family    were  nine  sons   and  four 


492 


PORTIlAlt  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  felECOM). 


daughters,  and  at  the  death  of  the  mother  six  of 

the  sons  acted  as  pail  bearers.  The  members  of 
tlie  family  still  living  are:  M.  J.;  Rebecca,  wife 
of  M.  A.  Evans,  of  Carbondale,  bj'  whom  she  has 
four  children;  Solomon;  Sarah  E.;  Mike  T.,  of 
Carbondale  Township,  who  married  Martha  Brew- 
ster, by  whom  he  has  two  children;  Mollie,  wife 
of  Dr.  John  Viek,  of  Carterville,  III.,  by  whom  she 
has  four  children ;  Charles  P.,  who  married  Nancy 
Woods,  and  has  five  children;  E.  Monroe,  who 
wedded  Emma  Painter,  and  with  his  wife  and  two 
children  makes  his  home  in  Carbondale;  and  Laura, 
twin  sister  of  Monroe.  She  is  now  the  wife  of 
Robert  H.  Dillingcr,  of  Carbondale  Township,  and 
has  five  children. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  attended  a  little  log 
schoolhouse,  heated  by  a  fireplace  and  seated  with 
rude  slab  benches.  He  aided  in  the  labors  of  the 
home  farm  until  twenty-two  j'ears  of  age,  when 
he  commenced  life  for  himself  on  a  wild  farm  on 
section  22,  De  Soto  Township.  He  built  a  log 
cabin  and  brought  to  his  new  home  a  bride.  Oc- 
tober 24,  1861,  he  married  Anna  Maria  Boucher, 
who  was  born  in  Ireland,  July  5,  1843.  She  died 
May  29,  1865,  leaving  a  daughter,  Lizzie,  who  was 
born  December  24,  1862,  and  is  now  the  wife  of 
W.  D.  Ward,  of  DuQuoin,  by  whom  she  has  two 
children. 

Mr.  Snider  was  again  married,  November  10, 
1872,  his  second  union  being  with  Miss  Hannah, 
daughter  of  Jeremiah  and  Mar3'  (Hagler)  Brewster. 
Her  father  was  born  in  1815,  and  was  a  son  of 
Jeremiah  Brewster.  Her  mother  was  born  in  Po- 
mona Township,  Jackson  County,  June  20,  1820, 
and  was  a  daughter  of  John  and  Susan  Hagler, 
who  came  to  Illinois  in  a  very  early  day  from 
North  Carolina.  Mr.  Brewster  died  in  1877,  but 
his  widow  still  survives  him.  They  were  the  par- 
ents of  eight  children,  seven  yet  living:  Dr.  James 
Brewster,  Mrs.  Mary  Campbell,  William  Harrison, 
Mrs.  Snider,  Mrs.  INIattie  Snider,  Mrs.  Laura  Quails 
and  Mrs.  Cora  Van  Keurcn.  The  parents  were 
both  members  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church. 
Two  sons,  James  and  John,  served  in  the  Civil 
War,  the  former  as  Assistant  Surgeon  of  the  Eigh- 
teen Illinois  Infantr3';  and  the  latter  in  Company 
B,  Eighty-first  Illinois  Infantry.     He  died  March 


27,  1880.  Mrs.  Snider  was  born  March  9,  1849, 
received  a  college  education,  and  afterward  suc- 
cessfully engaged  in  teaching. 

In  1866,  Mr.  Snider  removed  to  his  present  farm, 
where  he  has  since  made  his  home.  He  carries  on 
general  farming,  and  four  hundred  and  fifteen 
acres  of  valuable  land  pay  tribute  to  his  care  and 
cultivation.  He  also  raises  some  fine  cattle  and 
horses.  In  1872  he  erected  a  commodious  and 
comfortable  residence  at  a  cost  of  $2,500,  and  the 
home  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Snider  was  blessed  by  three 
children:  Manning,  who  was  born  April  8,  1875, 
and  is  a  student  in  the  State  Normal  University; 
Andrew  J.,  born  Jauuar}'  27,  1882;  and  Nellie, 
born  on  the  17th  of  January',  1886.  The  mother 
is  a  faithful  member  of  the  ]\Iethodist  Episcopal 
Church,  and  takes  an  active  part  in  Sunday-school 
work.  Mr.  .Snider  is  a  stalwart  supporter  of  the 
Democratic  party,  and  has  served  as  School  Di- 
rector. He  may  truly  be  called  a  self-made  man, 
for  since  starting  out  in  life  he  has  been  dependent 
entirely  upon  his  own  resources,  and  his  success  is 
the  result  of  his  own  labors. 


3^P 


(f^REDERlCK  WILLIAM  RIECKENBERG. 
[is^gv  The  world  is  crowded  with  men  and  women, 
/11,  each   trying   to   gain  success  through   the 

different  avenues  of  monej'-making,  and  day  after 
day  the  ceaseless  round  of  dut^^  goes  on,  some  giv- 
ing attention  to  professional  callings,  some  buying 
and  selling  in  commercial  headquarters,  and  others 
cultivating  the  soil.  It  is  generally  conceded  that 
the  agriculturist  leads  the  most  independent  life, 
and  certainly  to  no  class  of  bread-winners  are  we 
indebted  for  more  beneficial  results  than  to  the 
farmer. 

Among  those  in  Randolph  Country  who  are  iden- 
tified with  the  latter-named  class  ma}-  be  men- 
tioned the  subject  of  this  sketch,  who  was  born  in 
Wine  Hill,  this  count}-,  September  26,  1853.  His 
father,  Diederich  Rieekenberg,  was  born  in  Ger- 
many, and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  years  emigrated 
to  America,  and  after  working  in  New  Orleans, 
La.,  for  several  years,  came  to  Randolph  County, 
some  time  during  the  '30s.    Since  that  time  he  has 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


493 


been  closely  identified  with  the  farming  interests 
of  the  county,  and  is  still  living  at  Wine  Hill.  His 
wife,  whose  maiden  name  was  Margaret  Heitmann, 
died  in  1872. 

In  the  parochial  school  at  Wine  Ilill,  as  well  as 
the  public  schools  of  that  place,  the  subject  of  this 
sketch  received  a  practical  education.  He  worked 
on  the  home  farm  until  he  was  twenty-four,  when 
he  settled  upon  his  present  estate,  and  has  since 
devoted  his  attention  to  cultivating  and  improv- 
ing the  propert3-.  His  buildings  are  modern  in 
design  and  attractive  in  appearance,  while  he  has 
all  the  machinery  to  be  found  upon  a  first-class 
farm.  In  addition  to  the  raising  of  cereals  he  is 
largely  interested  in  stock-raising,  making  a  spe- 
cialty of  milch  cows.  He  has  an  interest  in  the 
Steeleville  creamery. 

Mr.  Rieckenbcrg  was  united  in  marriage  in 
1877  with  Jliss  Emma,  daughter  of  Conrad  and  M. 
(Royersher)  Voges,  who  reside  near  Red  Bud,  111. 
The  marriage  has  resulted  in  the  birth  of  six  chil- 
dren, namely:  Adelia,  George,  Helene,  William, 
Fritz  and  Rudolph,  all  of  whom  reside  with  their 
parents  and  attend  the  home  schools.  In  religious 
belief,  Mr.  Ricckeuberg  and  liis  entire  family  are 
identified  with  the  Lutheran  Church.  In  politics, 
he  has  been  a  life-long  Democrat,  and  has  served 
as  Road  Commissioner,  as  well  as  in  other  local 
positions  of  trust. 


ylLLIAM  A.  MILLIGAN,  who  is  always 
found  in  the  front  rank  of  any  enterprise 
calculated  to  promote  the  growth  and  up- 
building of  Coulterville,  is  a  citizen  whom  Ran- 
dolph County  could  ill  afford  to  lose.  He  is  both 
widely  and  favorably  known,  and  at  the  present 
time  is  carrying  on  a  good  trade  as  stationer  and 
jeweler.  In  local  affairs  he  has  also  been  promi- 
nent, having  been  City  Clerk  of  Coulterville  for 
three  years,  and  a  member  of  the  School  Board  for 
one  term. 

Samuel  and  Rachael  K.  (Miller)  Milligan,  the 
parents  of  our  subject,  were  natives  respectively 
of  Adams  County,  Ohio,  and  Saratoga  County, 
N.  Y.,  the  father  having  been  born   in   December, 


1809,  and  the  mother  in  October,  1817.  The  pa- 
ternal grandparents  of  our  subject,  William  and 
Jane  (Gibson)  Milligan,  came  from  Scotland.  His 
maternal  grandparents  were  also  born  across  the 
water,  AVilliam  Miller  being  a  native  of  Scotland, 
and  his  wife,  Margaret  Miller,  being  born  in 
Ireland. 

The  parents  of  our  subject  were  married  in  Illi- 
nois in  1837,  near  the  Garden  of  Eden,  and  after 
their  union,  located  near  Coulterville,  on  a  farm 
which  is  now  the  site  of  the  village.  When  Sam- 
uel Milligan  settled  here,  it  was  a  wild  and  uncul- 
tivated tract,  and  he  was  one  of  the  pioneers  in 
the  vicinity.  He  manifested  a  commendable  in- 
terest in  every  advance  movement,  and  took  an 
active  part  in  educational  and  ecclesiastical  affairs. 
With  his  wife  he  was  a  member  of  the  Reformed 
Presbyterian  Church.  He  died  July  13,  1852;  his 
wife  still  survives.  They  reared  a  family  of  eight 
children,  six  of  whom  are  now  living. 

AVilliam  A.  Milligan  was  born  on  the  old  home- 
stead February  23,  18-40,  and  remained  there  until 
1867.  After  attaining  his  majority,  he  superin- 
tended the  operations  of  the  estate  for  six  years, 
wlien  he  came  to  Coulterville  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  firm  of  A.  S.  Dickey  &  Co.,  continuing 
in  the  business  for  nearly  three  years.  This  ven- 
ture did  not  prove  at  all  successful,  and  in  Janu- 
ary, 1871,  Mr.  Milligan,  having  disposed  of  his 
stock  of  merchandise,  borrowed  $100,  which,  added 
to  the  amount  he  already  had,  enabled  him  to  open 
a  small  book  and  stationery  store,  and  in  this 
branch  of  trade  he  is  still  engaged. 

In  1873  our  subject,  in  company  with  his  brother 
J.  S.,  opened  a  fine  drug  store  in  this  place,  which 
they  continued  to  conduct  very  successfully  until 
1879.  The  old  homestead  already  spoken  of  was 
sold,  and  the  mone^'  derived  therefrom  divided 
among  the  children,  Mr.  Milligan's  share  being 
1800.  March  9,  1886,  he  married  Miss  Anna  Sor- 
rells,  a  native  of  Tennessee,  and  the  daughter  of 
Joseph  and  Emma  (Blair)  Sorrells.  Mrs.  Milligan 
was  born  February  18,  1859,  and  has  become  the 
mother  of  a  daughter,  Emil}^  who  was  born  De- 
cember 12,  1891. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Milligan  are  devoted  members  of 
the  United  Presbyterian  Church,  of  which  deuom- 


494 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


ination  in  CouUerville  our  subject  was  one  of  the 
founders,  and  also  served  as  its  Treasurer  for  a 
number  of  j-ears.  His  membership  is  now  with  the 
church  at  Oakdale.  He  is  a  stanch  Republican  in 
politics,  and  for  fifteen  ^x'ars  was  the  efficient 
servant  of  Uncle  Sam  as  Postmaster  at  this  place, 
and  for  five  years  served  as  Deputy  Postmaster. 
His  long  residence  here  h.as  made  him  well  known 
to  the  public,  and  that  he  is  highly  regarded  can- 
not be  doubled  when  the  large  number  of  his 
warm  friends  are  taken  into  consideration-.  He 
was  one  of  the  Directors  in  the  establishment  of 
the  Coulterville  flouring  mills,  and  also  owns  stock 
in  the  co-operative  creamery,  wliicli  forms  one  of 
the  industries  of  this  place. 


J^,  LFRED  C.  GANT,  a  son  of  a  well  known, 
(@A-J||    highly   respected    pioneer,  Alfred    Gant, 

///  Ik  Sr.,  and  a  native  of  Boone  County,  Kj'., 
^^  is  a  most  progressive  and  popular  citizen, 

and  is  an  intelligent,  genial  j^oung  man.  He  is 
prominentl}'  identified  with  the  farming  interests 
of  township  6,  range  7,  Randolph  County,  where 
he  is  ably  managing  his  extensive  agricultural  in- 
terests on  his  father's  finely  improved  farm  on 
section  14,  which  the  latter  purchased  in  his  earlj'^ 
manhood,  and  developed  b3'  hard  and  persistent 
labor  into  one  of  tlie  choicest  estates  in  this  locality. 

Tlie  father  of  our  subject  was  born  in  1820,  and 
when  a  child  of  four  years  was  brought  by  his 
parents  to  Randolph  County,  settling  on  a  farm 
within  one  mile  of  the  present  home  estate.  Alfred, 
Sr.,  had  to  go  a  distance  of  three  miles  to  school, 
and  notwithstanding  the  long  journey,  attended 
very  regularl}-.  He  improved  this  opportunity  un- 
til he  became  grown,  when  he  gave  his  entire  time 
to  helping  his  father.  After  his  marriage  he  started 
out  for  himself,  and  l)y  his  industry  and  economy 
became  possessed  of  an  abundance  of  propertj', 
which  included  fifteen  hundred  acres  of  as  fine 
land  as  is  to  be  found  in  the  county'.  This  he  took 
a;reat  pride  in  cultivating  and  improving,  and  it  is 
without  doubt  the  finest  in  the  township. 

Alfred  Gant,  Sr.,  was  married  March  19,  1846, 
to  Martha  Milligen,  whose  parents  were  early  set- 


tlers in  Randolph  Count}',  and  to  their  union  were 
born  eight  children.  He  was  called  to  the  land 
beyond  March  21,  1882,  mourned  and  respected 
bj'  his  many  friends  and  acquaintances.  His  good 
wife  followed  him  to  the  better  land  May  29,  189.3. 
In  politics  Mr.  Gant  was  first  a  Whig,  but  on  tlie 
organization  of  the  Republican  part}'  was  always 
found  read}'  to  support  its  candidates.  He  and 
his  good  wife  were  both  devoted  members  of  the 
Methodist  Church. 

The  subject  of  this  notice,  wlio  was  born  on  his 
present  farm,  April  25,  1868,  obtained  a  primary 
education  in  the  district  schools,  and  assisted  his 
father  in  the  farm  work  until  reaching  his  eigh- 
teenth 3'ear.  At  this  period  in  his  life  he  entered 
the  school  at  Lebanon,  Oiiio,  and  was  a  faithful 
student  there  for  seven  mouths.  He  again  return- 
ed to  the  farm  and  continued  his  agricultural  pur- 
suits. Young  Gant  tlien  made  two  trips  through 
the  west  on  prospecting  tours,  but  finally  settled 
down  to  carrj'  on  his  chosen  vocation.  He  is  look- 
ed upon  as  one  of  the  leading  3'oung  farmers  in 
southern  Illinois,  and  has  reason  to  be  proud  of 
his  fine  possession,  which  was  left  him  on  the  death 
of  his  father. 

October  13,  1892,  our  subject  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Mollie  E.  Crisler,  a  daughter  of 
Fletciier  and  Mary  (Harmon)  Crisler,  both  natives 
of  Randolph  County.  Our  subject  was  formerly  a 
member  of  the  Knights  of  PytWas  at  Chester,  and 
is  a  stanch  Democrat  in  his  political  affiliations. 


^.^-m^i^^i^^i^^^^^rSsS-^m^M 


OHN  A.  WAGNER.  Randolph  County  is 
the  home  of  quite  a  number  of  men  who 
were  thrown  upon  their  own  resources  at  an 
earl}'  age,  and  whose  natural  aptness  and 
energj'  were  developed  and  strengthened  b}'  con- 
tact witii  the  world,  resulting  in  making  their 
lives  more  than  ordinarily  successful.  Among  this 
number  is  John  A.  Wagner, one  of  the  most  prom- 
inent and  successful  merchants  of  Evansville. 

A  native  of  Germany,  our  subject  was  born  in 
Kur-Hessen  May  27,  1848,  and  is  a  son  of  Valen- 
tine and  Anna  Catherine  (Dill)  Wagner.  The 
parents   emigrated   to  the  United  States  in  1857, 


PORTRAIT  AKD  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


495 


and  coming  directly  "to  Illinois,  located  in  Monroe 
Count}',  where  the}'  made  their  home  on  a  farm 
for  eight  months.  August  10  of  the  following 
year,  thej'  removed  to  Evansville,  where  they  died 
just  thirty-six  hours  apart  in  1889,  the  father's 
decease  occurring  March  l,and  the  mother's  March 
3.  The  father  was  a  mining  engineer  in  his  na- 
tive land,  but  after  coming  to  America  followed 
the  trade  of  a  cooper.  The  paternaf  grandfather 
of  our  subject,  Nicholas  Wagner,  was  also  a  native 
of  Germany, and  died  there  when  Valentine  was  a 
child. 

The  parental  family  included  two  sons  and  four 
daughters,  of  whom  those  living  are:  Catharine, 
Mrs.  G.  E.  Heck;  Doroth}*,  Mrs.  Joseph  Yeagle; 
Frederick  and  our  ."ubject.  John  A.  has  made 
this  place  his  home  since  1858,  and  received  his 
education  in  the  common  schools,  which  he  at- 
tended during  the  winter  seasons.  Soon  after 
reaching  his  majoritj'  he  began  working  at  the 
trade  of  a  cooper,  which  he  had  learned  under 
his  father.  He  continued  to  be  thus  engaged  until 
1867,  and  later  followed  the  carpenter's  trade  for 
about  three  years.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time 
he  began  clerking  in  the  general  store  of  John 
Bratnej-,  of  this  place,  and  remained  with  him  for 
three  years  and  four  months.  After  leaving  his 
emplo}'  his  services  were  engaged  by  George 
Wehrheim,and  fourteen  months  later  he  formed  a 
partnership  with  his  brother  Frederick  and  opened 
up  a  general  store,  which  they  conducted  success- 
fully for  eleven  3-ears.  Upon  disposing  of  the 
stock,  our  subject  found  another  location  and  has 
since  been  engaged  in  the  mercantile  trade. 

September  17,  1874,  John  A.  AYagner  and  Miss 
Sophia  Heiman,  a  native  of  St.  Louis,  were  united 
in  marriage.  To  them  were  born  five  children,  of 
whom  the  three  living  are  Frederick,  Adelaide  and 
Anna.  Mr.  AVagner  is  public  spirited,  and  main- 
tains a  deep  interest  in  all  movements  which 
promise  to  advance  the  material  or  moral  prosper- 
it}'  of  the  citizens.  His  many  sterling  qualities  and 
unassuming  manners  have  won  him  a  high  place  in 
the  esteem  of  his  fellow-citizens,  who  have  elected 
him  to  the  offices  of  Town  Treasurer  and  Trustee. 
Socially,  he  is  a  member  of  Egypt  Star  Lodge  No. 
286, 1.  0.  O.  F.,  of  Bud  Bed,  and  joined   the  Ma- 


sonic fraternity  in  1876,  being  a  member  of  Kas- 
kaskia  Lodge  No.  86.  He  is  also  a  member  of  Sta- 
ley's  Chapter  No.  103,  at  Sparta.  In  politics  he  is 
a  Republican  and  cast  his  first  vote  for  U.  S. 
Grant. 

_^=^#P '    . 

*^«i  RNEST  C.  ROWOLD,  who  is  engaged  in 
fe  general  farming  on  section  25,  Horse  Prai- 
/!' — '^j  rie,  Randolph  Count}',  was  born  in  Prussia, 
in  1835.  and  at  the  age  of  eleven  years  came  to 
the  United  States  with  his  parents,  Frederick  and 
Sophia  (Yeager)  Rowold,  both  of  whom  were  also 
natives  of  Prussia.  They  made  their  wa}'  to  Liv- 
erpool, and  while  en  route  for  that  place  were 
wrecked  in  the  North  Sea.  From  England  they 
sailed  for  New  Orleans,  reaching  the  Crescent  City 
in  January,  1847,  and  then  came  up  the  Mississippi 
to  Cairo,  thence  to  St.  Louis,  and  on  to  Horse 
Prairie.  The  father  died  the  year  after  his  arrival, 
but  the  mother  survived  until  1862.  Their  fam- 
ily numbered  five  children,  all  of  whom  are  j'et 
living,  as  follows:  Frederick;  Conrad,  who  owns 
and  operates  one  hundred  and  twenty  acres  of 
the  old  homestead  farm;  Ernest  C,  of  this  sketch; 
Wilhelmina,  widow  of  Frederick  Hartman,  of  Horse 
Prairie,  and  Emily,  wife  of  Henry  Busch. 

Judge  Rowold  was  reared  to  manhood  under 
the  parental  roof,  becoming  familiar  with  all  the 
duties  of  farm  life  and  also  with  its  pleasures.  He 
attended  the  common  schools,  and  ere  his  majority 
learned  the  cooper's  trade,  which  he  followed  for 
some  time.  In  1857  he  chose  as  a  companion  and 
helpmate  on  life's  journej- Miss  Caroline  Hartman. 
By  their  marriage  were  born  twelve  children,  nine 
of  whom  are  still  living:  Ernest,  who  is  engaged, 
in  farming  in  this  county;  Frederick,  of  Bueksville, 
Monroe  Count}';  Caroline,  wife  of  Henry  Arbeiter, 
a  resident  of  Jackson  County;  Sophia,  wife  of 
Charles  Kloepper,  an  agriculturist  of  this  commu- 
nity; William,  who  is  living  in  Red  Bud;  Herman, 
who  spent  five  years  in  a  school  at  Springfield,  111., 
and  is  now  pastor  of  a  Lutheran  Church  in  Mar- 
quette County,  Wis.;  Hannah,  Mina  and  Henry. 

Through  the  winter  season  Mr.  Rowold  has  fol- 
lowed coopering,  and  in  the  summer  months  has 
devoted  his  time  and  energies  to  farm  work.     He 


496 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD, 


now  owns  one  hundred  and  twenty  acres  of  good 
land,  tlie  greater  part  of  which  is  under  a  high 
state  of  cultivation.  The  improvements  upon  his 
place  indicate  his  thrift  and  enterprise  and  are 
such  as  are  seen  on  a  model  farm. 

In  politics  Judge  Kowold  has  long  been  a  stanch 
Democrat.  P''or  two  terms  he  served  as  Coun- 
ty Commissioner  with  credit  to  himself  and  to  the 
satisfaction  of  his  constituents.  For  sixteen  con- 
secutive years  he  was  a  member  of  the  School 
Board  and  did  effective  service  in  the  cause  of  ed- 
ucation. For  the  same  length  of  time  he  also 
served  as  Appraiser  of  the  Horse  Prairie  Insurance 
Company.  In  public  office,  as  in  private  life,  he 
has  always  been  true  and  faithful  to  his  duties,  and 
hence  he  has  won  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  a 
large  circle  of  friends  and  acquaintances.  He  is 
now  a  Director  in  the  Horse  Prairie  Township  Mu- 
tual Insurance  Company-. 

?REDERICK  SCIIRIEBER,whois  numbered 
among  the  honored  pioneer  settlers  of 
Randolph  County,  located  here  in  1837, 
more  than  half  a  century  ago.  He  at  once  took 
up  land  from  the  Government  and  began  the  de- 
velopment of  a  farm.  With  the  historj'  of  fron- 
tier days  he  was  familiar,  and  the  hardships  and 
trials  of  pioneer  life  were  known  to  him  through 
experience.  He  was  a  man  of  an  industrious  and 
enterprising  disposition,  and  through  his  untiring 
labors  he  developed  a  fine  farm,  continuing  its 
cultivation  until  his  death,  in  September,  1867.  He 
left  a  widow  and  five  children.  The  former  after- 
ward became  the  wife  of  his  brother,  Charles  Schrie- 
ber.  The  members  of  the  family  are,  Fritz,  who  now 
resides  in  Washington  County;  Henry,  who  is  also 
living  in  Washington  County;  Charles  W.,  the 
third  in  order  of  birth;  William,  who  makes  his 
home  in  this  county,  and  Ed,  who  is  also  living  in 
Wasliington  County. 

Charles  W.  Schrieber  was  born  on  the  old  home- 
stead farm  in  1854,  there  spent  the  days  of  his 
boyhood  and  youth,  and  has  made  it  his  home 
since  attaining  to  years  of  maturity.  It  is  there- 
fore doubly  dear  to  him.     In  the  common  schools 


of  the  neighborhood  he  acquired  a  good  education, 
which  well  fitted  him  for  the  practical  duties  of 
life.  After  his  father's  death,  when  the  estate  was 
settled  up,  he  received  the  old  homestead  of  two 
hundred  and  forty  acres  as  his  share  of  the  prop- 
erty and  has  since  here  carried  on  general  farm- 
ing. In  connection  with  this  he  has  a  general 
merchandise  store  in  Prairie  and  is  doing  a  good 
business  along  that  line. 

In  1882  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  Charles 
W.  Schrieber  and  Miss  Annie  Saw3'er.  One  child 
graced  their  union,  Ida.  The  mother  was  laid  to 
rest  in  1887,  and  Mr.  Schrieber  afterward  married 
Miss  Mary  Goetting,  b}'  whom  he  has  one  child, 
Stalla. 

In  politics  our  subject  has  followed  in  the  po- 
litical footsteps  of  his  father  and  is  a  stanch  Demo- 
crat. He  takes  an  active  part  in  local  politics  and 
does  all  in  his  power  to  insure  the  success  and  pro- 
mote the  growth  of  his  party.  Public  spirited  and 
progressive,  he  manifests  a  commendable  interest 
in  everything  that  pertains  to  the  welfare  of  the 
community  and  is  ever  found  in  the  front  ranks 
of  those  enterprises  which  are  calculated  for  public 
advancement.  Both  he  and  his  wife  are  members  of 
the  Lutheran  Church,  and  the  community  in  wliich 
his  entire  life  has  been  passed  finds  in  him  a  worthy 
and  valued  citizen  and  one  who  has  the  high  re- 
gard of  all  with  whom  business  or  social  relations 
have  brought  him  in  contact. 


T|  AMES  II.  MORELAND,  a  prosperous  agri- 
I  culturist  and  successful  stock-raiser,  resid- 
^^  I  ing  upon  one  of  the  best  farms  in  township 
^^f/  5,  range  6,  Randolph  County,  is  the  proprie- 
tor of  two  hundred  and  fortj'  acres  of  land.  He  is 
the  son  of  James  Moreland,  who  was  born  in  the 
North  of  Ireland  in  1787,  and  when  a  3'oung  man 
accompanied  his  father  to  America,  landing  in  New 
York  Cit}'.  Upon  locating  in  Greene  County,  Ohio, 
he  purchased  sixty  acres  of  land,  on  which  he  con- 
tinued to  reside  until  1833.  In  that  year  he  came  to 
Randolph  County  and  made  his  home  on  section  3, 
township  5,  range  6,  where  he  died  In    1848.     In 


\ 


4  ■ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  Rp:CORD. 


499 


Ireland  he  followed  the  trade  of  a  weaver,  but 
after  coming  to  the  United  States  he  engaged  in 
farming. 

The  paternal  grandfather  of  our  subject,  Will- 
iam Moreland,  was  also  a  native  of  tlie  Emerald 
Isle,  and  upon  coming  to  America  with  his  son, 
located  in  the  Buckeye  State,  where  he  remained 
until  death.  Mrs.  Elizabeth  (Killough)  Moreland, 
the  mother  of  our  subject,  was  born  in  the  Alibey- 
ville  District,  S.  C,  and  at  the  death  of  her  mother 
removed  with  her  father  to  Ohio.  Her  parents 
were  William  and  Elizabeth  Killough,  natives  of 
South  Carolina  and  of  English  descent.  She  was 
married  to  James  Moreland  in  1816,  and  by  him 
became  the  mother  of  eleven  children,  of  whom 
Sarah,  Mary  Ann,  James  Killough,  Thomas  and 
Lydia  A.  (Mrs.  Elliott)  are  deceased.  Those  liv- 
ing besides  our  subject  are  Amelia,  Mrs.  David 
Tweed,  of  Sparta;  William  G.,  who  makes  his  home 
in  Page  County,  Iowa;  John  L.,  a  retired  farmer 
in  Kansas  City,  Mo.;  Elizabeth,  wife  of  Samuel 
Dickey,  a  farmer  of  Kansas;  and  Margaret,  the 
wife  of  Tlieron  McLean,  who  resides  in  Sparta. 

James  H.  Moreland  was  born  in  September,  1838, 
in  Randolpli  County,  and  was  given  a  good  edu- 
cation in  the  district  schools.  After  the  decease 
of  his  father  he  remained  at  home  with  liis  mother 
until  her  death,  and  was  only  sixteen  years  of  age 
when  he  took  charge  of  the  home  farm.  In  1861 
he  joined  the  Union  arm}',  enlisting  in  Companj- 
C,  Thirtieth  Illinois  Infantry,  under  Capt.  James 
C.  Wilson.  His  first  engagement  was  at  Britain 
Lane,  where  one  hundred  and  eighty-nine  Confed- 
erates and  two  Union  soldiers  ^ere  killed.  The 
last  battle  in  which  he  participated  was  that  of  At- 
lanta. During  his  entire  period  of  service  he  w.as 
neither  wounded  nor  taken  [)risoner. 

When  mustered  out  of  service,  in  December,  1864, 
at  Savannah,  Ga.,  young  Moreland  returned  home 
and  located  upon  the  place  which  is  his  present 
home.  The  lady  whom  he  married  January  1, 
1878,  was  Miss  Nellie  E.,  daughter  of  John  K.  and 
Elizabeth  (Gillespie)  Burke.  Mrs.  Moreland  is  a 
native  of  this  count}',  while  her  parents  were  born 
in  South  Carolina  and  were  of  English  descent. 
To  our  subject  and  his  wife  were  born  sis  chil- 
dren, of  whom  two  died  in  infancy.  Effle  is  a 
16 


student  in  the  schools  of  Sparta;    Ida,  William  and 
Bessie  are  at  home. 

In  his  political  relations  our  subject  is  a  stanch 
Republican  and  takes  a  leading  part  in  local  mat- 
ters. He  was  elected  County  Commissioner  in 
1891,  and  is  recognized  as  one  of  the  foremost  cit- 
izens of  his  township.  He  and  his  wife  are  mem- 
bers of  the  Presbj'terian  Church  and  are  ever 
ready  to  assist  in  the  religious  work  or  the  benevo- 
lent enterprises  of  the  vicinity. 


LVAII  BLANCHARD,  formerly  one  of  the 
f^'/Uy  most  prominent  merchants  of  Tamaroa, 
and  well  known  tiiroughout  southern 
Illinois,  died  at  the  Baptist  .Sanitarium  in 
St.  Louis  January  21,  1894.  In  his  demise  it  was 
realized  that  the  best  interests  of  Perry  County 
suffered  an  irremediable  loss.  For  many  years  his 
history  was  inseparably  associated  with  that  of 
the  community  where  he  resided,  and  he  contrib- 
uted largely  to  the  develojiment  of  many  of  its 
most  prominent  enterprises.  In  addition  to  con- 
ducting an  extensive  trade  as  a  merchant,  he 
owned  a  farm  of  three  hundred  and  eighteen  acres 
near  Tamaroa,  as  well  as  a  valuable  estate  in  Jack- 
son and  Williamson   Counties. 

In  Will  County,  this  state,  September  10,  1843, 
the  subject  of  this  sketch  was  born,  being  a  son  of 
Hiram  and  Lura  (Roots)  Blanchard,  natives  of 
Massachusetts.  The  father  was  a  contractor,  and 
aided  in  the  construction  of  the  Erie  Canal,  and 
also  assisted  in  building  the  canal  from  Chicago 
to  Peru,  111.  He  was  a  man  of  excellent  judgment, 
and  was  thoroughly  informed  on  all  matters  per- 
taining to  his  line  of  work.  Our  subject  was  one 
of  seven  children,  the  others  being  Mrs.  Annie 
Kennedy,  who  died  in  Omaha,  Neb.;  Lizzie,  the 
wife  of  Dr.  Wayne  Sims,  who  resides  in  Green- 
ville, Tex.;  Townsend,  a  resident  of  Tamaroa; 
Hackley, deceased;  Mrs.  Emily  Merrick;  and  Hiram, 
who  was  killed  b}'  Quaiitrell's  men  at  Olathe,  Kan. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  was  the  daughter  of 
Rev.  Philan  Roots,  who  was  one  of  the  first  Baptist 
ministers  in  New  York.  Two  of  his  sons  came  to 
Illinois  and  were  numbered  among  the  most  influ- 


500 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


ential  raen  of  the  Prairie  State.  In  1857  the  sub- 
ject of  this  sketch  was  brought  by  his  parents  to 
the  present  site  of  Tamaroa.  In  1863  be  embarked 
in  the  hardware  business  at  tliis  place,  but  soon 
afterward  enjjagcd  in  general  merchandising.  In 
this  enterprise  he  was  very  successful,  having  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  the  various  departments 
of  the  business.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was 
recognized  as  one  of  the  moneyed  men  of  the  city. 

.Tune  20,  186<l,Alvah  Blanchardand  MissAddie 
Lathrop  were  united  in  marriage.  Their  union  was 
blessed  by  the  birth  of  four  children:  Guy;  Maude, 
the  wife  of  George  Wykes,  of  Carbondale;  Scott 
andlsa.  The  two  son  were  associated  in  business 
with  their  father.  As  a  Democrat,  Mr.  Blanchard 
was  closely  associated  with  the  political  affairs  of 
his  township  and  county-  for  a  number  of  years, 
and  filled  many  of  the  most  important  positions 
within  the  gift  of  his  fellow-citizens.  From  1882 
until  1888  he  was  County  Commissioner,  serving 
for  two  terms  in  that  capacity.  At  the  time  of  his 
demise  he  was  President  of  the  Board  of  Trustees 
of  the  Southern  Illinois  Insane  Asylum.  Sociallj', 
he  was  a  Mason. 

The  press  of  southern  Illinois  paid  many  merited 
tributes  to  the  memory-  of  Mr.  Blanchard, and  from 
these  we  quote  as  follows  from  the  Democrat,  at 
Pinckne3'ville,  January  26,  1894:  "Old  almost  as 
the  eternal  hills  is  the  sajMng  that  'Death  loves  a 
shining  mark.'  It  was  his  when  he  claimed  the 
above-named  Perry  County  citizen,  on  Sunday'  last, 
Januarj-  21,  in  St.  Louis.  His  loss  falls  heavily, 
even  outside  the  family  circle.  Perry  County  loses 
a  citizen  who  has  given  his  best  efforts  to  her  prog- 
ress, having  been  a  leading  citizen  for  a  generation. 
His  home  town,  Tamaroa,  has  lost  a  friend  whose 
aid  and  counsel  were  invaluable.  To  no  one  man 
can  be  given  more  credit  for  her  prosperity  and  ad- 
vancement than  to  him  whose  new-made  grave 
hides  from  mortal  view  one  of  nature's  noblemen. 
Honored  by  the  Governor  of  our  great  state  in  be- 
ing chosen  from  among  hundreds  as  Trustee  of  one 
of  Illinois'  great  charitable  institutions,  he  dis- 
charged well  the  duty  thus  imposed  by  his  native 
state.  He  was  chosen  President  of  the  Board  of 
Trustees  uix)n  its  organization,  and  from  the  first 
became  active  in  promoting  the  welfare  of  the  in- 


stitution and  its  inmates,  having  at  once  mastered 
the  details  of  its  management  and  successfully  en- 
tered upon  and  carried  out  reforms  and  improve- 
ments that  proved  his  great  ability  in  that  direc- 
tion. In  this  hospital  work  he  took  an  especial 
pride,  and  his  efforts  have  been  worth  much  to  the 
state  institution  and  its  helpless  wards. 

"  '  An  honest  man  is  the  noblest  work  of  God.' 
Old  and  true  saying;  one  brought  to  memory  by 
tliis  loss  to  the  family,  state,  count}' and  town; 
one  that  enables  his  fellows  to  grasp  the  cause  for 
grief  when  all  is  ended  in  such  a  one's  life.  Sterl- 
ing and  unswerving  honesty  was  that  possessed  by 
Alvali  Blanchard  in  all  his  dealings  with  men. 
Small  wonder  he  had  no  enemies  and  was  univer- 
salh'  loved  and  respected.  His  path  was  laid  along 
the  line  of  the  Golden  Rule.  So  to  honor,  more 
than  even  to  his  indomitable  energy  and  wise  man- 
agement, will  be  truthfully  ascribed  his  successful 
life." 

From  the  Tamaroa  correspondence  in  the  Dem- 
ocrat we  take  the  following:  "The  funeral  serv- 
ices were  held  Tuesday  morning  in  the  Presby- 
terian Church,  ■which  was  crowded,  even  all  the 
standing  room  being  occupied.  Rev.  J.  H.  Spil- 
man  preached  a  short  discourse  from  James  4:14: 
'Ye  know  not  what  shall  be  on  the  morrow.' 
A  long  procession  followed  the  remains  to  the 
cemeterj-,  where  the  Masons  performed  their  im- 
pressive services,  which  were  in  charge  of  Judge 
Monroe  Crawford,  of  Jonesboro.  After  the  grave 
was  filled,  it  was  decorated  with  beautiful  floral 
offerings  of  hothouse  flowers,  sent  bj'  business  men 
of  St.  Louis  and  friends  in  our  town.  The  business 
houses  were  closed  during  the  hours  of  the  service, 
and  all  respect  was  shown  to  the  honor  of  one  who 
lived  in  the  hearts  of  the  people  and  who  had 
done  so  much  for  the  town.  The  Board  of  Direc- 
tors, remembering  his  devotedness  to  the  public 
school  cause  and  the  faithfulness  with  which  the 
deceased  had  discharged  every  duty  when  he  was  a 
member  of  the  Board,  ordered  the  school  closed 
during  the  hours  of  the  service.  The  family  can 
feel  assured  that  the}'  have  the  heart-felt  sympa- 
thy'of  the  entire  community.  Men  from  neigh- 
boring towns  and  friends  of  all  nationalities  gath- 
ered from  far  and  near  to  pay  their  last  tokens  of 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


501 


respect  to  the  departed  one,  who  now  rests  in 
his  quiet  bed.  Peace  be  to  bis  slumbers,  and  may 
great  peace,  whicli  Jesus  alone  can  give,  be  given 
to  the  deeply  bereaved  family." 


•^^• 


=*®^ 


JIeFFERSON  JENKINS  is  the  owner  of  one 
of  the  finest  farms  of  southern  Illinois. 
I  His  valuable  property  is  located  on  section 
19,  Carbondale  Township,  Jackson  County, 
where  he  lias  resided  since  1885.  The  home  is  an 
elegant  residence,  which  was  erected  at  a  cost  of 
$10,000.  Upon  the  place  are  three  fine  barns,  all 
modern  conveniences  and  accessories  and  the  latest 
improved  machinery,  and  in  the  fine  orchard  are 
several  thousand  trees.  The  farm  is  two  hundred 
acres  in  extent. 

Mr.  Jenkins  was  born  April  24,  1838,  on  the  old 
homestead  of  the  family-.  His  father,  James  Jen- 
kins, was  born  in  Kentucky  in  1800,  and  was  a 
farmer  by  occupation.  His  brother,  Arthur  Jen- 
kins, served  as  a  Captain  under  Jackson  at  the  bat- 
tle of  New  Orleans,  in  the  War  of  1812.  The 
paternal  grandfather,  Shadrack  Jenkins,  was  a 
native  of  North  Carolina,  and  was  of  "Welsh  de- 
scent. He  was  numbered  among  the  Revolution- 
ary heroes,  and  in  the  war  for  independence  was 
taken  piisoner  by  the  Tories.  The  mother  of  our 
subject  was  Susanna,  daughter  of  Robert  Stephen- 
son. She  was  born  in  Smith  County,  Tenn.,  in 
1798. 

James  Jenkins  first  came  to  Illinois  in  1818,  lo- 
cating in  Galena.  He  afterward  made  several 
trips  to  Kentucky.  On  the  17th  of  April,  1831, 
in  Perrj-  County,  111.,  he  married  Miss  Stephen- 
son, and  then  located  upon  a  farm  in  that  locality. 
Four  years  later  he  removed  to  a  farm  two  miles 
south  of  Murph3-sboro.  This  part  of  the  state  was 
all  wild  and  unimproved  and  was  inhabited  bj' 
nianj-  Kaskaskia  Indians.  The  land  was  covered 
with  timber,  and  the  work  of  civilization  seemed 
scarcely  begun.  Mr.  Jenkins  started  out  in  life  for 
himself  in  limited  circumstances,  but  by  well  di- 
rected efforts  became  the  owner  of  eight  hundred 
acres  of  valuable  land.  In  politics  he  was  a  stanch 
Republican,  and  he  and  his  wife  were  members  of 


the  Baptist  Church.     His  death  occurred  March  7, 
1861,  and  his  wife  passed  away  December  23,  1865. 
Of  their  eight  children,  only  two  are    now  living. 
Marium,  widow  of  Richard  Jukes,  resides  in  Mc- 
Pherson   Count}-,  Kan.,  and   has   seven    children. 
j   The  eldest  son.  Hamilton,  served  throughout  the 
I    late  war  as  a  member  of  Company  B,  Eighty-first 
I   Illinois  lufantr}-,  and  was  made  Orderly  Sergeant. 
While  crawling  from  tiie  rifle-pits  at  Yicksburg  to 
get  water,  a  rebel  bullet  passed  through  his  whis- 
kers, but  he  escaped  iujurv. 

Mr.  Jenkins  of  this  sketch  was  reared  on  the 
old  homestead,  and  acquired  his  education  in  the 
district  schools.  On  his  father's  death  he  became 
owner  of  the  farm.  He  was  married  November  4, 
1863.  to  Miss  Fannie  Eakin,  daughter  of  Stephen 
and  Martha  W.  (Walker)  Eakin.  Her  father  was 
born  in  Virginia  in  1801,  and  her  mother  in  Ken- 
tucky in  1807.  They  were  married  in  the  former 
stite,  and  there  resided  until  their  emigration  to 
Illinois  in  1833,  when  they  located  in  Levan 
Township,  Jackson  County,  on  a  new  farm.  The 
first  school  of  that  township  was  taught  b}'  an 
aunt  of  Mrs.  Eiakin,  Miss  Sarah  J.  Moore,  who  was 
also  prominent  in  promoting  the  best  interests  of 
this  locality-,  aiding  in  all  that  tended  to  elevate 
the  comraunit}-.  She  died  in  1856.  and  was  buried 
in  Du  Quoin.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Eakin  were  charter 
members  of  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  organ- 
ized in  Jackson  County,  were  prominent  in  chuich 
work,  and  were  highly  respected  people.  He  took 
an  active  part  in  politics  and  supported  the  Dem- 
ocratic part\-.  His  death  occurred  in  1876,  and 
his  wife  passed  away  in  1855.  They  were  the 
parents  of  eleven  children,  of  whom  six  are  now 
living:  Francis  M.,  Robert  S.,  Joseph  H.,  Stephen 
P.;  Eleanor  S.,  wife  of  Alex  Imhoff,  of  Ft.  Scott, 
Kan.,  and  Mrs.  Jenkins. 

The  last-named  was  born  in  Levan  Township, 
March  16,  1842,  and  completed  her  education  in  a 
boarding  school  of  Holly  Springs,  Miss.  At  the 
age  of  fifteen  she  began  teaching,  and  followed 
that  profession  for  five  years,  or  until  her  marriage. 
Unto  our  subject  and  his  wife  were  born  ten  chil- 
dren, of  whom  eight  are  j-et  living:  J.  Howard; 
Edgar  Ellsworth,  a  farmer  of  Carbondale  Town- 
ship, who  married  AUie  Johnson,  by  whom  he  has 


502 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL    RECORD. 


one  child;  Henry  H.,  whose  wife  died,  leaving  one 
child;  Edith  May,  wife  of  Ed  P.  Trobaugli,  of 
Murphysboro  Township,  by  whom  she  has  two 
children;  Gertrude  Blanche,  Anna  Louise,  Nellie 
Florence  and  Alice  Kate.  They  lost  twin  boys  in 
infanc}'.  Tiie  eldest  son  is  a  conductor  on  the 
Mobile  ct  Ohio  Railroad. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  .lenkins  have  given  their  children 
good  educational  advantages,  thus  fitting  them 
for  the  practical  duties  of  life.  This  worthy*  cou- 
ple began  their  domestic  life  on  the  old  homestead, 
and  there  resided  until  removing  to  their  present 
home  in  1885.  The  old  home  comprises  one 
hundred  and  sixty-seven  acres,  and  is  still  owned 
by  our  subject,  who  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  most 
progressive  farmers  of  the  neigliborhood.  Socially 
he  is  a  member  of  Amity  Lodge,  I.  O.  O.  F.,  of 
Murphysboro,  and  in  politics  he  fs  a  Republican. 
He  served  for  three  terms  as  Supervisor,  and  for 
fifteen  3'ears  has  been  Township  Trustee,  a  fact 
which  shows  the  confidence  reposed  in  him  and  the 
high  regard  in  which  lie  is  held  by  his  fellow- 
townsmen. 

.     ' 0^P • 

EDWIN  M.  HANSON  is  a  worthy  represent- 
ative of  the  agricultural  interests  of  Jack- 
son County.  He  successfully  follows  farm- 
ing on  section  8,  Makanda  Township,  where  for 
some  years  he  has  made  his  home.  A  native  of  York- 
shire, England,  he  was  born  March  19,  1819.  The 
date  March  19  was  a  memorable  one  in  the  family, 
for  the  mother  and  three  sons  were  born  on  that 
day  of  the  year. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  Hamor  Hanson,  was 
born  in  Yorkshire  in  1782,  and  was  a  son  of 
Abraham  Hanson,  a  native  of  the  same  county. 
The  former  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  goods 
for  the  American  market,  and  in  1804  came  to 
this  country.  Later  he  returned  to  England,  but 
in  1824  again  crossed  the  Atlantic,  locating  in 
Philadelphia.  In  his  native  land  he  married 
Martha  Moorehouse,  who  was  born  in  Yorkshire 
in  1782.  In  1827  she  brought  her  children  to 
the  United  States,  joining  her  husband  in  Phila- 
delphia. In  1829  the  familv  came  to  Jackson 
County,  111.,  locating  on   section  31,  Carbondale 


Township.  There  were  but  few  families  in  the 
county',  and  all  was  wild  and  unimproved.  The 
parents  here  spent  their  last  days,  the  father's 
death  occurring  in  1844,  while  the  mother  passed 
away  in  1861.  Tiieir  children  were:  Batley,  born 
in  1802:  John  M.,  in  1804;  Joseph,  in  1805;  Har- 
riet, in  1808;  Charlotte,  in  1811;  Sarah,  in  1812; 
Abraham,  in  1815;  Henry,  in  1817;  E.  M.,in  1819; 
Hamor  in  1820;  Samuel,  in  1823;  and  Judith,  in 
1824. 

Our  subject  is  now  the  onl^'  survivor  of  the 
family.  His  education  was  acquired  in  his  native 
land,  and  he  there  engaged  in  storekeeping  until 
seventeen  years  of  age.  The  jear  1836  witnessed 
his  emigration  to  America,  and  for  a  short  time 
he  was  employed  as  a  machinist  in  Philadelphia. 
In  1838  he  came  to  Illinois  and  made  his  home 
with  his  father  until  his   marriage.     In   February, 

1843,  he  wedded  Elizabeth  Hiller,  who  was  born 
in  Kentucky  in  1824,  .and  was  a  daughter  of  the 
Rev.  Simon  Hiller,  one  of  the  early  preachers  of 
this  county.     She  was  called   to  her    final  rest  in 

1844.  The  previous  year  Mr.  Hanson  came  to 
this  county  and  secured  from  the  Government 
a  tract  of  timber  land,  from  which  he  has  hewed 
out  a  fine  farm.  In  the  fall  of  1844  he  wedded 
Nancy  Clinton,  who  was  born  in  Kentuck\"  Janu- 
ar}'  16,  1827,  and  was  brought  to  this  state  in 
1829  by  her  parents,  Zachary  and  Sarah  (Hanks) 
Clinton,  natives  of  Kentucky,  who  settled  on  a 
new  farm  near  DuQuoin,  Perry  County.  In  De- 
cember, 1838,  they  located  in  Murphysboro  Town- 
ship, Jackson  County,  where  they  opened  up 
another  farm,  and  in  1854  removed  to  a  farm  on 
section  5,  Makanda  Township,  Where  the  father 
died  in  1859.  His  wife  survived  him  only  two 
years.  Of  their  five  children,  three  are  yet  living: 
Mrs.  Hanson,  Mrs.  Rebecca  Crowell  and  Mrs. 
Martha  Boone.  The  parents  were  both  members 
of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  E.  M.  Hanson  were  born 
seven  children:  Caroline, deceased;  Cameron  C,  de- 
ceased, who  was  married  and  had  four  children; 
Albert  B.,  deceased ;  Hamor  M.,  of  Makanda  Town- 
ship, who  married  Louisa  Gregory  and  has  five 
children;  Mary  J.,  wife  of  Calvin  Biggs,  by  whom 
she  has  four  children ;  John  E.,  of  Makanda  Town- 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


503 


ship,  who  wedded  Melissa  Foster  and  has  three 
children;  and  Louis  IL,  who  completes  the  family. 

Mr.  Hanson  is  the  oldest  settler  living  in  Ma- 
kanda  Township,  and  is  numbered  among  tiie 
county's  honored  pioneers.  He  has  upon  his  farm 
some  rails  which  he  made  a  lialf -century  ago. 
He  owns  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres  of  land,  of 
which  one  hundred  and  twenty  acres  have  been 
placed  under  cultivation  through  his  own  labors. 
During  the  building  of  the  Illinois  Central  Rail- 
road, he  and  his  brother  .John  kept  .an  extensive 
store  on  the  farm. 

Mr.  Hanson  aided  in  the  organization  of  Ma- 
kanda  Township,  iielped  to  organize  the  school 
district,  and  has  been  a  member  of  the  School 
Board  for  fifteen  years.  For  fourteen  years  he 
was  Justice  of  the  Peace,  was  Assessor  one  term, 
and  for  over  twenty  years  has  been  Judge  of 
Elections.  In  politics  he  is  a  Democrat.  The  prom- 
inent part  which  he  has  taken  in  the  upbuilding 
of  the  community  and  the  promotion  of  its  best 
interests  numbers  him  among  the  valued  citizens, 
as  well  as  the  honored  pioneers  of  the  county. 


-f^ 


bHOMAS  MOFFAT,  who  operates  the  Ran- 
dolph mines,  located  near  Percy,  1 11.,  is  a  na- 
tive of  Scotland,  his  birth  having  occurred 
in  that  country  on  the  14th  of  January,  1836. 
His  parents  were  Andrew  and  Helen  (Donaldson) 
Moffat,  and  he  was  their  fifth  child.  "When  a 
young  man,  his  father  sailed  twice  to  America, 
but  always  made  his  home  in  the  Old  Country. 
He  served  as  Overseer  of  Roads  under  the  English 
Government  for  a  period  of  thirty-five  years,  and 
both  he  and  bis  wife  spent  their  last  da3'S  in  Eng- 
land. 

Thomas  Moffat  attended  school  in  Scotland  and 
England  until  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  then 
woiked  on  a  farm  and  also  aided  his  father  in 
macadamizing  roads.  He  then  abandoned  that 
work  to  begin  emplo3inent  in  the  iron  mines  of 
England,  and  since  that  time  his  attention  has 
been  devoted  exclusively  to  mining.  He  won 
promotion  in  that  work,  and  became  foreman  at 
the  mines  of  the  Rosedale  and  Fairy  Hill  Company, 


which  position  he  filled  for  seven  years,  when,  in 
1864  he  decided  to  seek  a  home  beyond  the  Atlan- 
tic and  came  to  America.  At  that  time,  however, 
he  only  spent  one  year  in  the  New  World,  after 
which  he  returned  to  England  and  accepted  his 
old  position  as  foreman  of  the  mines.  Thus  he 
was  employed  until  1869,  when  once  more  he 
crossed  the  briny  .deep.  This  time  he  took  up 
his  residence  in  Braidwood,  111.,  but  soon  after- 
ward removed  to  (Jardner,  and  thence  to  Bloom- 
ington,  this  state.  Six  months  later  he  went  to 
St.  John,  Perry  County,  where  he  worked  for  a 
short  time,  when  he  took  charge  of  the  Eagle 
mines,  near  Du  Quoin.  He  continued  the  opera- 
tion of  the  same  for  a  j'ear,  when  he  bought  a 
farm,  and  with  his  family  located  thereon.  This 
was  in  the  latter  part  of  1870. 

In  187.3.  Mr.  Moffat  went  to  Roseborough,  near 
Sparta,  111.,  and  took  charge  of  the  Roseborough 
mines,  continuing  the  operation  of  the  same  for 
ten  years,  when,  in  order  to  educate  his  children, 
he  removed  to  Sparta,  where  he  spent  the  two  suc- 
ceeding years  of  his  life.  We  next  find  him  in 
Percy,  where  he  has  since  made  his  home.  He 
now  conducts  the  Randolph  mines,  of  Percy,  which 
turn  out  about  three  hundred  tons  of  coal  per  day. 

In  December,  18G6,  Mr.  Moffat  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Alice  Fell,  a  daughter  of  Will- 
iam and  Elizabeth  (Harrison)  Fell,  who  were  na- 
tives of  England,  but  in  an  early  day  located  at 
Rich  Hill,  Mo.  Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Moffat  were 
born  six  children,  but  only  three  are  now  living: 
Robert  E.,  who  married  Etta  Edwards,  and  resides 
in  Percy;  Thomas,  who  wedded  Lou  Short,  who 
died  a  year  later;  and  James,  at  home.  The  mother 
of  this  family  was  called  to  her  final  rest  in  Ajjril, 
1876.  The  following  year,  Mr.  Moffat  married 
Alice  Lewis,  daughter  of  Abraham  and  EJizabeth 
Lewis,  of  Sparta,  III.  Their  union  has  been  blessed 
with  one  son,  Abraham  Livingston. 

Mr.  Moffat  was  reared  in  the  Presb3'lerian  faith, 
but  is  not  now  connected  with  any  church.  In 
polities  he  is  a  stanch  Republican,  and  warmly  ad- 
vocates the  principles  of  his  party.  He  has  served 
as  Trustee  of  the  village  of  Percy,  proving  a  ca- 
pable and  efficient  officer.  He  is  ever  deeply  inter- 
ested in  what  pertains  to  the  welfare  of  the  com- 


504 


PORTRAIT  AND  BlOGRAPmCAL  RECORD. 


munitj'  in  which  he  resides,  and  does  all  in  his 
power  for  public  improvement  and  advancement. 
lie  is  a  man  of  sterling  worth  and  strict  integrity, 
and  well  deserves  a  place  in  tlie  history  of  his 
adopted  county. 


-^^l 


[B  • 


0. 


\^^^ 


bOUIS  HEITMAJs,  an  enterprising  and  pop- 
ular 3'oung  pharmacist  of  Chester,  already 
occupies  an  honored  position  in  the  busi 
ness  world  of  his  native  county.  He  was  born  in 
Randolph  County,  at  Bremen,  February  1,  1857, 
and  is  the  son  of  Dietrich  and  Mary  (Rickenberg) 
Heitman,  natives  of  the  Fatherland.  The  parents 
came  to  America  in  1840,  making  the  journey 
hither  on  the  sailing-vessel  "Orleans,"  and  after 
landing  in  the  New  World  made  their  way  di- 
rectly to  this  state  and  county.  The3'  immedi- 
ately located  in  Bremen,  where  tiiey  are  residing 
at  the  present  time,  and  rank  among  its  well-to-do 
citizens.  The  elder  Mr.  Heitman  was  in  early  life 
a  watchmaker,  but  upon  becoming  an  American 
citizen,  purchased  a  farm,  and  lias  since  been  en- 
gaged in  its  cultivation. 

Our  subject,  who  is  the  youngest  of  the  four 
children  born  to  his  parents,  carried  on  his  primary 
studies  in  the  district  school.  Being  ambitious 
to  obtain  a  good  education,  however,  he  took  a 
course  of  study  in  the  high  school  of  Sparta.  Later 
lie  entered  the  Southern  Illinois  University,  from 
which  he  was  graduated  with  due  honors  in  1880. 
In  1882,  wisliing  to  see  something  of  the  western 
country,  Mr.  Heitman  went  to  California  and  en- 
gaged for  one  term  as  Principal  of  the  Azusa 
School.  His  ambition,  however,  being  to  follow 
the  profession  of  a  pharmacist,  he  engaged  in  the 
drug  business  at  Pasadena,  Cal.,  where  he  remained 
for  about  five  years.  Then,  spending  the  inter- 
.val  until  1890  in  traveling  in  the  western  states 
and  territories,  Mr.  Heitman  returned  to  Chester, 
in  the  fall  of  that  year,  where  he  established  a 
drug  store,  and  is  conducting  a  fine  business. 
Here  he  has  a  neat  and  commodious  store,  com- 
plete in  all  its  appointments,  well  stocked  with 
drugs  and  medicines,  toilet  articles,  and  all  things 
to  be   found   in   a    fii-st-class  establishment.     Mr. 


Heitman  pays  especial  attention  to  the  compound- 
ing of  prescriptions,  and  is  conducting  here  a  good 
and  well  paying  business. 

November  9,  1891,  our  subject  and  Miss  Ber- 
thena  Eggers  were  united  in  marriage.  Mrs.  Heit- 
man was  also  born  in  this  place,  and  is  the  daugh- 
ter of  Henry  and  Mary  Eggers.  He  has  always 
taken  an  active  part  in  social  affairs,  and  is  a  mem- 
ber of  Pasadena  Lodge  No.  132,  K.  of  P„  He  has 
held  man^'  prominent  offices  in  that  order,  and 
was  elected  Representative  to  the  Grand  Lodge 
in  the  Golden  State  in  1887.  Since  locating  in 
Chester  he  became  a  member  of  Hercules  Lodge 
No.  228,  which  he  also  represented  in  the  Grand 
Lodge  in  1891.  In  the  above  year  he  was  elected 
Deimty  Grand  Cliancellor  of  this  district,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  He  is  likewise  a  member 
of  Pasadena  Lodge  No.  172,  A.  F.  <fe  A.  M.,  and 
also  of  Harmon  G.  Reynolds  Chapter,  of  this  place. 
He  is  a  standi  adlierent  of  the  Democratic  party, 
and  has  given  his  township  faithful  service  as 
School  Director.  In  addition  to  this,  he  is  the 
Secretary  of  the  Southern  Illinois  Stock  and  Agri- 
cultural Association,  and  in  many  ways  is  pro- 
moting the  interests  of  his  township. 


vH/ 


'H 


11^^ 


^,  OBERT  CRAIG.  This  country  is  the  home 
of  many  Scotchmen,  who  have  come  here 
from  time  to  time  to  take  advantage  of 
Sj^the  favorable  opportunities  offered  for  ac- 
cumulating money,  and  few  have  won  more  friends 
or  been  more  successful  than  was  the  subject 
of  our  sketch,  who  at  the  time  of  his  decease, 
wliich  occurred  June  18,  1888,  had  accumulated 
a  goodly  amount  of  this  world's  goods,  including 
a  valuable  farm  located  in  township  7,  range  6, 
Randolph  County. 

Robert  Craig  was  born  in  1828,  in  Glasgow, 
Scotland,  and  was  a  lad  of  onlj'  twelve  years 
when  he  crossed  the  Atlantic,  with  the  determina- 
tion to  make  his  permanent  home  in  America. 
Finding  his  way  directly  to  Illinois,  which  he  had 
heard  was  so  rich  in  farming  lands,  young  Craig 
made  his  home  near  Chester,  in  Randolph  Coun- 
ty.    He  had  been  given  a  limited  education  in  his 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


505 


native  land,  and,  after  making  his  home  in  Illinois, 
woriied  on  his  father's  farm  until  reaching  his 
thirtieth  year,  when  he  purchased  land  on  his  own 
account.  He  was  a  man  of  excellent  judgment 
and  soon  improved  his  broad  acres  witli  attractive 
and  commodious  buildings,  and  reaped  annually 
abundant  harvests  from  his  estate. 

March  31,  18G9,  Mr.  Craig  and  Miss  Magdalena, 
daughter  of  Baldash  and  Catherine  (Ilelbling) 
.Schneider,  were  married.  The  lady's  parents  were 
natives  of  Switzerland,  and  she  was  tiie  elder  of 
tlie  two  children  born  to  them.  Bj-  the  union  of 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Craig  have  been  born  three  children, 
of  whom  Robert,  the  eldest,  died  in  infancy. 
William  A.  is  still  living  with  his  mother  on  the 
home  farm,  and  Katie  met  an  untimel}'  death  by 
drowning  a  few  years  ago.  Mrs.  Craig,  aided  by 
lier  son,  is  conducting  the  farm  in  a  very  success- 
ful manner,  and  the  improvements  and  substan- 
tial buildings  which  now  adorn  the  place  stand  as 
monuments  to  the  thriftof  the  husband  and  father. 

Mr.  Craig  was  a  devoted  member  of  the  Pres- 
byterian Church,  while  his  wife  is  a  Rom.an  Cath- 
olic. The  former  in  his  political  relations  was  a 
stanch  Republican,  and,  although  never  aspiring 
to  [lolitical  ofHce,  was  ever  ready  to  lend  a  help- 
ing hand  in  the  advancement  of  any  public  enter- 
prise. Mr.  Craig  was  first  married  to  Eliza  Wilder- 
man,  bj'  whom  he  had  one  son,  John,  who  resides 
in  St.  Louis,  Mo. 

"fij  OHN  C.  DOUGLAS.  Few  men  have  lived 
I  more  quietlj-  and  unostentatiously  than  Mr. 
^;^  Douglas,  and  j-et  few  have  exerted  a  more 
l^^/  salutary  influence  upon  the  immediate  so- 
ciety in  which  they  move,  or  impressed  a  commu- 
nit3'  with  a  more  profound  reliance  on  their  honor, 
ability  and  sterling  worth.  His  life  has  not  been 
illustrious  with  striking  or  startling  contrast,  but  it 
has  shown  how  a  laudable  ambition  may  be  grati- 
fied when  accompanied  with  pure  motives,  perse- 
verance and  steadfastness  of  purpose.  Mr.  Douglas 
is  a  self-made  man  in  every  sense  of  that  term,  and 
what  he  lias  accumulated  in  the  way  of  tliis  world's 
goods  has  been  the  result  of  energy  and  persever- 
ance on  his  part. 

A  native  of  Randolpii  County,  our  subject  was 


born  in  Chester  in  1852,  and  is  the  eldest  child  of 
Andrew  and  Eliza  (Craig)  Douglas,  of  whom  a 
sketch  will  be  found  on  another  page  in  this  Rec- 
ord. Our  subject  attended  school  during  his  ear- 
lier days,  and  as  his  opportunities  for  gaining  an 
education  were  limited,  he  later  supplemented  the 
book  knowledge  of  his  j-outh  with  reading  and 
observation.  He  was  reared  to  farm  pursuits,  and 
all  his  life  he  has  followed  the  occupation  of  an 
agriculturist,  now  being  the  possessor  of  a  good  es- 
tate on  section  8,  township  7,  range  6. 

John  C.  Douglas  was  married  in  1888,  to  Miss 
Eliza,  daughter  of  Joseph  M.  and  Harriet  P.(Tilden) 
Tousley,  natives  of  England,  and  at  the  time  of 
her  marriage  were  residing  in  Randolph  County. 
Their  union  has  been  blessed  by  the  birth  of  one 
son,  John  C.  Our  subject  and  his  wife  are  active 
members  of  the  Presbyterian  Church.  The  politi- 
cal views  of  Mr.  Douglas  are  identical  with  those 
of  the  Republican  party,  and  he  takes  a  deep  inter- 
est in  the  success  of  the  same. 


ENRY  W.  F.  NEUHAUS.  In  this  volume 
may  be  found  biographies  of  many  useful 
citizens  who,  possessing  remarkable  energy, 
have  worked  their  way  upward  from  pov- 
erty- to  affluence.  The  life  of  Mr.  Neuhaus  fur- 
nishes an  example  of  this  kind.  Of  German  birth 
and  parentage,  he  has  inherited  the  sturdy  traits 
of  character  for  which  the  Teutonic  tribes  have 
alwa3'S  been  noted.  For  many  years  he  engaged 
actively  in  the  cultivation  and  improvement  of  a 
farm  in  Randolph  Count}-,  and  became  known  as 
one  of  the  successful  and  progressive  agriculturists 
of  this  section.  He  is  now  a  resident  of  Steele- 
ville,  where  he  is  well  and  favorable  known  as  a 
citizen,  neighbor  and  friend. 

The  parents  of  our  subject,  William  and  Louisa 
(Struck)  Neuhaus,  were  natives  of  German}-,  whence 
in  1870  they  emigrated  to  the  United  States. 
Thej'  came  at  once  to  Illinois  and  located  near 
Steeleville,  where  the  father  followed  agricultural 
pursuits.  Here  he  and  his  wife  continued  to  make 
their  home  until  death.  Their  third  child,  Henry 
W.  F.,  was  born  in  Germany  February   12,  1847, 


506 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


and  grew  to  manhood  in  the  land  of  his  birth,  re- 
ceiving a  good  education  in  the  German  language. 
At  the  age  of   fourteen  years  he  hired  out  as  a 
farm   laborer  and    continued   thus  engaged  for  a   I 
period  of  six  years. 

In  1867,  Mr.  Neuhaus  took  passage  for  America, 
and  arriving  in  this  country,  proceeded  to  Illinois 
and  made  settlement  in  Washington  County,  where 
he  worked  on  a  farm  for  six  months.  He  tlien 
came  to  Steeleville  and  hired  out  as  a  farm  laborer, 
remaining  thus  employed  for  one  and  a-half  years. 
He  then  began  an  independent  career  as  a  farmer, 
and  having  acquired  thorough  familiarity  with 
agricultural  pursuits,  success  naturally  followed 
his  efforts.  In  1888  he  retired  from  the  farm  and 
came  to  Steeleville,  where  he  has  since  resided. 

The  lady  who  on  the  loth  of  November,  1872, 
became  the  wife  of  Mr.  Neuhaus  bore  the  maiden 
name  of  Doretha  Rabe.  Her  parents,  Henry  and 
Mary  (Rorman)  Rabe,  were  born  in  Germany, 
whence  they  emigrated  to  the  United  States,  set- 
tling in  Randolph  County  in  an  early  day.  Mr. 
Rabe  is  deceased,  and  his  widow  is  living  in  East 
St.  Louis.  In  their  religious  connections,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Neuliausare  members  of  the  Lutheran  Church, 
and  are  regular  attendants  at  the  services  of  that 
denomination.  As  a  member  of  the  Democratic 
part3',  he  has  alwaj's  maintained  an  interest  in 
national  and  local  political  affairs,  but  is  not  an 
aspirant  for  official  honors.  He  is  an  upright  man, 
straightforward  in  his  dealings,  and  obliging  and 
kind  in  his  relations  with  those  with  whom  he 
comes  in  contact. 


■^1  AMES  CROWE,  one  of  the  substantial  farm- 
ers who  owns  and  operates  a  fine  tract  of 
land  on  section  15,  township  3,  range  9, 
Monroe  County,  is  a  native  of  the  Emerald 
Isle.  He  was  there  born  on  the  1st  of  INIay,  1836, 
and  is  a  son  of  Matiiias  and  Catherine  (Ragin) 
Crowe,  who  were  also  natives  of  Ireland.  The 
father  lived  with  his  parents  until  his  marriage, 
and  then  began  farming  for  himself.    He  carried  on 


agricultural  pursuits  in  his  native  land  uhtil  1852, 
when  he  bade  adieu  to  his  home  and  friends, 
and  with  his  family  sailed  for  the  New  World. 
Coming  to  Illinois,  he  located  in  Monroe  County, 
where  he  carried  on  farming  until  his  death,  and 
so  successful  was  he  in  his  undertakings  that  he 
became  possessed  of  considerable  propertj'  and  was 
numbered  among  the  substantial  farmers  of  tlie  com- 
munity. He  was  truly  a  self-made  man,  for  his  pos- 
sessions were  all  acquired  through  his  own  efforts. 
Ill  politics  lie  was  a  supporter  of  the  Democracy, 
and  both  he  and  his  wife  were  members  of  the 
Catholic  Church.  His  death  occurred  in  1864, 
and  IMrs.  Crowe  passed  away  about  1878.-  They 
were  the  parents  of  seven  children,  Celia,  Mary, 
Patrick,  Lawrence,  Bridget,  Thomas  and  James. 

In  his  native  land  James  Crowe  spent  the  first 
sixteen  jears  of  his  life,  and  then  accompanied 
his  parents  on  their  emigration  to  America.  The 
public  schools  of  Ireland  furnished  him  his  edu- 
cational privileges.  He  continued  to  reside  at 
home  and  give  his  father  the  benefit  of  his  serv- 
ices until  his  marriage,  which  was  celebrated  in 
1871,  Miss  Margaret  Fox  becoming  his  wife.  Six 
children  have  blessed  their  union,  viz.:  Catherine, 
Agnes,  Mathias,  Thomas,  IMary  and  James.  The 
mother  is  a  native  of  Monroe  Count}',  and  has 
here  spent  her  entire  life.  She  acquired  her  edu- 
cation in  the  district  schools  of  the  neighbor- 
hood, and  remained  upon  her  father's  farm  until 
she  went  to  the  home  of  her  husband.  She  is  a 
member  of  the  Catholic  Church.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Crowe  have  carefully  reared  their  children,  giv- 
ing them  good  school  privileges,  and  with  one 
exception  all  are  single.  Agnes,  who  married 
Matthew  II.  Dunn,  makes  her   home  in    St.  Louis. 

Throughout  his  entire  life  Mr.  Crowe  has  fol- 
lowed agriculture  and  is  a  practical  and  progressive 
farmer,  who  in  the  able  management  of  his  busi- 
ness affairs  has  met  with  a  high  degree  of  success. 
Diligence,  econom}-  and  perseverance  have  brought 
to  him  prosperity,  and  he  is  now  the  owner  of 
one  of  the  finest  and  most  valuable  farms  of  this 
community.  He  exercises  his  right  of  franchise 
in  support  of  the  Democratic  party,  and,  like  his 
wife  and  children,  is  a  member  of  the  Catholic 
Church.     He  has  lived   in    Monroe   County  since 


%J^, 


M 


(P.     '^t^.^n^^cy'h^^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


509 


the  age  of  sixteen  years,  and  those  who  have 
known  him  from  his  3'onth  upward  are  numbered 
among  his  warmest  friends,  a  fact  which  indicates 
a  well  spent  life. 


v(g). ^^M® ^(SjJ 


,  EV.  FATHER  PAUL  LIMACHER,  pastor 
of  St.  Peter  and  Paul's  Catholic  Church  of  ■ 
Waterloo,  was  born  in  Fluehli,  canton  of 
1  Lucerne,  Switzerland,  .June  16,  1826,  and 
is  a  son  of  Anton  and  Mary  Liraacher.  In  his  na- 
tive country  he  was  reared  to  manhood.  His  edu- 
cation was  acquire<l  in  the  parochial  schools  and 
in  the  Catholic  College  of  Lucerne.  It  was  in 
1847  that  he  crossed  the  Atlantic  to  America, 
landing  on  the  1st  of  May  in  New  York  Cit^', 
whence  lie  went  to  Chicago.  He  made  the  jour- 
ne}'  by  way  of  the  Erie  Canal,  St.  Lawrence  River 
and  the  Great  Lakes,  for  there  was  not  a  railroad 
built  to  the  western  metropolis  at  that  time.  He 
continued  his  studies  in  Chicago,  in  the  Uoiversity 
of  St.  Mar\''s  of  the  Lake,  completing  the  course, 
and  was  afterward  appointed  curator  in  the  col- 
lege. 

Mr.  Limacher  was  ordained  on  the  31st  of  July, 
18.")1,  and  entered  upon  his  priestly  duties  in 
Highland,  Madison  County,  111.  He  there  re- 
mained for  ten  years,  but  his  labors  were  very 
arduous,  and  his  health  thereby  becoming  impaired, 
he  was  forced  to  leave  his  first  charge.  On  the 
lOtli  of  September,  1861,  he  came  to  Waterloo 
and  began  liis  labors  in  this  place.  He  was  instru- 
mental in  erecting  the  fine  church  edifice  here  in 
1883,  at  a  cost  of  1:32,000.  He  has  charge  of  all 
the  Catholic  institutions  at  this  place,  including 
the  Holy  Family  Convent,  which  lie  erected  in 
1865.  He  lias  a  membership  of  two  hundred  and 
fifty  families  in  his  congregation.  A  most  excel- 
lent choir  furnishes  the  music  for  the  churcli,  and 
each  Sunday  the  children  are  instructed  in  the 
Sunday-school.  In  the  Catholic  day  school  there 
are  two  hundred  pupils  under  the  care  of  five 
teachers.  Sister  Anastasia  is  the  Sister  Superior 
of    the    convent.     The    church  is  in  a  flourishins 


condition  financially,  owing  to  the  excellent  man- 
agement of  its  pastor,  who  is  aided  in  his  work  b}' 
Father  Kaercher,  the  assistant  pastor. 

Father  Limacher  has  lived  a  devout  and  hol}- 
life  and  has  the  love  and  esteem  of  his  members. 
He  has  held  his  present  pastorate  since  1861,  and 
has  seen  the  church  grow  from  a  small  beginning 
until  it  has  reached  its  present  large  membership. 
On  the  anniversar}'  of  his  thirtieth  year  in  this 
place,  his  members  and  those  of  other  denomina- 
tions united  in  celebrating  the  day,  and  gave 
him  some  handsome  presents  in  token  of  their  es- 
teem. Again,  on  the  fortieth  anniversary  of  his 
ordination,  there  was  another  large  gathering  to 
celebrate  the  occasion.  Tlie  church  has  several  so- 
cieties, namely:  the  St.  Vincent,  St.  Peter  and 
Paul's  Society,  the  Catholic  Knights  of  Illinois,  the 
Young  Men's  Society,  the  Roseaiy  Society,  and 
the  Holy  Angel  Society  among  the  children. 

s^ '— S]"^T'~^[S^"       ■ — -"S 

RTIIUR  E.  CRISLER.  It  is  a  well  known 
fact  tliat  circumstances  in  life  may  make 
or  mar  tlie  prospects  of  man  to  a  certain 
extent,  but  a  determined  spirit  will  bend 
even  the  force  of  circumstances  to  its  will.  The 
career  of  Mr.  Crisler  since  his  arrival  on  the  stage 
of  human  action  is  abundant  proof  of  this  trite 
s.aying:  That  which  is  better  tlian  silver  or  gold,  a 
good  name,  gains  added  luster  in  adverse  circum- 
stances, and  the  sterling  qualities  of  character  are 
strengthened  in  the  combat  of  life. 

Our  subject,  who  is  one  of  the  prominent  attor- 
neys and  Master  in  Chancery  at  Chester,  is  a  na- 
tive of  this  county,  and  was  born  August  11, 
1861.  He  is  a  son  of  Thomas  J.  and  Maria  (Aid- 
rich)  Crisler,  natives  of  this  county.  The  grand- 
father of  our  subject,  Abel  Crisler,  was  one  of  the 
first  settlers  in  Randolph  County,  while  his  great- 
grandfather, Silas  Crisler,  hailed  from  Kentucky. 
The  last-named  gentleman  came  to  this  state  in 
the  year  1800,  and  followed  the  joint  occupations 
of  preacher  and  farmer.  He  was  of  German  de- 
scent, and  religiously  a  minister  in  the  Hard  Shell 
Baptist  Church.  The  mother  of  our  subject  was 
the  daughter  of  Amasa  Aldrich,  a  native  of  Rhode 


510 


POktllAlT*AND  BlOGftAtmCAL  ftECORG. 


Island,  who  came  to  Illinois,  locating  in  this  coun- 
ty in  the  j^ear  1820.  He  was  also  a  farmer,  and 
was  of  English  descent. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  the  second  child 
and  eldest  son  in  the  parental  farailj'  of  eight  chil- 
dren. He  passed  his  hoyhood  on  the  home  farm, 
and  later  going  to  Jackson  County,  completed  his 
education  in  the  state  normal  school.  He  next 
taught  school  for  two  years,  and  was  thus  enabled 
to  carry  out  the  ambition  of  his  life,  and  took  his 
initiative  steps  by  reading  law  in  the  office  of  H. 
C.  Hbrner,  of  this  city.  He  was  admitted  to  the 
Bar  in  1890,  at  Ml.  Vernon,  this  state,  and  on  re- 
turning to  Chester,  imraediatel}'  began  the  prac- 
tice of  his  profession,  in  which  he  has  been  so  suc- 
cessful, and  is  building  up  for  himself  a  splendid 
clientage. 

In  1888,  Mr.  Crisler  and  Miss  Arietta  Gant  were 
united  in  marriage.  The  lady  was  the  daughter 
of  Alfred  Gant,  and  was  born  in  this  county.  In 
1892,  Mr.  Crisler  was  appointed  Master  in  Chan- 
cery, and  in  the  spring  of  the  following  year  was 
elected  City  Attorney  on  the  Democratic  ticket. 
He  is  courteous,  gentlemanly  and  considerate  in 
his  dealings  with  all,  and  is  classed  among  the  best 
citizens  of  the  count}-.  Socially,  he  is  a  Knight  of 
Pythias. 


'f= 


=+ 


\|^pRED  AY.  SCHRIEBER,  a  well  known  resi- 
l!i^>  dent  of  Randolph  County,  and  one  of  its 
/ll  honored    settlers,    now    living    in    Horse 

Prairie,  claims  Germany  as  the  land  of  his  birth. 
His  father,  A.  Schrieber,  was  born  in  the  same 
country,  and  in  1835  emigrated  to  America,  ac- 
companied by  his  wife  and  four  children,  the  eld- 
est of  whom  was  Fred.  Charles,  the  second,  is 
now  a  resident  of  Carondelet,  111.;  William  is  liv- 
ing in  St.  Louis  County,  Mo.;  and  Wiilielraina  is 
a  resident  of  Randolph  County. 

Our  subject  was  a  youth  of  sixteen  when  he 
came  to  the  New  World,  taking  up  his  residence 
in  this  community.  For  ten  years  he  remained 
under  the  parental  roof,  and  then,  iu  1848,  he  be- 
gan life  for  himself.  He  chose  as  a  companion 
and  helpmate  on  life's  journey  Miss  Wilhelmena 
Luebkarman,   and    by   their  marriage   were    born 


eleven  children,  five  of  whom  are  still  living, 
namely:  Frederick,  Henrj',  Edward,  Charles  and 
Herman.  The  two  youngest  are  now  residents  of 
St.  Louis. 

Mr.  Schrieber  started  out  in  life  for  himself 
empt3-lianded.  In  early  life  he  secured  from  the 
Government  a  farm  of  eight}'  acres  of  wild  land, 
which  was  covered  only  with  prairie  grass,  not  a 
furrow  having  been  turned  or  an  improvement 
made.  He  at  once  began  breaking  it,  and  from 
time  to  time  he  extended  the  boundaries  of  his 
farm  until  it  now  comprises  almost  an  entire  sec- 
tion. This  tract  he  has  placed  under  a  high  state 
of  cultivation,  making  many  excellent  improve- 
ments upon  it,  which  stand  as  monuments  to  the 
thrift  and  enterprise  of  the  owner.  His  life  has 
been  indeed  a  busy  and  useful  one,  and  by  his 
economy,  industry,  perseverance  and  good  man- 
agement he  has  achieved  success.  His  sons  are 
also  well-to-do  men  and  are  industrious. 

When  Mr.  Schrieber  first  came  to  this  county  in 
1838,  wild  game  was  to  be  had  in  abundance,  and 
as  he  was  very  fond  of  hunting  he  had  ample  op- 
portunity to  indulge  his  taste  for  that  sport.  He 
has  seen  the  county  in  its  wild  condition,  and  in 
the  work  of  improvement  and  development  has 
ever  borne  his  part.  In  1876  he  was  called  upon 
to  mourn  the  loss  of  his  wife,  who  was  called  to 
her  final  rest.  She  was  a  faithful  Christian  woman 
and  proved  a  faithful  helpmate  to  him.  He  and 
his  family  are  all  members  of  the  Lutheran  Church, 
with  which  they  have  been  connected  since  its  or- 
ganization. To  its  support  he  contributes  liber- 
ally, and  in  its  upbuilding  and  welfare  he  takes 
an  active  interest.  In  politics  he  has  been  a  life 
long  Democrat,  but  has  never  sought  or  desired 
public  office,  preferring  to  devote  his  entire  time 
and  attention  to  his  business  interests,  in  which 
he  has  met  with  a  success  that  is  well  deserved. 


1^  OBERT  S.  DOUGLAS  was  a  man  of  excel- 
llWr  lent  iudgment  and  firm  convictions  upon 
!ii\\\  all  subjects  of  importance,  and  was  re- 
^^garded  as  one  of  the  substantial  citizens  of 
township  7,  range  6,  Randolph  County.  He  was 
a  native  of   Roxburgh,  Scotland,  where  his  birth 


PORTEATT  A:N"D  BIOGRAPlttCAL  RECORD. 


511 


occurred  in  1829.  The  father  and  mother  of  our 
subject  bore  the  names  of  John  and  Helen  (Smith) 
Douglas.  The  parents  emigrated  to  this  country 
when  our  subject  was  sixteen  years  of  age,  and 
located  in  this  county,  where  they  were  classed 
among  the  prosperous  farmers  of  the  section.  A 
sad  event  occurred  in  the  year  1849,  when  the  fa- 
ther, mother,  two  sons  and  one  daughter  were 
called  to  the  land  beyond,  two  of  them  dying  from 
cholera. 

Young  Robert  attended  school  in  his  native  land, 
Scotland,  and  obtained  but  a  meagree  ducation, 
as  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  begin  work 
earW  in  life.  After  coming  to  America  he  assisted 
his  father  in  cultivating  the  home  farm  until  the 
latter's  death,  when  the  estate  was  divided  be- 
tween his  sister  and  himself,  and  he  continued  to 
work  ou  the  place  with  his  sister  as  liis  house- 
keeper. In  the  year  1867  our  subject  sold  out 
his  share  of  the  farm,  and  had  started  for  Kansas, 
when,  being  taken  sick,  he  returned  to  Illinois. 
He  then  lived  on  rented  land  for  the  following 
three  years,  at  the  expiration  of  which  time  he 
purchased  land  on  Mar^^'s  River,  about  five  miles 
from  Chester.  He  spent  his  last  da3S  on  this 
place,  dj'ing  in  February',  1875.  One  hundred 
and  sixty  acres  were  comprised  in  his  fine  farm, 
which  was  a  finely  improved  and  attractive  piece 
of  land. 

September  13,  185.5,  our  subject  and  Miss  Helen, 
daughter  of  Mungo  and  Isabel  (Telfer)  Dickson, 
were  united  in  marriage.  Her  parents  were  na- 
tives of  Roxburgh,  Scotland,  and  came  to  Amer- 
ica with  the  Douglas  family.  Robert  and  Helen 
were  schoolmates  in  their  native  land,  and  by 
their  marriage  five  children  have  been  born.  Isa- 
bel died  in  infancy;  Helen  died  when  seven  years 
of  age;  George  is  married  to  Jennie  Gant  and 
makes  his  home  in  Colorado;  William  P.  married 
Minnie  Hansen  and  resides  near  Chester;  and 
Daisy,  who  is  the  wife  of  Channing  Smith,  lives 
on  a  farm  near  the  city  of  Chester. 

Mrs.  Douglas  is  a  faithful  member  of  the  United 
Presbyterian  Church,  as  was  also  her  husband. 
Mr.  Dickson,  the  father  of  Mrs.  Douglas,  was  an 
Elder  in  the  United  Presbyterian  Church  in  Scot- 
land, and  was  also  made  an   Elder  of  the  church 


in  Chester  on  its  establishment.  He  died  at  his 
home  near  Chester  in  1878,  when  at  the  advanced 
age  of  ninety  3'ears.  Mr.  Douglas  was  a  Repub- 
lican in  his  political  affiliations  and  a  man  who 
by  his  congenial  manners  won  for  himself  the  ad- 
miration of  all  with  whom  he  had  dealings. 

LBERT  E.  FRITZE,  M.  D.,  though  still  a 
young  man,  has  already  acquired  a  fine 
(a  reputation  as  a  skillful  surgeon  and  a  suc- 
cessful phjsician.  He  has  been  a  resident 
of  Chester  only  a  short  time,  but  he  has  flattering 
prospects  of  a  lucrative  practice.  He  is  a  son  of 
Charles  C.  and  Susannah  Fredericka  (Metzger) 
Fritze,  and  was  born  near  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  March 
28,  1861.  The  parents  were  both  born  in  Ger- 
many, and  coming  to  the  United  States  when  quite 
young,  were  married  in  the  state  of  Michigan. 

Young  Albert  attended  the  common  schools 
near  his  home,  and  at  the  same  time  assisted  his 
father  in  the  duties  of  farm  work.  When  reach- 
ing his  eighteenth  year,  he  entered  the  Wesleyan 
College  at  ]Mt.  Pleasant,  Iowa,  remaining  for  two 
years,  when  he  commenced  to  read  medicine  under 
Dr.  Fisher,  of  St.  Paul.  After  a  twelvemonth 
spent  thus,  our  subject  became  a  student  at  the 
Homeopathic  Medical  College  of  Missouri,  at  St. 
Louis,  and  was  graduated  from  that  institution  in 
1885.  His  first  location  was  then  at  Carmi,  111., 
where  he  practiced  his  profession  for  about  one 
year.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time  he  came 
to  this  county,  and  making  Ellis  Grove  his  home, 
there  engaged  in  active  practice.  He  has  been 
eminently  successful,  not  onh'  financially,  but  pro- 
fessionally, and  is  conceded  to  be  one  of  the  bright- 
est and  ablest  medical  men  in  thecountj'.  During 
the  fall  of  1893  Dr.  Fritze  concluded  to  move  to 
Chester;  here  he  has  commenced  a  good  practice, 
and  having  a  much  wider  field  for  his  labors,  will 
soon  stand  at  the  head  of  his  profession. 

In  May,  1885,  the  Doctor  and  Miss  Anna  Schlatt- 
mann,  of  St.  Paul,  were  united  in  marriage.  Mrs. 
Fritze  is  a  daughter  of  Henrj'  and  Marj-  Schlatt- 
mann,  natives  of  Germany,  but  residents  of  St. 
Paul  at  the  time  of  their  marriage.    One  child  was 


512 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


born  to  this  union,  Pearl,  who  died  in  infancj'. 
Soon  afterward  Mrs.  Fritze  passed  from  this  life, 
and  in  1889  our  subject  was  a  second  time  married, 
taking  as  his  companion  Maggie  Hiob,  a  daughter 
of  Fred  and  Elizabeth  Iliob.  of  Ellis  Grove.  Dr. 
Fritze  is  a  member  of  K.askaskia  Lodge  No.  86.  F. 
&  A.  M.,  and  politically  is  a  stalwart  Republican. 
He  and  his  good  wife  are  members  of  the  Method- 
ist Church,  and  being  possessed  of  genial,  frank 
dispositions  and  many  pleasant  personal  attributes, 
have  become  very  popular. 


-?— = 


i>-^^<i 


<ji^'RED  A.  RATIIERT,  a  well  known  mer- 
U^^fe  chant  tailor  and  clothier  of  Red  Bud,  is 
ili  recognized  as  one  of   the    prominent  and 

valued  citizens  of  this  communit3',  who  has  the 
high  regard  of  all  with  whom  business  or  social 
relations  have  brought  him  in  contact.  We  feel 
assured  that  this  record  of  his  life  will  prove  of 
interest  to  manj-  of  our  readers.  He  was  born  in 
Westphalia,  Germany,  in  1846,  and  is  the  only 
child  of  William  and  Margucrita  (Schoenebaum) 
Rathert,  who  were  also  natives  of  the  same  coun- 
try. The  mother  died  daring  the  infancy  of  her 
son,  and  the  father  afterward  married  Miss  Eliza- 
beth Schwier.  They  became  the  parents  of  six 
children:  William  and  Henry,  both  of  whom  still 
reside  in  the  Fatherland;  Cliristian,  wiio  is  en- 
gaged in  merchandising  in  Red  Bud;  Christina, 
Rike  and  Mar}',  who  are  also  living  in  Germany. 
A  half-brother  of  the  familj-,  Charles  AVehking, 
is  a  resident  of  St.  Louis,  where  he  is  engaged  in 
business  as  a  carpenter  and  builder.  He  served  in 
the  arm}'  for  about  four  j'ears  during  the  late  war, 
and  was  Paymaster  of  one  division. 

Fred  A.  Rathert  was  a  young  man  of  twenty- 
three  years  when  he  bade  adieu  to  home  and  friends 
and  native  land  and  sailed  for  America.  At  length 
he  reached  St.  Louis.  He  could  not  speak  a  word 
of  English,  but  he  determined  to  conquer  the  dif- 
ficulties and  obstacles  in  his  path.  As  time  passed, 
he  acquired  the  language  of  the  country,  and  he 
continued  working  at  the  trade  of  Uiiloring  in  St. 
Louis  until  June,  1871,  when  he  came  to  Red  Bud, 
forming  a  partnership   with   Henry   Heuer.    This 


connection  continued  for  a  year.  In  1874  Mr. 
Rathert  established  a  regular  merchant-tailor  busi- 
ness, and  in  1878  erected  the  building  which  he 
now  occupies.  He  carries  a  fine  line  of  goods, 
and  on  account  of  his  excellent  workmanship  and 
moderate  prices,  he  has  received  from  tiie  public 
a  liberal  patronage. 

In  1876  Mr.  Rathert  was  united  in  marriage 
witb  Miss  Annie  Saxenmeyer,  and  unto  them  have 
been  born  two  sons:  Oswald,  who  is  now  attend- 
ing the  Lutheran  College  of  Addison,  111.;  and 
Paul,  at  home.  The  parents  are  both  members  of 
the  Lutheran  Church  and  take  an  active  interest 
in  its  welfare.  In  June,  1890,  Mr.  Rathert  re- 
turned to  Germany  to  visit  his  aged  father.  It 
was  the  last  time  he  ever  saw  him,  for  the  father 
has  since  passed  awa}'.  Returning  home,  he  re- 
sumed business,  and  in  his  work  he  has  met  with 
a  high  degree  of  success,  becoming  a  substantial 
citizen.  His  determination  to  seek  a  home  in 
America  has  proved  to  be  a  wise  one,  for  prosperity' 
has  rewarded  his  efforts.  In  politics  he  is  a  stanch 
Republican,  but  has  never  been  an  oftice-seeker, 
preferring  to  devote  his  entire  time  and  attention 
to  his  commercial  interests  and  the  enjoyment  of 
tlie  home  circle. 

f—  ,   '^<..A  ■^[^-''  ^. 

J.  SEELY,  M.  D.,  is  a  skillful  surgeon  and 
successful  medical  practitioner  of  Red 
^^  Bud.  A  native  of  New  York,  he  was 
born  in  Sullivan  Count}',  and  during  his  early 
boyhood  accompanied  his  parents  to  Washington 
County,  Ohio,  in  1838.  In  the  Buckeye  State  he 
was  reared  to  manhood,  and  began  to  earn  his  own 
livelihood  by  teaching  school,  which  profession  he 
followed  for  six  years.  He  was  educated  in  tlie 
common  schools  and  in  an  academy.  He  then  took 
up  the  study  of  medicine,  wishing  to  make  its 
practice  his  life  work,  and  after  completing  his 
studies,  he  practiced  for  one  year  in  Ohio.  In  the 
sjjring  of  1861,  he  came  to  Illinois,  settling  in 
Evansville,  Randolph  County,  where  he  engaged 
in  the  |)rosecution  of  his  profession  for  five  years. 
In  the  spring  of  1866,  he  came  to  Red  Bud, 
where  he  has  since  made  his  home.     In  the  long 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


513 


years  of  his  residence  here  he  has  won  an  enviable 
rei)utation  and  secured  a  very  large  practice. 

The  Doctor  comes  of  an  old  New  England  fam- 
ily, which  was  probably  founded  in  America  dur- 
ing Colonial  days.  lIis  paternal  grandfather.  Jo- 
seph Seely,  was  a  native  of  Connecticut.  Ilis 
parents,  William  G.  and  Hannah  (Ferris)  Seel3', 
were  both  natives  of  New  York.  The  former 
served  for  two  years  in  tiie  War  of  1812,  and  after 
the  close  of  that  struggle  became  a  sea  captain.  His 
only  brother  was  also  a  sea  captain.  In  the  Seely 
family  were  five  children,  of  whom  the  Doctor  is 
the  youngest. 

In  1864,  Dr.  Seely  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  M.  Elvie  Robbins,  a  native  of  Washington 
Count}',  Ohio,  and  to  them  have  been  born  a  son 
and  daughter.  The  former,  Guy,  is  now  married 
and  resides  in  Fairbur}',  Neb;  Edna  is  still  with 
her  parents. 

On  coming  to  Red  Bud,  Dr.  Seel}'  formed  a  part- 
nership with  Dr.  A.  B.  Beattie,  which  continued  for 
one  3'ear.  The  connection  was  then  dissolved  by 
mutual  consent,  and  since  that  time  our  subject 
has  been  alone  in  practice.  He  is  widely  and  fav- 
orably known  throughout  the  county,  and  has  the 
high  respect  of  all  with  whom  business  or  social 
relations  have  brought  him  in  contact.  He  is  a 
member  of  the  Soutliern  Illinois  Medical  Associa- 
tion, and  is  a  Knight  Templar  Mason.  He  takes 
great  interest  in  the  workings  of  tiiat  fraternity. 
In  politics,  he  is  a  supporter  of  Democratic  prin- 
ciples. 


-^ 


^ 


,  ETER  RAIIN  is  numbered  among  the  resi- 
dent farmers  of  Monroe  County,  and 
makes  his  home  on  section  1,  township  4, 
range  9  west.  A  German  by  birth,  he  was 
born  in  the  province  of  Rheinpfolz,  on  tlie  11th 
of  December,  1826,  and  is  a  son  of  Jacob  and 
Barbara  Ralin.  In  their  family  were  five  children. 
The  mother  died  in  German}',  and  the  father  after- 
ward married  Elizabeth  Stuhlfolt.  He  was  a  farmer 
by  occupation,  and  followed  that  pursuit  in  his 
native  land  until  1842,  when  he  crossed  the  briny 


deep.  The  vessel  in  which  he  sailed  dropped  an- 
chor in  tiic  harbor  of  New  York  on  the  4th  of 
July.  He  came  directly  to  Monroe  County,  111., 
where  he  purchased  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres 
of  partially  improved  land.  He  made  all  of  the 
necessary  improvements  upon  it,  and  placed  it 
under  a  high  state  of  cultivation,  devoting  his  en- 
ergies to  its  further  development  until  his  death. 
The  parents  of  our  subject  were  both  members  of 
the  Evangelical  Church.  Only  two  of  their  chil- 
dren are  living,  Peter  and  Philip.  There  is  also 
one  half-brother,  Wendell,  a  resident  of  Monroe 
County. 

Peter  Ralin  spent  the  first  sixteen  years  of  his 
life  in  the  Fatherland,  and  then  came  with  the 
family  to  the  United  States.  He  aided  in  the  ardu- 
ous task  of  developing  a  new  farm,  and  also  bore 
the  hardships  and  trials  of  frontier  life.  At  the 
age  of  nineteen  he  left  home  and  started  out  in 
life  for  himself,  going  to  .Cincinnati,  Ohio,  where 
he  spent  three  years  engaged  in  draying.  On  the 
expiration  of  that  period  he  returned  to  Monroe 
County,  where  he  has  since  made  his  home.  His 
energies  have  since  been  devoted  to  agricultural 
pursuits,  and  he  owns  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres 
of  fine  farming  land,  but  expects  soon  to  retire 
from  active  business  life,  for  by  his  industry,  per- 
severance and  good  management  in  former  years 
he  has  acquired  the  capital  which  will  enable  him 
to  spend  his  declining  days  in  rest  from  labor. 

In  1850  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  Mr. 
Rahn  and  Barbara  Gedelmann,  daughter  of  Nicho- 
las Gedelmann.  The  lady  was  born  in  Germany, 
and  with  the  family  came  to  America  in  1844,  locat- 
ing in  Randolph  County.  Unto  our  subject  and 
his  wife  were  born  six  children,  five  of  whom  are 
yet  living,  namely:  Nicholas,  a  liquor  dealer  of 
St.  Louis,  Mo.;  Henry,  who  is  engaged  in  farming 
in  Monroe  County,  111.;  Anna  and  Barbara,  at  home; 
Mary,  a  resident  of  St.  Louis;  and  Elizabeth,  de- 
ceased wife  of  Philip  Baner. 

In  his  political  views,  Mr.  Rahn  is  a  stalwart 
Republican,  who  warmly  advocates  the  principles 
of  his  party.  The  cause  of  education  finds  in  him 
a  warm  friend,  and  for  twelve  years  he  served  as 
School  Director.  He  and  his  wife  hold  membership 
with  the  Evangelical   Church.     He  has  lived  an 


514 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD 


honorable,  upright  life,  and  among  those  who  know 
him  his  word  is  as  good  as  his  bond.  He  has  the 
respect  of  all,  and  it  is  with  pleasure  that  we  pre- 
sent to  our  readers  the  record  of  Ins  career. 


«^'  LEXANDER  P.  HAMILTON,  the  present 
(©VlJII  popular  and  efficient  Supervisor  of  Somer- 
w  set  Township,  and  one  of  Jackson  Coun- 
ty's most  influential  citizens,  was  born  in 
Clarke  County,  Va.,  .June  23,  1844.  The  Hamilton 
family,  tradition  says,  originated  in  England, 
whence  three  brothers  of  tiiat  name  emigrated  to 
America  prior  to  the  Revolutionary  War,  one  of 
whom  settled  in  New  York,  another  in  Soutii  Caro- 
lina, and  the  third  in  Virginia.  Our  subject  is  a 
descendant  of  the  Virginia  branch  of  the  family, 
and  his  ancestors  for  several  generations  were 
prominent  in  the  histoi^-  of  the  Old  Dominion.  His 
maternal  grandfatiier,  John  Blake,  was  a  soldier  in 
the  AVar  of  1812,  and  his  progenitors  on  both  sides 
have  been  men  of  lofty  patriotism  and  undaunted 
courage. 

In  companj'  with  his  parents.  Whiting  and 
Nancy  (Blake)  Hamilton,  our  subject  in  1859  left 
the  old  Virginia  home  and  started  westward.  From 
Charlestown  to  Parkersburg,  W.  Va.,  the  family 
traveled  by  rail  over  the  Baltimore  <fe  Ohio  Rail- 
road; they  then  proceeded'  by  boat  to  Cairo,  111., 
from  there  went  by  rail  to  DuQuoin  and  thence 
journeyed  to  Franklin  County,  this  state,  which  at 
that  time  had  comparatively  few  residents  and  was 
onl3'  partly  improved.  Upon  a  farm  there  Alex- 
ander P.  grew  to  a  sturdy  manhood,  meantime  be- 
coming familiar  with  agriculture,  which  has  since 
been  his  chosen  occupation.  His  education  was 
meagre,  being  limited  to  a  brief  attendance  at  the 
district  schools  of  pioneer  days,  but  he  has  been  a 
thoughtful  reader  and  a  close  observer,  and  conse- 
quently- is  well  informed. 

November  18,  1869,  Mr.  Hamilton  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Charlotte  L.  Snider,  who  was 
born  in  Franklin  County,  111.,  March  1,  1852,  be- 
ing the  daughter  of  Isaac  and  Electa  (Taylor) 
Snider,  earlj'  settlers  of  that  county.  They  are  the 
parents  of  eight  living  children,  of  whom  the  eld- 


est, Etta,  is  a  successful  teacher  in  the  public  schools 
of  Murpli)-sboro;  James  is  a  student  in  the  Normal 
.School  at  Valparaiso,  Ind.;  Maggie,  Lottie,  Ella, 
Joseph.  Lula  and  John  Rilph  reside  willi  their 
parents. 

Shortly  after  his  marriage  Mr.  Hamilton  came  to 
Jackson  County  and  settled  in  Somerset  Township, 
where  he  has  since  resided  on  section  33,  except  a 
few  years  spent  in  Murph^'sDoro,  III.  He  has  ever 
been  prominent  in  the  promotion  of  the  best  in- 
terests of  the  people,  and  is  now  serving  his  second 
terra  as  Supervisor  of  Somerset  Township.  In  his 
political  belief  he  is  a  Democrat,  and  while  not 
active  in  his  partisanship,  he  ma^'  always  be  relied 
upon  to  discharge  his  duties  as  a  public-spirited 
and  progressive  citizen.  He  enjoys  the  confidence 
of  his  large  circle  of  acquaintances  and  the  esteem 
of  those  who  for  years  have  been  his  associates  in 
business  and  social  circles. 


iHOMAS  BROCKLESBY.  The  vast  agricult- 
ural resources  of  the  United  States  enables 
thousands  of  men  to  gain  a  competence  by 
tilling  the  soil.  Randolph  County  is  not  without 
her  share  of  these  enterprising  workers,  and  among 
those  in  township  6,  range  5,  who  occupy  excellent 
estates  is  the  gentleman  above  named,  who  is  num- 
bered among  the  successful  men  of  the  county. 
His  propertj'  is  well  improved  with  substantial 
buildings,  modern  farm  machinery  and  good  fenc- 
ing, and  the  owner  raises  all  the  cereals  for  which 
this  portion  of  the  country  is  adapted. 

Born  in  Lancashire,  England,  in  March,  1832, 
our  subject  is  the  j-oungest  child  of  John  and  Ann 
Brocklesby,  both  of  whom  died  in  England. 
Thomas  attended  school  in  his  native  country, and 
in  his  3-outh,  being  obliged  to  support  himself,  he 
worked  at  anything  he  could  find  to  do.  At  the 
age  of  nineteen,  having  determined  to  seek  a  home 
in  the  New  AVorld,  he  sailed  for  America,  and  at 
once  after  landing  came  to  Illinois.  Arriving  in 
Randolph  County,  he  located  upon  the  farm  where 
he  has  since  resided.  For  one  year  he  worked  for 
a  farmer  in  this  county,  and  then  undertaking 
agricultural   pursuits   for  himself,  soon  achieved 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


615 


success.  His  estate  is  pleasantly  located  within  a 
mile  of  the  cit}'  of  Steeleville,  and  its  admirable 
location,  as  well  as  the  fertilit}'  of  the  soil,  renders 
the  property  very  valuable. 

The  marriage  of  Mr.  Brocklesby  occurred  in 
18.52,  and  united  him  witii  Miss  Marj'  A.,  daughter 
of  .John  and  Marv  (Scott)  Stevenson.  The  father 
IKissed  away  in  England,  and  the  mother  afterward 
emigrated  to  the  United  States,  and  resided  in  Illi- 
nois until  her  death.  The  greatest  sorrow  that  has 
come  to  the  wedded  life  of  Mr.  Brocklesby  and  his 
wife  is  the  loss  of  their  five  children,  of  whom  they 
have  been  bereaved  b^'  death.  They  are  highly 
esteemed  b3'  the  people  of  tlie  community,  and 
justly  merit  the  esteem  in  which  they  are  held.  As 
a  member  of  the  Democratic  party  Mr.  Brocklesby 
takes  an  intelligent  interest  in  the  welfare  of  the 
people  and  the  development  and  progress  of  this 
section  of  the  state.  He  is,  however,  disinclined 
to  accept  public  positions,  preferring  the  tranquil- 
lity- of  domestic  life  to  the  excitement  of  an  official 
career.  He  has  given  his  attention  to  the  improve- 
ment and  cultivation  of  his  farm,  and  has  the  sat- 
isfaction of  knowing  that  the  property  of  which 
he  is  now  the  owner  has  been  earned  by  his  own 
indefatigable  and  honorable  efforts. 


^^  LAUS  PETERSON,  dealer  in  carriages  and 
(ll  n  ^ffi'icultuial  implements,  of  Red  Bud,  was 
^^7  born  in  northern  Germany,  and  in  that 
country  was  reared  to  manhood,  no  event  of 
special  importance  occurring  during  his  boj'hood 
and  youth.  It  was  in  1867  that  be  crossed  the 
Atlantic  and  came  direct  to  this  place,  where  he 
soon  embarked  in  his  present  business.  Two  of 
his  brothers  also  emigrated  to  the  New  World, 
Peter  and  Chris.  The  former  died  in  Red  Bud 
in  1891,  leaving  two  children.  The  latter  is  now 
a  resident  of  Silver  King,  Ariz.,  where  he  is  in- 
terested in  mining. 

In  his  native  land  our  subject  had  learned  the 
trade  of  wagon-making,  and  in  1872  began  work- 
ing along  that  line  in  Red  Bud,  but  after  carrying 
on  operations  for  a  few  years  he  abandoned  the 
occupation  and  began  dealing  in  farm  implements 


and  carriages.  He  carries  a  good  stock  and  does 
the  most  extensive  business  in  this  line  of  any 
man  in  the  county.  He  lost  heavily  in  the  cy- 
clone of  1892,  but  with  characteristic  energy  he  be- 
gan the  work  of  retrieving  his  lost  possessions. 
His  success  is  the  result  of  his  untiring  effort  and 
good  management. 

In  1876  Mr.  Peterson  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Annie  Kaney,  a  native  of  Indiana,  born 
in  t^vansville.  Their  union  has  been  blessed  with 
a  familj'  of  four  children,  Johnnie,  Oscar,  Amelia 
and  Minnie,  all  of  whom  are  still  under  the  par- 
ental roof.  The  parents  of  our  subject,  John  and 
Katrina  (Christiansen)  Peterson,  were  both  na- 
tives of  Germany,  and  there  spent  their  entire 
lives.  A  brother  and  sister  of  our  subject,  John 
and  Mai"3',  are  also  living  in  the  Fatherland. 

Socially,  Mr.  Peterson  is  connected  with  the 
Knights  of  Honor,  and  his  brother  is  a  member  of 
the  Masonic  fraternity  and  the  Odd  Fellows'  so- 
ciety. Both  are  stanch  Republicans  in  politics  and 
take  an  active  interest  in  the  growth  and  success 
of  their  party.  Mr.  Peterson  has  been  called  upon 
to  serve  in  positions  of  public  .trust,  and  for  a 
number  of  years  hiis  filled  the  office  of  City  Alder- 
man with  credit  to  himself  and  satisfaction  to  his 
constituents.  For  some  time  he  was  also  a  mem- 
ber of  the  School  Board,  and  during  his  service 
in  that  capacity  did  much  toward  the  promotion 
of  the  cause  of  education,  of  which  he  is  a  warm 
friend.  It  was  a  fortunate  day  for  him  when  he 
determined  to  emigrate  to  America,  for  here  he 
has  met  with  prosperity',  securing  a  comfortable 
home,  and  made  manv  warm  friends. 


\T]SAAC  R.  PINKERTON.  It  has  been  often 
l|  said  that  invincible  determination  will  accom- 
/I\  plish  any  desired  result  and  already  are  the 
effects  of  its  constant  exercise  visible  in  the  life 
of  this  gentleman,  who,  although  one  of  the  3'oung- 
est  agriculturists  in  township  7,  has  won  a  respected 
position  for  himself  in  the  community  by  reason 
of  his  industry,  perseverance  and  genial  nature. 
He  is  a  fine  type  of  the  native  born  citizens  of  Ran- 


516 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


dolpb  County,  and  lias  good  reason  to  look  for- 
ward to  a  bright  and  honored  future. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  the  Mill  Creek  Settle- 
ment, October  27,  1854,  and  is  the  son  of  David 
Pinkerton,  who  came  from  Pennsylvania  in  an 
early  day  and  located  in  the  above  place.  The  fa- 
ther was  a  farmer  by  occupation,  and  also  worked 
for  some  time  at  his  trade  of  a  carpenter.  The 
maiden  name  of  our  subject's  mother  was  Sarah 
Rust.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Isaac  and  Annis 
D.  (Cochran)  Rust,  who  were  earl}'  pioneers 
of  this  county,  and  at  the  time  of  locating  here 
purchased  land  from  the  Government. 

Isaac  R.,  of  this  sketch,  received  his  early  educa- 
tion in  the  district  school  near  his  home,  and  al- 
though his  advantages  were  not  of  the  best,  he  im- 
proved his  spare  moments,  and  has  become  one  of 
the  well  posted  men  of  this  section.  Being  the 
eldest  in  the  parental  family  of  six  children,  he 
was  obliged  to  take  the  lead  in  farm  work,  and 
when  q\iitc  young,  plowed  land  with  a  double  team. 
Ile'remained  at  home  assisting  his  father  in  culti- 
vating the  old  homestead  until  reaching  his  eigh- 
teenth year,  when  he  hired  out  for  a  twelvemonth, 
and  at  the  expiration  of  that  time  began  farming 
on  his  own  account,  which  has  since  been  his  life 
■  work.  He  gives  his  time  to  raising  hay  and  grain, 
and  is  also  a  breeder  of  fine  stock. 

Miss  Harriet,  daughter  of  Archibald  and  Theo- 
dora (Tilden)  Gilchrist,  became  the  wife  of  our 
subject  in  1879.  The  parents  of  Mrs.  Pinkerton 
were  among  the  earliest  settlers  of  this  county,  and 
lier  father,  who  was  a  descendant  of  Scotch  parents, 
served  as  a  soldier  in  the  late  Civil  War,  and  died 
from  the  effects  of  disease  contracted  while  in  the 
army. 

To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Isaac  R.  Pinkerton  have  been 
born  four  children:  Lelia,  Jessie,  and  Isaac  Glenn 
and  Sarah  Eunice,  twins.  They  are  all  being 
given  the  best  advantages  for  obtaining  an  edu- 
cation. A  Republican  in  his  political  opinions, 
Mr.  Pinkerton  has  been  elected  upon  the  ticket 
of  his  chosen  party  to  numerous  positions  of  re- 
sponsibility and  trust.  He  has  held  the  office  of 
Constable  and  was  Road  Supervisor  for  one  year. 
He  was  a  strong  advocate  of  public  schools,  and  as 
Director  has  done  much  to  promote  the  standard 


of  scholarship  in  his  neighborhood.  He  lias  also 
rendered  efficient  service  as  School  Trustee  for  a 
period  of  nine  years,  and  is  known  for  his  sturdy 
championship  of  eveiy  measure  calculated  to  bene- 
fit the  community,  and  has  alwa3-s  been  progress- 
ive, fearless  and  honest. 


^  (VILLIAM  RUCKNAGEL.  Prominentamong 
\rJ//  the  pioneer  citizens  of  Randolph  County 
^/yyfj  is  the  gentleman  above  named,  who  dur- 
ing his  active  life  was  inseparably  associated  with 
the  agricultural  interests  of  Evansville  Precinct. 
In  1888  he  became  blind,  but  after  an  operation, 
which  was  performed  b}'  Dr.  Hoyt,  of  St.  Louis, 
he  regained  his  sight  to  some  extent.  An  hon- 
ored and  upright  citizen,  by  hard  work  lie  has  ac- 
cumulated a  handsome  fortune,  and  now  in  the 
twilight  of  age  rests  from  arduous  duties  with  the 
consciousness  of  a  life  well  spent. 

Like  many  of  the  best  residents  of  this  county, 
our  subject  was  born  in  Germany,  his  birth  occur- 
ring .Tuly  7,  1821.  His  parents,  Andrew  and 
Christina  (Hoffman)  Rucknagel,  were  also  natives 
of  the  Fatherland,  where  the  former  died  in  1829. 
The  mother  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  com- 
pany with  our  subject  in  1846,  and  departed  this 
life  in  Randolph  County  in  1855.  AVilliam,  of 
this  sketch,  upon  coining  to  the  New  World  made 
his  first  home  near  Waterloo,  Monroe  County,  this 
state,  and  there  resided  until  1854,  when  he  made 
his  advent  into  Randolph  County  and  purchased 
the  farm  he  now  owns  and  occupies. 

The  lady  whom  onr  subject  married  in  1852  was 
also  a  native  of  German}',  and  in  maidenhood  was 
known  as  Margaret  Longhaus.  She  was  the 
daughter  of  John  and  Margaret  (Grown)  Long- 
haus, who  came  to  America  in  1845  and  settled 
near  the  home  of  our  subject  in  Monroe  County. 
Later,  they  came  to  Randolph  Count}',  where  Mr. 
Longhaus  departed  this  life  in  1879,  and  his  good 
wife  two  years  previously.  William  Rucknagel 
was  the  youngest  of  six  children,  and  received  a 
fair  education  in  the  model  schools  of  his  native 
land.  When  locating  upon  the  land  which  he 
now    owns,   and    which    comprises    eighty    acres, 


/. 


V 


■yy 


/ 


■/n^^L<7 


a^^^'/^^O^^ 


^^,  c^/^^^^.^^^     ^  ^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


519 


it  was  in  ils  primitive  condition,  and  lie  imme- 
diately set  himself  about  the  task  of  clearing 
away  the  timber  and  erecting  a  log  cabin.  It 
must  be  admitted  that  he  commenced  life  under 
disadvantages,  but  by  means  of  undaunted  energy 
and  great  courage  he  has  reached  a  high  position 
in  agricultural  circles. 

To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ruckiiagel  have  been  born  five 
children,  viz.:  Andrew,  John,  William,  Jacob  and 
Elizabeth.  They  are  both  members  of  the  Luth- 
eran Church  and  take  great  interest  in  religious 
matters.  Our  subject  cast  his  first  Presidential 
vote  for  Taylor,  and  although  not  an  active  poli- 
tician, always  votes  the  Re[)ublican  ticket. 

— .>> .o*o.@^<v@-o*0" <<^ 

jlU^  ON.   ALBERT  L.  BRANDS,  M.  D.,  who  is 

If  J,  at  present  representing  Randolph  County 
/^^    in   the  State  Senate,  has  not  only  attained 

(^^  a  competency  in  the  practice  of  liis  profes- 
sion, but  has  won  an  honorable  lecord  in  Legisla- 
tive halls  and  as  a  private  citizen.  He  is  also  one 
of  the  leading  druggists  in  Prairie  du  Rocher, 
where  he  resides,  and  in  his  well  equipped  estab- 
lishment is  found  a  full  line  of  all  articles  carried 
by  first-class  druggists. 

A  native  of  St.  Genevieve  County,  Mo.,  our 
subject  was  born  April  26,  1856,  to  Herman  and 
Emeline  (Wells)  Brands,  natives  respectively  of 
Westphalia,  Prussia,  and  southwestern  Ohio.  The 
father  of  our  subject  made  his  wa^'  to  America  in 
1844,  and  coming  west,  located  in  the  above  coun- 
ty in  Missouri,  where  he  was  a  farmer,  and  di^d 
June  2,  1893.  His  good  wife,  who  is  still  living, 
resides  on  the  old  homestead  in  thatconnty.  They 
reared  a  family  of  three  sons,  ot  whom  Albert  L., 
of  this  sketch,  is  the  only  one  now  living.  The 
latter  was  reared  to  manhood  in  his  native  county, 
and  received  his  early  training  in  the  subscription 
schools  near  his  home.  Later  he  continued  his 
studies  for  a  twelvemonth  in  the  De  Soto  College, 
at  De  Soto,  Mo.,  and  after  leaving  there  he  taught 
school  for  one  term  in  his  native  county.  It  be- 
ing his  desire  to  become  a  physician,  he  entered 
the  Missouri  Medical  College  at  St.  Louis  in  1877, 
from  which  institution  he  was  graduated  with  the 
degree  of  Doctor  of  Medicine  three  years  later, 
17 


When  ready  to  begin  the  practice  of.  his  profes- 
sion. Dr.  Brands  came  to  Illinois,  and  in  Ivy 
Landing,  Monroe  County,  remained  for  eighteen 
months,  and  at  the  end  of  that  time  came  to  Prai- 
rie du  Rocher,  which  has  since  been  his  home.  He 
has  alwaj'S  been  verj'  ])opular  with  the  people 
where  he  has  resided,  and  during  the  first  admin- 
istration of  Cleveland,  was  appointed  Postmaster 
at  Prairie  du  Rocher.  His  prominence  as  a  public 
man  is  also  indicated  by  the  fact  that  in  1892  he 
was  elected  to  the  State  Senate,  representing  Perry, 
Monroe,  Randolph  and  Jackson  Counties.  His 
political  affiliations  have  always  been  with  the 
Democratic  part}',  which  he  has  represented  as  a 
delegate  to  many  of  the  state  conventions. 

The  marriage  of  Dr.  Brands  with  Miss  Mag- 
gie Bliler  was  celebrated  July  28,  1886.  Mrs. 
Brands  was  born  in  Carlyle,  Clinton  County,  111., 
and  at  the  time  of  her  marriage  was  residing  in 
Chester.  Their  union  was  blessed  b}'  the  birth  of 
four  sons,  viz.:  Edgar  G.,  H.  Arnold,  Sylvester 
J.  and  Albert  A.  The  Doctor's  wife  and  children 
are  members  of  the  Catholic  Church. 

Up  to  the  time  of  entering  the  Senate.  Dr. 
Brands  actively  pursued  his  high  calling  as  a  phy- 
sician here,  having  a  large  practice.  He  is  noted 
for  his  rare  skill  in  the  treatment  of  difficult  cases, 
and  is  considered  one  of  the  finest  physicians  in 
this  section  of  the  country.  As  State  Senator  he 
has  taken  a  decided  stand  on  the  side  of  labor,  and 
in  the  National  Coal  3Iiners'  Journal,  at  Columbus, 
Ohio,  he  is  spoken  of  as  the  "prominent  labor  Sena- 
tor." While  in  that  body,  he  was  Chairman  of  the 
Committee  on  Expenses,  and  was  also  a  member 
of  thirteen  other  committees  of  importance.  His 
record  is  that  of  a  man  interested  in  public  im- 
provements, liberal  in  his  views  regarding  appro- 
priations, but  averse  to  extravagance  or  fraud. 
Stanch  in  principles,  clear  in  perception,  and  de- 
cided in  character,  he  deserves  the  good  things 
which  have  come  to  him,  and  is  one  of  the  most 
pr(>minent  and  influential  men  in  the  state. 

DWARD  SCHWARTZ,  a  successful  farmer 
and  stock-raiser   residing  in  Elkville,  is  a 
son  of  Edward  and  Sarah  (Pyle)  Schwartz. 
His  father  was  numbered  among  the  early  settlers 


520 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


of  southern  Illinois,  locating  in  tbe  state  in  1818, 
the  year  of  its  admission  to  the  Union.  In  1827 
he  removed  to  Jackson  County  and  entered  land 
from  the  Government  at  $1.25  per  acre.  Two 
years  previous  he  had  married  Sarah,  daughter  of 
John  Pyle,  who  settled  near  Carbondale  in  1803, 
and  subsequently  located  east  of  Du  Quoin.  In- 
dians were  still  in  the  neighborhood  and  were  quite 
troublesome,  but  eventually  they  retreated  before 
the  advancing  steps  of  the  white  man. 

Eight  children  were  born  to  ilr.  and  Mrs. 
Schwartz,  Isabel,  Eliza,  Josiah,  Hiram,  Elizabeth, 
William  (deceased),  Edward  and  Horatio.  The 
subject  of  this  record  was  born  on  section  20, 
Elkville  Township,  near  his  present  farm,  April 
10,  1828.  From  his  boyhood  he  was  noted  for  bis 
industry  and  enterprise,  and  the  raw  prairie  soon 
became  productive  and  fertile  under  his  skillful 
care.  He  gradually  became  the  posses^or  of  con- 
siderable valuable  property  as  the  result  of  his 
earnest  efforts. 

On  the  30th  of  August.  1860,  Mr.  Schwartz  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Emeline,  daughter 
of  Eli  and  Rebecca  Renno.  Nine  children  were 
born  to  them,  seven  of  whom  are  yet  living.  Ella 
A.,  born  July  20,  1861,  was  married  in  1887  to 
William  Lemming,  a  carpenter  of  Elkville,  and 
the}'  have  thrcechildren,  Addie,  John  E.  and  Albert. 
Mattie  A.,  born  April  27,  1863,  was  married  March 
27,  1884,  to  W.  D.  Kimmel,  the  well  known  horse- 
man, and  the}-  have  had  four  children,  Mercy, 
Luc}',  Ned,  and  one  deceased.  Marj'  J.,  born  Sep- 
tember 24,  1868,  became  the  wife  of  George  Cas- 
tleton,  August  12,  1888,  and  the}'  had  four  chil- 
dren, Charles  (deceased),  Clara,  Christopher  and 
Emma.  Eva  L.,  born  December  9,  1870,  became 
the  wife  of  Everett  Castleton  November  10,  1892, 
and  they  have  a  son,  Claude.  Samuel  M.,  born 
April  14,  1877;  John  W.,  who  is  a  twin  brother  of 
Samuel;  and  Josiah  E.,  born  Jul}'  8,  1878,  are  the 
younger  members  of  the  family.  Those  deceased 
are  William  A.,  who  was  born  September  19,  1864, 
and  Edward  H.,  born  May  16,  1866. 

Mr.  Schwartz  has  frequently  been  solicited  to 
become  a  candidate  for  public  oUice,  but  has  al- 
ways steadily  refused,  unless  it  was  for  some  minor 
position.     lie  was  commissioned  by  Richard  Yates, 


the  War  Governor  of  Illinois,  as  Justice  of  the 
Peace  November  29, 1864;  he  w.as  elected  Supervisor 
of  Elkville  Townshi[)  in  1872,  and  was  re-elected  in 
1874.  For  two  years  he  also  served  as  Town 
Treasurer,  discharging  his  duties  with  rare  fidelity 
and  judgment. 

In  1849  Jlr.  Schwartz,  attracted  by  the  discov- 
ery of  gold,  crossed  the  plains,  and  for  a  short 
time  engaged  in  mining.  He  recalls  many  inci- 
dents of  pioneer  life,  both  amusing  and  interesting, 
for  he  has  passed  through  all  the  experiences  of 
the  frontier,  and  knows  its  history  well.  In  the 
early  days  of  Jackson  County  he  engaged  in  mer- 
chandising, but  later  turned  his  attention  to  farm- 
ing, and  in  tliat  business  met  with  most  excellent 
success.  In  March,  1892,  the  Horse  and  Mule 
Protective  Association  was  organized  in  Elkville 
Township,  and  its  officers  are  as  follows:  C.  Cas- 
tleton. Chairman;  J.  D.  Hays,  Secretary,  and  Ed- 
ward Schwartz,  Treasurer.  The  farm  of  our  sub- 
ject comprises  four  hundred  and  twenty  acres  of 
valuable  land,  and  is  considered  one  of  the  finest 
and  best  in  the  community.  It  stands  as  a  monu- 
ment to  his  thrift  and  enterprise,  and  is  the  just 
reward  of  his  labors.  Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  .Schwartz 
are  consistent  members  of  the  Christian  Church  of 
Elkville,  contribute  liberally  to  its  support,  and 
are  among  its  leading  workers. 


&0N.  THOMAS  J.  RICE  has  met  with  more 
than    ordinary    success  in  prosecuting  his 
calling  as  a  farmer,  and  since  casting  in 
his  lot  with  the  pioneere  of  Perry  County. 

more  than  half  a  century  ago,  has  accumulated  a 
valuable  property  and  is  classed  among  the  wealthy 
and  prominent  agriculturists  of  this  portion  of  the 
county.  He  owns  two  hundred  and  eighty  acres 
of  land  on  section  10,  township  4,  range  2,  where 
he  and  his  good  wife  are  enjoying  the  fruits  of 
their  united  laborein  the  comforts  of  a  substantial 
home. 

A  native  of  Perry  County,  111.,  Mr.  Rice  was 
born  September  16,  1841,  .and  is  tbe  son  of  Hiram 
and  Mary  (Hutchings)  Rice,  natives  of  Tennessee. 
He  received  a  liberal  education,  and  when  starting 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


521 


out  in  life  for  himself  was  prudent  and  frugal, 
and  boon  laid  53-  a  sufficient  sum  of  money  to  en- 
able him  to  engage  in  business  on  his  own  ac- 
count. In  1864  he  married  Miss  Fannie,  daugh- 
ter of  William  and  Marj"  (Hall)  Rhine,  and  to 
them  were  born  five  children,  three  of  whom  are 
still  living,  Lvman,  a  farmer  in  this  county;  T. 
Warren  and  Dora. 

In  his  political  relations,  Mr.  Rice  has  been  an 
active  worker  in  the  ranks  of  the  Democratic  part}*, 
and  in  1888  was  elected  on  that  ticket  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  State  Legislature.  He  is  known  for  his 
sturdy  championship  of  every  measure  calculated 
to  benefit  the  comrauuitv,  and  has  always  been 
progressive,  fearless  and  honest.  With  his  wife, 
he  is  a  member  of  the  Missionary  Baptist  Church, 
and  is  numbered  among  the  most  prominent  resi- 
dents of  this  section. 


\i^^OAH  FARNER,a  representative  farmer  and 
I  )/,'  stock-raiser  of  Jackson  County,  residing 
!i\ J^,  on  section  13,  Somerset  Township,  was 
born  in  Somereet  County,  Pa.,  November  30,  1834. 
He  is  the  son  of  Abraham  and  Caroline  (Oaks) 
Famer,  natives  of  Pennsylvania,  whom  he  accom- 
panied at  the  age  of  nine  years  to  Illinois,  and 
settled  with  them  in  Jackson  Count\-.  The  jour- 
ney hither  was  made  bj'  wa}"  of  the  Ohio  and  Mis- 
sissippi Rivers  to  a  place  then  known  as  Bennett's 
Landing,  whence  they  came  by  wagon  to  Somerset 
Township. 

Locating  near  Elkville,  Abraham  Earner  there 
for  a  time  operated  a  rented  farm  and  remained  in 
that  neighborhood  for  several  years.  .Subsequently 
he  removed  to  De  Soto  Township,  of  which  he 
was  a  pioneer,  settling  in  the  woods  and  erecting 
a  log  cabin  for  the  home  of  his  family.  It  fell  to 
his  lot  to  do  a  large  amount  of  frontier  work,  but 
being  stalwart  and  rugged,  he  was  enabled  to  se- 
cure profitable  results  from  his  labors.  Shortly 
after  locating  in  De  Soto  Township  he  was  be- 
reaved by  the  death  of  his  estimable  wife,  whom 
he  survived  for  a  number  of  j'ears,  passing  away 
in  1878.  A  man  of  energetic  and  forceful  dispo- 
sition, be  was  highlj'  regarded    by  the  people  of 


Jackson  Countv,  and  was  especially  prominent  in 
the  public  aflfairs  of  DeSoto  Township. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  reared  to  man- 
hood amid  scenes  of  pioneer  life  in  Jackson  Coun- 
t\-.  In  the  subscription  schools  of  the  neighbor- 
hood he  obtained  the  rudiments  of  his  education, 
but  the  obstacles  to  progress  were  manj'.  The 
mode  of  instruction,  was  crude,  the  text  books  un- 
satisfactory, and  the  building  itself  no  better  than 
the  books.  However,  in  the  school  of  experience 
he  has  learned  many  lessons  not  taught  in  books, 
and  his  efforts  have  been  so  constant  and  thorough 
that  he  is  now  a  well  informed  man. 

In  the  year  1866  !Mr.  F.-wner  married  Miss  Ros- 
anna  Knights,  who  died  after  having  become  the 
mother  of  four  children.  Of  this  famil3-one  alone 
survives,  a  daughter,  Dora.  May  30,  1880,  Mr. 
Farner  was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Minnie 
Fager,  who  was  born  in  German^'  January  26, 
1848.  At  the  age  of  five  years  she  accompanied 
her  parents,  Sebastian  and  Mary  A.  Fager,  from 
their  native  land  to  America,  and  locating  in  Jack- 
son County,  her  father  afterward  assisted  in  the 
construction  work  of  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad. 
Later  he  settled  in  Somerset  Township,  where  he 
died  September  17,  1889.  His  wife  passed  away 
January  28,  1862.  Four  of  their  children  are  now 
living:  Mrs.  Farner,  John,  Philip  and  Daniel  B. 

Through  energetic  efforts  Mr.  Farner  has  ac- 
quired the  ownership  of  a  valuable  farm  consist- 
ing of  one  hundred  and  twenty  acres.  While  de- 
voting his  attention  closely  to  agriculture,  he  also 
finds  time  for  the  consideration  of  matters  of  pub- 
lic import.  He  is  a  Republican  in  politics,  and  has 
served  as  School  Director.  In  religious  matters  he 
is  liberal,  though  inclined  to  the  faith  of  the  Luth- 
eran Church,  of  which  his  wife  is  a  member.  Dur- 
ing the  Civil  War  he  enlisted,  August  1,  1862,  as 
a  member  of  Company  K,  Seventy-third  Illinois 
Infantr3',  and  became  a  factor  of  the  Army  of  the 
Cumberland,  participating  with  his  regiment  in  the 
battles  of  Perryville,  Stone  River,  Chickamaugua, 
Mission  Ridge  and  other  minor  engagements.  He 
went  as  far  south  as  Atlanta,  and  afterward  took 
part  in  the  battle  of  Nashville.  Altogether  he  was 
actively  engaged  in  nineteen  battles.  Three  times 
he   was  wounded,  and  is  now  in  receipt  of  a  pen- 


522 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


sion  of  $12  per  month.  After  an  honorable  serv- 
ice of  almost  three  years  he  was  discharged  at 
Camp  Butler,  in  1865.  He  is  an  active  member  of 
DeSoto  Post  No.  564,  G.  A.  R.,  and  has  served  as 
its  Junior  Vice-Commander. 


,1^^  A.Ml'EL  SCHWARTZ  is  the  present  Post- 
^^^  master  at  Elkville,  and  is  an  efficient  and 
faithful  officer,  who  in  the  prompt  dis- 
charge of  his  duties  has  won  high  com- 
mendation. Mr.  Schwartz  is  a  native  of  Elkville 
Township,  and  is  therefore  all  the  more  deserving 
of  representation  in  this  volume.  He  was  born  in 
1847,  and  is  a  son  of  George  and  Sarah  Schwartz, 
who  were  numbered  among  the  pioneers  of  the 
state,  having  settled  in  the  southern  part  of  Illi- 
nois in  1812,  during  territorial  days.  They  were 
natives  of  Penns^'lvania  and  Kentucky,  respect- 
ively and  on  leaving  their  childhood  home  became 
residents  of  Jackson  County,  111.,  locating  soutli 
of  Murphysboro.  At  that  time  the  Indians  still 
lingered  along  the  INIississippi,  and  the  entire  dis- 
trict was  in  a  wild  and  unimproved  condition. 
Later  Mr.  Schwartz  made  extensive  purchases  of 
land  in  Elkville  Township,  which  subsequently 
became  the  property-  of  numerous  heirs  of  the 
family. 

Amid  the  wild  scenes  of  frontier  life,  Samuel 
Schwartz  passed  the  days  of  his  bo3'hood  and 
youth.  He  worked  on  a  farm  during  the  summer 
months,  and  in  the  winter  season  attended  the 
common  school,  where  he  acquired  a  good  educa- 
tion. When  he  had  arrived  at  man's  estate,  he 
took  up  the  pursuit  to  which  he  had  been  reared, 
and  ver}'  successfully  followed  farming  for  some 
time.  He  still  owns  two  hundred  acres  of  valu- 
able land,  comprising  one  of  the  best  farm  proper- 
ties in  Jackson  County.  The  land  is  highl}-  culti- 
vated, and  is  improved  with  all  the  buildings  and 
conveniences  found  upon  a  model  farm. 

In  1872,  Mr.  Schwartz  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Sarah  Jane  Hackney,  of  Tennessee,  who 
has  proved  to  him  a  faithful  companion  and  help- 
mate. She  IS  a  most  estimable  lad}-,  and  has 
many  warm  friends  throughout  the   community, 


who  esteem  her  highly.  The  Schwartz  household 
numbers  our  subject,  his  wife  and  the  three  chil- 
dren who  have  graced  their  union.  Charles  E., 
the  eldest,  is  now  attending  the  State  Normal  Uni- 
versity of  Carbondale,  111.,  and  is  rapidly  winning 
success  as  a  correspondent  of  the  St.  Louis  papers. 
Fannie  B.  and  Chester  R.  are  still  at  home. 

Mr.  Schwartz  has  twice  been  elected  Postmaster 
at  Elkville,  and  is  now  filling  the  office  inacredil- 
able  and  acceptable  manner.  He  votes  with  the 
Democrac3',  and  is  a  warm  advocate  of  its  princi- 
ples. In  1891  he  established  a  general  store,  and 
from  the  beginning  this  investment  has  proved  a 
profitable  one,  increasing  his  income  materially. 
He  is  a  man  of  energj-  and  enterprise,  and  his  suc- 
cess is  the  result  of  well  directed  efforts. 


FRANK  TREFFTZS.  Since  his  early 
.,,,  youth  this  gentleman  has  manifested  a  de- 
'  V/  gree  of  enterprise  which  has  redounded  to 
his  credit  and  resulted  in  worldh-  prosperity.  He 
is  of  German  ancestry,  and  no  doubt  inherits  some 
of  the  national  characteristics  which  have  combined 
to  secure  his  financial  success.  He  is  a  son  of 
Gabriel  and  Mary  (Federer)  Trefftzs.  who  came  to 
America  from  Wurtemherg,  Germany,  in  1837. 

Gabriel  Trefftzs,  wlio  was  the  elder  in  a  family 
of  two  children,  was  a  weaver  by  trade,  and  also 
owned  and  operated  a  seven-acre  tract  of  land  in 
his  native  country.  Prior  to  coming  to  America 
he  married  Miss  Federer,  and  of  their  union  seven 
children  were  born  in  Germany.  After  coming 
to  the  United  States  two  children  were  added  to 
the  family.  The  household  included  Caroline; 
Gabriel,  now  deceased;  Levy,  Jacob;  Gottleib,  who 
died  in  Germany;  Lewis,  also  deceased;  Mathias; 
Rebecca  and  William  F.,  our  subject.  The  parents 
were  memliers  of  the  German  Lutheran  Church, 
and  were  active  in  all  good  works.  After  coming 
to  America  the}'  located  on  rented  land  in  Ohio, 
which  they  operated  until  coming  to  Perry  Coun- 
ty in  1854.  Here  the  father  purchased  one  hun- 
dred and  twent}'  acres  of  Government  land,  which 
forms  a  part  of  our  subject's  present  home,  and 
he  worked  industriously  in  order  to  clear  and  im- 


Portrait  and  biographical  record. 


523 


prove  bis  property.  He  departed  this  life  March 
2,  1875,  and  was  followed  to  the  better  land  by 
his  good  wife,  who  died  Jul}-  2.  1878. 

W.  Frank  Trefftzs  received  a  district  school 
education  and  lived  with  his  parents,  caring  for 
them  until  their  decease.  Then  purchasing  of  his 
brothers  and  sisters  their  interest  in  the  home  farm 
he  became  its  proprietor,  and  is  now  conducting 
affairs  so  as  to  reap  good  returns.  AVhen  twent}-- 
three  years  of  age  Mr.  Trefftzs  married  Miss  Eliza 
E.  Blaclc,  who  was  born  in  Perry  County,  Mo.,  in 
1844.  She  is  the  daughter  of  Louis  and  Nancy 
(Watkins)  Black,  natives  of  Kentucky  and  pio- 
neers of  Missouri.  To  them  has  been  born  a 
family  of  ten  children,  of  whom  one  died  in  in- 
fancy. Those  living  are,  Gabriel;  Winefred,  Mrs. 
George  G.  Brown;  Lewis,  Emma,  Jacob,  Lydia  M., 
Cora  M.,  Sadie  E.  and  Grace  M.  The  cluldren 
have  been  given  good  educations,  and  one  mem- 
ber of  the  family  has  been  very  successful  as  a 
school  teaclier.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Trefftzs  are  conscien- 
tious members  of  tiie  Missionary  Baptist  Church, 
in  which  the  former  has  been  Clerk.  In  early  life 
a  Republican,  he  now  votes  with  the  People's 
party. 

.    ' ^#P '    . 


^^EORGE  H.  FRENCH,  A.  M.,  professor  of 
III  ,_-,  botan}',  zoology  and  physiology  in  the 
■^^  Southern  Illinois  State  Normal  University, 
is  a  native  of  Tull}-,  Onandaga  County,  N.  Y. 
His  father,  Hazen  M.  French,  was  born  in  Vermont, 
March  15,  1812,  and  was  a  farmer  by  occupation. 
His  father,  Miles  French,  was  of  English  descent, 
the  faniilj'  having  been  founded  in  America  by 
four  brothers  oC  English  birth,  who  in  early  Colo- 
nial days  settled  in  Concord,  N.  II.  The  mother  of 
our  subject  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Caroline 
White,  was  born  in  New  York  in  1813,  and  was  a 
member  of  the  AVhite  family  which  furnished  many 
eminent  physicians  to  New  York.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
French  were  married  in  the  Empire  State,  where 
thej'  alwa^'S  lived.  He  was  a  prominent  and  influen- 
tial citizen  and  was  a  great  reader  and  student  of 
history.  In  the  family  were  five  children,  of 
whom  three  j-et  survive,  Esther  E.,  wife  of  Byron 
S.  Lake,  a  mining  superintendent  of  Central  City, 


Colo.,  by  whom  she  has  two  children;  George  H., 
and  Emery  H.,  who  is  living  in  De  Ruyter,  N.  Y. 
He  married  Florence  Parks,  and  they  have  one 
child. 

Professor  French  was  born  JMarch  19,  1841,  and 
spent  the  days  of  his  boyhood  and  youth  upon  liis 
father's  farm.  He  completed  liis  education  in  the 
normal  school  of  Cortland,  N.  Y.  and  later  en- 
gaged in  teaching  for  four  years  in  the  common 
schools  of  his  native  state.  In  1865-66,  he  was 
engaged  in  teaching  in  Belvidere,  111.,  later  spent 
one  year  as  a  teacher  in  Grand  Rapids,  Wis.,  one 
3'ear  in  Roscoe,  111.,  and  nine  years  in  the  Agricult- 
ural College  of  Irvington,  111.  He  then  spent  one 
year  as  Assistant  State  Entomologist  under  Dr. 
Cyrus  Thomas,  and  in  July,  1878,  he  became  con- 
nected with  the  University  in  Carbondale,  in 
which  he  has  since  occupied  the  chairs  of  botany, 
zoology,  physiology  and  has  been  curator. 

In  1872  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  Pro- 
fessor French  and  Miss  Ilattie  E.  Bingham,  a  native 
of  Bureau  County,  111.  She  was  born  December 
25,  1851,  and  is  a  daughter  of  S.  P.  and  Harriet 
(Adams)  Bingliam.  Her  mother  was  a  descendant 
of  Samuel  Adams  of  Revolutionaiy  fame.  She  is 
now  deceased.  Mr.  Bingham  is  a  resident  of  Lin- 
coln, Neb.,  and  a  Deacon  in  a  Baptist  Church  of 
that  city. 

Both  tlie  Professor  and  Mrs.  French  belong  to 
the  Baptist  Church,  and  he  also  serves  as  Deacon. 
He  takes  an  active  part  in  churcli  and  benevolent 
work  and  h.as  always  been  a  teaclier  in  the  Sunday- 
school.  He  belongs  to  the  Entomological  Society 
of  France,  is  an  associate  member  of  the  Natural 
History  Society  of  Lubeck,  Germany,  an  associate 
member  of  the  Entomological  Society'  of  Ontario, 
Canada,  and  of  a  similar  organization  in  New  York, 
in  the  Philadelphia  Academy-  of  Sciences  and  the 
American  Entomological  Society  of  Philadelphia. 
He  is  evidentlj'  the  foremost  entomologist  in  Illi- 
nois, and  has  received  insects  from  all  over  the 
country  to  name  and  classify-.  He  is  probably 
just  as  well  versed  in  botany.  He  is  the  author  of 
a  work  of  over  four  hundred  pages  entitled  "The 
Butterflies  of  Eastern  United  States,"  published  by 
J.  B.  Lippincott  in  1886.  He  is  now  writing  a 
work  on  "Moths  of  Eastern  United  States."     He 


524 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


bas  furnished  many  articles  for  scientific  peri- 
odicals and  papers,  has  been  a  regular  contributor 
to  the  Fruit  Grower's  Journal  since  its  organization, 
has  been  Entomological  correspondent  for  the 
Rural  New  Yorker,  the  Prairie  Farmer  and  tlie  Pa- 
cific Rural  Press,  of  San  Francisco.  Some  of  his 
papers  have  also  been  publislied  in  foreign  coun- 
tries. His  membership  in  the  foreign  societies  was 
entirely  unsolicited  on  his  part.  A  lover  of  nature, 
he  lias  ever  been  a  close  student,  especial!}'  of  in- 
sects and  flowers,  and  liis  deep  researches  have 
given  him  a  position  of  prominence  among  scien- 
tific men,  not  onl}'  in  liis  own  country,  but  In 
foreign  lands  as  well. 


;REDERICK  HARMSEN.  Among  the  na- 
tives of  German}'  who  rank  among  the 
1\  prominentagriculturists  of  Randolph  Coun- 

ty may  be  classed  tlie  subject  of  this  biographical 
notice,  whose  life  has  been  such  as  to  reflect  credit 
not  only  upon  himself,  but  also  upon  the  land  of 
his  nativity.  His  estate  is  located  in  township  6, 
range  5,  near  the  city  of  Steeleville,  and  on  ac- 
count of  its  first-class  improvements  and  pleasant 
situation  is  conceded  to  bo  one  of  the  most  valua- 
ble farms  in  the  county. 

Born  in  Germany  August  29,  1832,  our  subject 
is  the  second  of  a  famiij"  of  three  children  born  to 
the  union  of  Henr}'  and  Katheriue  (Blester) 
Harmsen,  both  of  whom  lived  and  died  in  the 
Fatherland.  In  the  excellent  schools  of  German}', 
Frederick  received  a  practical  education,  and  at 
the  age  of  fourteen  3'ears  discontinued  his  studies 
and  commenced  to  work  upon  a  farm.  He  fol- 
lowed farming  pursuits  in  that  country  until  1865, 
when  he  took  passage  on  a  ship  and  crossed  the 
ocean  to  America.  For  a  time  he  remained  in 
Chicago,  after  which  he  spent  a  year  in  Randolph 
County,  and  then  returned  to  Germany. 

So  pleased  was  Mr.  Harmsen  with  the  prospects 
and  inducements  America  offered  to  settlers  that 
in  1867  he  returned  hither  and  took  up  his  abode 
in  Randolph  County,  settling  ujjon  the  place  where 
he  has  since  resided.  Since  locating  here  he  has 
become  known  as  one  of  the  leading  farmers  and 


stock-raisers  of  the  county,  and  as  a  result  of  his 
progressive  spirit  and  energetic  disposition  he  has 
gained  prosperity.  He  devotes  his  attention  ex- 
clusively to  his  private  interests,  and  other  than 
casting  his  ballot  for  the  nominees  of  the  Demo- 
cratic party,  is  not  interested  in  public  affairs. 

The  first  mari-iage  of  Mr.  Harmsen  occurred  in 
1867,  when  he  was  united  with  Miss  Margaret 
Myers,  whose  parents  spent  their  entire  lives  in 
Germany.  Of  this  union  there  were  born  five 
children.  Those  who  survive  are:  Agnes,  who 
married  Hermann  Kuhlman  and  resides  in  Cali- 
fornia; Emma  and  Henry,  who  are  at  home.  In 
1886  Mrs.  Margaret  Harmsen  passed  away,  and 
two  years  later  our  subject  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Wilhemena  Pagels,  who  was  born  and  reared 
in  Germany,  and  there  also  married.  The  parents 
of  Mrs.  Harmsen  spent  their  entire  lives  in  their 
native  land,  Germany.  This  marriage  has  resulted 
in  the  birth  of  two  children,  John  and  William, 
who  are  bright  and  intelligent.  In  their  religious 
affiliations,  Mr.  Harmsen  and  his  excellent  wife  are 
identified  with  the  Lutheran  Church. 


^•{••{••{••S-! 


i-HE  CITY  NATIONAL  BANK  of  Murphys- 
boro  is  one  of  the  conservative  and  solid 
■^^  financial  institutions  of  Jackson  County. 
It  was  organized  in  1893,  with  a  capital  stock  of 
?!50,000,  and  on  the  25th  of  November  was  opened 
for  business.  Although  the  period  is  compara- 
tively short  that  has  elapsed  since  that  time,  it  has 
already  established  itself  on  a  firm  basis  and  is 
recognized  as  the  leading  bank  of  the  city.  Its 
stockholders  are  among  the  best  and  most  sub- 
stantial citizens  of  Murphysboro. 

The  City  National  Bank  is  a  continuation  of  the 
Bank  of  Murphysboro,  carried  on  by  James  E. 
Walker  &  Co.,  and  established  in  1886  with  the 
following  officers:  James  E.  Walker,  President; 
John  M.  Herbert,  Vice-President,  and  John  G. 
Hardy,  Cashier.  Its  Board  of  Directors  numbers 
nine  gentlemen:  James  H.  Martin, a  member  of  the 
law  firm  of  Hill  &  Martin;  J.  M.  Herbert,  State's 
Attorney;  C.  O.  Pellett,  a  leading  merchant;  W. 
C.  Norman,  of  the  Big  Muddy  Lumber  Company; 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


525 


J.  D.  Peters,  Superintendent  of  the  Big  Murtdy 
Coal  and  Iron  Compan}^,  and  others.  Among  the 
stockholders  of  the  bank  are  James  C.  Clarke, 
President  of  the  Mobile  &  Oliio  Railroad;  H.  \V. 
Clarke,  Superintendent  of  the  St.  Louis  Division 
of  the  Mobile  &  Ohio  Road;  A.  B.  Minton,  master 
mechanic  of  tiie  St.  Louis  Division,  and  Thomas 
M.  Logan,  a  capitalist  of  Murphysboro. 

A  general  banking  business  is  done  and  interest 
is  paid  on  time  deposits.  From  the  beginning  the 
bank  has  met  with  most  excellent  success,  receiv- 
ing the  support  and  co-operation  of  the  best  citi- 
zens. A  prosperous  future  is  certainly  before  the 
City  National  Bank,  for  those  interested  in  the 
concern  are  men  of  most  excellent  business  repu- 
tation, and  their  safe  and  conservative  yet  pro- 
gressive policy  at  once  commends  the  bank  to  all. 

James  E.  Walker,  who  is  its  President,  is  a  na- 
tive of  Pennsylvania,  and  came  to  Murph3'sboro 
in  1881,  and  since  that  time  has  been  devoted 
largely  to  banking  interests.  Other  enterprises, 
however,  have  received  his  support  and  co-opera- 
tion. He  was  one  of  the  organizers  and  is  now 
President  of  the  Jackson  Countj^  Milling  and 
Elevator  Company.  In  manj'  other  concerns  he 
is  interested,  and  througii  his  connection  with  these 
enterprises  he  has  added  materially  to  the  welfare 
of  the  city.  In  politics  Mr.  Walker  is  a  stanch 
Republican. 

' ^#P • 

Sfl  E.  EXTSMINGER,  D.  D.  S.,  one  of  the 
leading  dentists  of  Murplysboro,  who  is 
successfully  engaged  in  the  practice  of  his 
profession,  is  a  native  of  Meigs  County, 
Ohio,  and  was  born  April  2,  1864.  The  family 
is  of  German  ancestry.  His  father  and  grand- 
father, both  of  whom  were  named  David  Ents- 
minger,  were  natives  of  Virginia.  The  latter  served 
as  a  soldier  in  the  War  of  1812,  and  as  a  business 
pursuit  followed  farming  throughout  life  in  the 
Old  Dominion.  Tlie  former  went  west  when  a 
young  man,  locating  near  Middleport,  Ohio.  He 
followed  farming  for  a  time,  and  then  began  black- 
smithing  in  the  town  where  he  still  makes  his  home. 
He  was  joined  in  wedlock  with  Christine  B.  Mc- 
Knight,  a   native    of  Nova  Scotia,  and  a  daugh- 


ter of  Samuel  McKnight.  The  latter  was  born  and 
married  in  Scotland,  and  thence  emigrated  to  Can- 
ada. He  afterward  became  a  pioneer  farmer  of 
Meigs  County,  Ohio,  where  his  death  occurred  in 
1873.  Mrs.  Entsminger,  who  was  a  consistent 
member  of  the  Presbyterian  Ciiurch,  was  called  to 
her  final  rest  February  4,  1893. 

In  the  parental  family  were  seven  children,  four 
sons  and  three  daughters,  and  all  are  still  living, 
naiTiel3':  G.  AV.,  a  dentist  of  Carbondale;  Mrs.  Isa- 
bel Bailev,  of  Pomeroy,  Ohio;  Mrs.  Mina  F.  Klein, 
of  Evansville,  Ind.;  Ida,  at  home;  Richard  B.,  a 
farmer  of  Meigs  County,  Ohio;  James  E.,  of  this 
sketch;  and  A.  L.,  of  Carbondale. 

Dr.  Entsminger,  whose  name  heads  this  record, 
spent  the  days  of  his  boyhood  and  youth  in  the 
usual  manner  of  farmer  lads.  After  attending  the 
common  schools,  he  completed  his  literary  studies 
in  the  high  school  of  Middleport,  Ohio.  Leaving 
his  native  state  on  the  24th  of  Januaiy,  1884,  he 
reached  DuQuoin,  111.,  where  his  brother  G.  W.  was 
living.  He  remained  with  him  until  June,  1884, 
when  he  accompanied  him  to  Carbondale,  and  under 
his  direction  took  up  the  study  of  dentistry.  He 
then  practiced  with  his  brother  until  January, 
1889,  when  m  order  to  further  perfect  himself  in  his 
profession  he  entered  the  Hospital  College  of  Med- 
icine, in  Louisville,  Ky.,  as  a  student  in  the  den- 
tal department,  from  which  he  was  graduated  June 
17,  1890,  with  the  degree  of  D.  D.  S.  Since  that 
time  he  has  been  in  Murphysboro,  and  in  a  pleas- 
ant office  at  the  corner  of  Walnut  and  Spring 
Streets  he  receives  from  the  public  a  large  prac- 
tice, which  is  steadily  increasing. 

On  the  31st  of  December,  1890,  in  Louisville, 
the  Doctor  wedded  Miss  Lizzie  Cox,  who  was  born 
near  that  city.  Her  mother  was  an  own  cousin  of 
ex-Governor  Blackburn,  of  Kentucky.  They  now 
have  a  little  daughter,  Ruth.  In  social  circles,  the 
Doctor  and  his  wife  hold  an  enviable  position, and 
true  worth  and  intelligence  were  their  passports 
into  good  society.  Dr.  Entsminger  is  a  charter 
member  of  the  Fraternal  M^'stic  Circle,  of  which 
he  is  now  serving  as  Chaplain,  and  he  also  belongs 
to  the  Southern  Illinois  Dental  Association,  and  is 
a  member  of  the  First  Presbyterian  Church.  In 
politics  he  is  a  true-blue    Republican.     His   skill 


526 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


and  ability  and  his  courteous  and  general  manner 
have  made  him  a  successful  dentist  and  won  bim 
a  prominent  place  among  his  professional  brethren. 


'17  EWIS  C.  HARRY,  one  of  the  leading  farni- 
I  (jf^.  crs  of  township  8,  range  5,  Randolph  Coun- 
J'— ^\,  ty,  was  born  near  York  Springs,  Adams 
County.  Pa.,  April  12,  1834.  He  is  the  second  in 
order  of  birth  in  a  family  of  ten  children  born  to 
Lewis  and  Sarah  (Comly)  Harr}',  both  natives  of 
the  Keystone  State.  The  father  is  of  Welsh  de- 
scent, and  was  born  in  Delaware  Township,  Ches- 
ter County,  July  27,  1791,  and  his  wife  was 
born  April  18,  1810.  They  were  members  of  the 
Friends'  Church.  The  exact  date  of  the  birth  of  the 
grandfather  of  our  subject,  Jesse  Harry,  is  not 
known, but  hedied  in  1818,  when  abouteighty  years 
old,  in  Chester  County,  Pa.,  which  was  also  the 
county  of  his  birth. 

Tlie  parents  of  the  mother  of  our  subject  were 
Samuel  and  Susannah  (Wyerman)  Comly,  natives 
of  Philadelphia  and  Adams  County,  Pa.,  respect- 
ively, and  of  old  English  descent.  Samuel  was 
born  October  7,  1773,  and  Susannah  September  5, 
1779.  In  the  year  1837  tlie  Comly  family  re- 
moved to  Washington  County,  Pa.,  and  five  3'ears 
later  went  to  Putnam  County,  111.,  settling  on  a 
farm  near  Magnolia,  then  a  small  town. 

April  26,  1832,  Lewis  Harry  was  wedded  to 
Sarah  Coml^',  in  Adams  County,  Pa.,  where  they 
continued  to  reside  until  the  spring  of  1838,  when 
he  followed  the  family  of  his  father-in-law  into 
Washington  County,  of  the  same  state.  Here  he 
continued  to  reside  until  the  time  of  his  death, 
which  occurred  the  last  day  of  March,  1865.  The 
mother  continued  to  live  with  her  son  Lewis  C, 
and  with  his  family  removed  to  Randolph  County, 
where  he  purchased  a  tract  of  sixty  acres  on  sec- 
tion 5,  township  8,  range  5.  On  this  place  the 
family  now  reside.  The  place  is  under  the  best 
possible  cultivation,  and  a  good  income  is  realized 
from  the  crops  raised  thereon. 

Mr.  Harry  of  whom  we  write  this  brief  life- 
history  was  married  June  12,  1870,  to  Mary  J.,  a 
a    daughter   of  James  and   RLargaret   (McCaslon) 


Simpson.  The  Simpsons  were  natives  of  Lime- 
vedy.  County  Londonderry,  Ireland,  where  Mrs. 
Harry  was  born  March  25,  1843.  In  the  year 
1854  she,  with  her  sister  Anne,  left  her  native 
island  for  America,  landing  in  Philadelphia.  They 
went  from  there  to  visit  an  aunt  in  AVashington 
Count}',  Pa.,  where  she  and  our  subject  first  met. 
To  them  were  born  five  children,  of  whom 
three  survive.  They  are,  Lewis  S.,  Robert  J.  and 
Jesse  AV.  The  deceased  children  are  Annie  Mary 
and  Frank.  The  mother  of  our  subject  is  in  her 
eight3'-fourth  year,  hale  and  hearty,  and  in  the 
possession  of  all  her  native  faculties,  and  is  still 
making  her  home  with  him  during  the  closing 
years  of  a  long  and  peaceful  life.  She  and  her 
son  are  yet  members  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  but 
do  not  attend  their  services,  as  there  is  no  church 
nearer  than  St.  Louis.  Mrs.  Harry,  the  wife  of 
our  subject,  is  a  devoted  member  of  the  Methodist 
Church,  as  were  her  people  before  her. 

Our  subject  is  a  true-blue  Republican  in  his  po- 
litical affiliations,  and  has  been  since  the  birth  of 
that  party.  He  is  liberal  and  open-hearted,  and 
no  worthy  movement  is  allowed  to  fail  for  want 
of  support  on  his  part.  He  is  pleasant,  affable  and 
courteous,  and  has  many  warm  friends. 


^^EORGE  AV.  ZIEBOLD  is  the  SuperinUnd- 


G 


I  ,=n  ent  of  the  AYaterloo  Milling  Company  and 


one  of  the  leading  and  representative  citi- 
zens of  Monroe  Count}'.  He  is  a  native  o  Mis- 
souri, his  birth  having  occurred  in  Moniteau  Coun- 
ty, on  the  1st  of  March,  1860.  His  father,  Gott- 
lieb Ziebold,  is  now  a  miller  of  Red  Bud,  111. 
George  W.  was  onl}'  a  lad  of  seven  summers  when 
with  his  parents  he  came  to  Illinois,  the  family  lo- 
cating in  Monroe  City.  There  he  was  reared,  and 
there  he  made  his  home  until  1878,  when  he  accom- 
panied his  parents  to  Red  Bud.  His  education  was 
acquired  in  the  public  schools  of  Monroe  County, 
and  during  his  youth  he  learned  the  miller's  trade 
with  his  father.  He  worked  for  him  in  Red  Bud, 
until  1882,  when  he  was  placed  in  charge  of  the 
mill  which  his  father  owned  in  Monroe  City,  wher? 


s   '). 


CY^  ffi-.tytyir~- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


529 


the  succeeding  four  years  of  liis  life  were  passed. 

In  1886,  in  connection  with  Mr.  Chenot,  our 
subject  org-anized  the  Waterloo  Milling  Company, 
and  built  the  large  mill,  which  is  now  in  successful 
operation.  With  it  he  has  been  connected  since 
the  beginning,  and  the  prosperity  which  has  at- 
tended the  undertaking  is  largely  due  to  his 
efforts. 

On  the  3d  of  October,  1883,  was  celebrated  the 
marriage  of  Mr.  Ziebold  and  Miss  Minnie  Hoff- 
meister.  The  lady  is  a  daughter  of  Christian 
Hoffnieister,  an  undertaker  of  South  St.  Louis, 
Mo.,  and  she  was  born  and  reared  in  that  city. 
Four  children  grace  the  union  of  our  subject  and 
his  wife,  George  C,  Adina  C,  Clara  M.  and  Eve- 
lyn E.  They  also  lost  a  daughter,  IMinnie,  who 
died  at  the  age  of  seven  months.  The  family  is 
widely  known,  and  the  parents  are  people  of  prom- 
inence in  this  community. 

In  his  political  affiliations,  Mr.  Ziebold  is  a  Dem- 
ocrat, but  has  never  given  any  time  to  seeking 
public  office,  as  he  cares  little  for  its  honors  or 
emoluments.  He  holds  membership  with  the  Evan- 
gelical Church,  and  his  wife  is  a  member  of  the 
Roman  Catholic  Church.  Throughout  life  he  has 
been  interested  in  the  milling  business,  which  he 
thoroughly  understands  in  every  particular.  His 
good  management,  executive  ability  and  the  en- 
terprise which  have  characterized  his  career  have 
won  for  him  success. 


^•{••{••5"5''? 

HILIP  N.  FREW,  a  well  known  general 
merchant  of  Murphysboro,  has  built  up  a 
good  business  in  this  place,  and  now  oc- 
cupies a  prominent  position  in  commercial 
circles.  The  record  of  his  life  is  as  follows:  A  na- 
tive of  the  Keystone  State,  he  was  born  in  New 
Castle,  Lawrence  County,  April  4,  1852.  His 
father,  Philip  Frew,  was  a  native  of  Pennsylvania, 
as  was  the  grandfather,  James  Frew,  who  served 
in  the  War  of  1812.  As  a  means  of  livelihood,  he 
followed  the  occupation  of  farming.  The  father 
was  also  an  agriculturist  and  a  miller,  and  operated 
a  water-mill  in  New  Castle  for  many  years.  At 
lengtli  he  retired,  and  in   1890  came  to  Murphys- 


boro, where  his  death  occurred  on  the  6th  of  July, 

1893, at  the  age  of  seventy-seven.  His  wife,  whose 
maiden  name  was  Jane  Armstrong,  was  born  in 
Pennsylvania,  and  was  a  daughter  of  John  Arm- 
strong, a  wheelwright  of  that  state.  She  died  in 
her  native  state,  at  the  age  of  fifty -seven. 

P.  N.  Frew  was  the  fifth  in  a  family  of  nine 
children,  but  only  two  are  now  living,  our  subject 
and  David  A.  Three  brotiiers  wore  the  blue  in 
the  Civil  War  and  valiantly  aided  in  the  preser- 
vation of  the  Union.  In  the  town  of  his  birth  our 
subject  was  reared  and  educated,  remaining  at 
home  until  eighteen  years  of  age.  He  apprenticed 
himself  to  a  bricklayer,  with  whom  he  served  a 
term  of  four  years.  In  1874  he  came  to  the  west, 
locating  first  in  Chicago,  but  removed  thence  to 
St.  Louis,  where  he  worked  as  a  brickl.ayer  for 
three  years.  He  then  embarked  as  a  grocer  in  that 
city,  and  later  purciiased  a  grocery  store  in  East 
Carondelet,  III.,  which  he  carried  on  until  1884. 

In  that  year  Mr.  Frew  returned  to  St.  Louis,  and 
there  eng.aged  in  business  as  a  contractor  and 
builder  until  1886,  when  he  entered  the  employ  of 
the  Mobile  &  Ohio  Railroad  as  Superintendent  of 
the  brick  work  construction  of  a  road  between  St. 
Louis  and  Corinth,  Miss.  The  four  succeeding 
years  of  his  life  were  thus  passed,  during  which 
time  he  superintended  the  building  of  the  machine 
shops  and  roundhouse  at  Murphysboro.  On  the 
completion  of  this  task  he  took  up  his  residence 
here  and  engaged  in  contracting  and  building 
for  himself.  He  erected  the  St.  Andrew's  Catholic 
Church,  the  Lucier  Opera  House,  the  Logan  House, 
the  water  works,  the  ice  f.actorios  for  the  brewing 
company,  and  a  number  of  business  houses  and 
residences.  His  handiwork  is  seen  on  all  sides, 
and  many  of  the  most  important  buildings  of  the 
place  stand  as  monuments  to  his  skill  and  .enter- 
prise. He  erected  his  own  store  building,  which 
covers  four  lots  and  includes  two  stories.  The 
basement  is  a  large  produce  and  potato  cellar, 
which  will  hold  two  car  loads  of  goods. 

In  1889  Mr.  Frew  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Mary  V^.  Torbett,  a  native  of  Illinois,  born  in 
St.  Clair  County.  Tliey  have  two  daughters, 
Jennie  and  May.  Mr.  Frew  is  an  inflexible  ad- 
herent  of  Democratic   principles,  and  socially  is 


530 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


connected  witli  the  Masonic  fraternity.  Those 
wlio  know  him  esteem  him  highly  as  a  man  of 
sterling  worth,  and  in  liim  the  business  interests  of 
tiie  city  lind  a  wortliy  representative. 


l^HJH^^ 


"il]  OHN  HENRV  OSTERLOH.  The  higlily  im- 
proved and  prosperous  condition  of  Ran- 
dolpli  County  is  in  a  large  degree  due  to  its 
farming  population,  which  is  for  the  most 
part  composed  of  men  who  are  energetic  in  dispo- 
sition, strong  in  character,  sensible  in  judgment 
and  prompt  to  take  advantage  of  whatever  will 
prove  beneficial.  It  is  of  one  of  this  class  of  whom 
we  write.  His  farm,  comprising  seventy-five  acres 
in  township  6,  range  5,  is  one  of  the  best  in  this 
region,  having  rural  buildings  of  neat  design, 
and  rich  haivest  fields  and  pastures  devoted  to  the 
support  of  cattle  and  horses. 

The  second  of  three  children,  our  subject  was 
born  in  Germany,  May  10,  1856,  and  was  a  lad  of 
ten  years  when  in  1866  he  came  to  America  in 
company  with  his  parents,  Henry  and  Dora  (Fel- 
ingdref )  Osterloh.  For  some  years  afterwards  he 
aided  his  father,  who  is  still  following  the  occupa- 
tion of  a  farmer  near  SteeleviUe,  111.  He  attended 
the  Lutheran  schools  at  Chester  and  Randolph, 
spending  one  year  at  each  place.  After  having 
assisted  his  father  for  some  years,  he  began  for 
himself  at  the  age  of  twenty-six  years,  and  purchas- 
ing land  near  Steeleville,  entered  at  once  upon 
the  task  of  clearing  and  cultivating  the  property. 
He  has  met  with  such  success  that  he  is  now  num- 
bered among  the  most  prosperous  agriculturists  of 
the  township,  and  while  devoting  considerable 
time  to  mixed  farming,  has  also  made  a  specialty 
of  stock-raising. 

December  26,  1880,  jMr.  Osterloh  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Amelia,  daughter  of  Fritz  and 
Mary  (Zaller)  Jutze,  natives  of  Switzerland.  They 
came  to  Randolph  County  in  an  early  day,  and  are 
now  residents  of  St.  Louis,  where  Mr.  Jutze  follows 
the  carpenter's  trade.  To  the  union  of  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Osterloh  there  have  been  born  six  children, 
all  of  whom  are  at  home  with  their  parents  and 
who  are  named  in  the  order  of  their  birth,  Alvina, 


Henry,  Minnie,  Frederick,  Esty  and  Alvin.  In 
religious  connections  Mr.  Osterloh  and  his  family 
are  identified  with  the  Lutiieran  Church,  and  are 
generous  contributors  to  its  support. 

In  politics  Mr.  Osterloh  supports  the  nie.asures 
of  the  Republican  party,  but  has  never  been  an  as- 
pirant for  public  position.  In  ever}'  respect  he 
has  been  one  of  the  enterprising  citizens  of  the 
county  and  has  done  much  to  make  it  the  flourish- 
ing agricultural  region  that  it  now  is.  He  deserves 
great  credit  for  his  success  in  life,  as  he  has  re- 
ceived little  assistance,  but  has  worked  his  way  up- 
ward unaided.  With  true  public  spirit  and  char- 
acteristic liberality  he  has  aided  every  enterprise 
that  would  in  any  way  advance  the  welfare  of  the 
community. 


^^  HRISTIAN  STALLMANN  resides  on  sec- 
fl(^L  tion  36,  township  6,  range  7,  Randolph 
'^^^  County,  where  he  owns  two  hundred  and 
seventy  acres  of  finel}'  improved  land,  which  he 
devotes  to  diversified  crops.  The  buildings  that 
have  been  erected  upon  the  estate  are  neat  and 
substantial,  sufficiently  commodious  for  their  re- 
spective uses,  and  include  every  necessarj'  and 
convenient  edifice.  Mr.  Stallraan  pursues  his  call- 
ing with  zeal  and  intelligence,  winning  fwem  the 
soil  an  abundant  share  of  the  various  grains  which 
he  cultivates,  and  in  this  way  securing  for  himself 
and  family  all  of  the  comforts  and  many  of  the 
luxuries  of  life. 

Mr.  Stallman  is  a  native  of  Germany,  having 
been  born  in  Hanover,  February  21,  1851.  He  is 
the  second  child  born  to  Frederick  and  Dorothj' 
(Bode)  Stallman,  the  father  being  a  day  laborer  in 
his  native  country.  In  1859  he  came  with  his 
family  to  America  and  settled  in  this  county,  on 
the  farm  which  is  now  in  the  possession  of  our 
subject.  He  at  once  engaged  in  its  cultivation, 
and  at  the  time  of  his  death,  which  occurred  in 
February,  1889,  was  classed  among  the  prominent 
and  prosperous  farmers  in  the  county.  He  was 
preceded  to  the  better  land  b}'  his  wife  one  year. 

Our  subject  attended  school  but  two  years  in 
the  Fatherland,  but  after  coming  to  America  was 
a  student  in  the  Lutheran  schools  at  Chester,  where 


I'ORTRAIT  AND  BIOGKAPHICAL  RECORD. 


631 


he  gained  a  good  education.  As  be  grew  to  man- 
hood he  aided  in  clearing  nnd  cultivating  the 
home  farm,  and  on  his  father's  death  it  came  into 
his  possession.  The  first  purchase  consisted  of 
forty  acres,  and  by  push,  pluck  and  perseverance 
he  has  made  it  one  of  the  most  attractive  and 
best  cultivated  estates  in  the  township,  and  it 
now  comprises  two  hundred  and  sevent}'  acres. 
Besides  raising -the  cereals,  Mr.  Stalhnan  is  greatl}^ 
interested  in  the  care  of  fine  stock. 

The  date  of  tlie  marriage  of  our  subject  and 
Miss  Anna  Massberg  occurred  May  25,  1877.  The 
lady  is  a  daughter  of  Christopher  and  Dorothy 
(Schnaker)  M.assberg,  who  were  also  born  in  Ger- 
many. To  this  marriage  were  born  six  children, 
one  of  whom,  Dora,  is  deceased.  The  living  are: 
Hermann,  Alwena,  Clara,  Rudolph  and  Eddie,  who 
are  all  at  home  with  their  parents.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Stallman  are  Lutherans,  and  in  politics  the  former 
ahva3S  voted  with  the  Republican  party  until 
1892,  when  he  cast  his  ballot  with  the  Democracy. 


^^ 


■^m- 


/^)  ^^'^"'  ^^^^^O^'  WALKER,  of  Carbondale, 
[l(  _  is  one  of  the  honored  veterans  of  the  late 
^^^  war  who  wore  the  blue  in  defense  of  the 
Union  and  followed  the  Stars  and  Stripes  until 
they  were  triumphantly  planted  in  the  Confed- 
erate strongholds.  In  the  history  of  his  adopted 
county  lie  well  deserves  representation.  He  was 
born  in  Clinton  County,  111.,  March  3,  1831,  and 
is  a  son  of  Simeon  Walker,  who  was  brought  to 
this  stale  from  Georgia  by  his  mother  in  1811.  He 
too,  served  in  the  Civil  War,  being  appointed 
Chaplain  of  the  Fifteenth  Illinois  Cavalry  by 
Gov.  Richard  Yates.  He  married  Elizabeth  Sharp, 
a  native  of  Georgia,  who  came  with  her  parents  to 
Illinois  in  1811.  They  located  where  the  town  of 
Belleville  now  stands,  but  soon  afterward  removed 
to  Clinton  County.  He  was  one  of  the  circuit  riders 
of  the  state  contemporary  with  Peter  Cartwright. 
His  death  occurred  in  the  spring  of  1880,  aged 
seventy-eight  years,  and  his  wife  passed  away  in 
1846.  They  were  the  parents  of  twelve  children, 
but  only  four  are  now  living:  Rev.  Samuel,  of  Car- 
lyle;  Rev.  William  H.,of  Kansas;  Rev.  Levi  S.,  of 


Chester;  and  the  Captain.  Five  sons  of  the  fam- 
ilj'  were  preachers,  and  six  were  soldiers  of  the 
late  war.  AVilliara  H.  was  Captain  of  the  One 
Hundred  and  Eleventh  Illinois  Infantry;  and 
Samuel  was  a  Lieutenant  of  the  same  regiment. 
Levi  S.  was  Chaplain  of  the  Sixtieth  Illinois  In- 
fantry; John  B.  was  Captain  of  the  Fortietli  Illi- 
nois Infantry,  and  was  killed  at  Shiloli.  Thomas 
C.  served  as  a  private  in  the  One  Hundred  and 
Eleventh  Illinois  Infantry. 

Upon  the  home  farm  our  subject  was  reared,  and 
in  the  common  schools  of  his  native  county  his 
education  was  acquired.  He  was  married  in  1851 
to  Miss  E.  J.  Walker,  who  was  born  in  Washing- 
ton County,  111.,  July  28,  1834,  and  was  a  daughter 
of  Rev.  James  Walker,  who  was  also  a  circuit 
rider  of  this  state.  Tiiey  became  the  parents  of  ten 
children,  five  of  whom  are  yet  living:  Clara  A., 
wife  of  W.  H.  Brewster;  Lora  A.,  wife  of  George 
Schwartz,  of  Elkville;  Corrington  O.,  of  Texas; 
Kate  E.,  chief  stenographer  for  the  Standard  Oil 
Company  of  Kansas  City,  Mo.;  and  Ben  A.,  who 
is  now  attending  school. 

On  his  marriage,  Mr.  Walker  began  merchandis- 
ing in  Richview,  111.,  where  he  spent  one  j'ear.and 
then  carried  on  farming  until  the  breaking  out  of 
the  war.  He  enlisted  on  the  10th  of  January, 
18G2,  in  Company  C,  Sixtieth  Illinois  Infantry, 
and  was  commissioned  Second  Lieutenant  in  July 
following.  In  February',  1862,  he  was  made  Cap- 
tain of  the  Companj'.  The  regiment  which  was 
organized  at  Anna,  was  sent  to  Cairo,  III.  With 
his  command  he  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Is- 
land No.  10,  and  later  was  in  the  raid  after 
Price  in  Missouri.  He  was  under  fire  at  the 
battles  of  Shiloh,  Corinth,  Tuscumbia,  Athens 
and  Nashville,  and  was  almost  incessantly  en- 
gaged in  skirmishes.  In  Nashville  they  were  em- 
ployed in  guard  duty  for  about  nine  months  while 
General  Buell  and  (General  Bragg  made  their 
race  to  Louisville.  Captain  Walker  was  also  in  the 
battles  of  Murfreesboro  under  General  Rosecrans, 
took  part  in  all  the  battles  of  the  Atlanta  cam- 
paign, the  march  to  the  sea,  and  was  present  at 
the  surrender  of  General  Johnston  in  North  Caro- 
lina. He  took  part  in  the  Grand  Review  in  Wash- 
ington, where  wave  after  wave  of  bayonet-crested 


bii 


t'ORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


blue  passed  through  the  streets  of  the  Capitol  City, 
and  was  mustered  out  in  Louisville,  Kj'.,  in  July, 
1865.  He  now  draws  a  pension  of  §24  per  month 
as  recompense  for  hardships  endured. 

After  his  return  home.  Captain  Walker  was 
elected  Assessor,  and  for  four  years  served  as 
Treasurer  of  W.ashinglon  Count}'.  He  tlien  eu- 
gagpd  in  merchandising  and  milling  for  two 
j'ears,  and  in  1871  came  to  Carbondale,  where  for 
five  3'ears  lie  carried  on  the  dairy  business.  He 
was  tiie  efficient  and  popular  Postmaster  for  a 
period  of  eleven  years,  was  engaged  in  the  grocery 
business  for  two  and  a-half  jears.and  is  now  serv- 
ing as  City  Clerk  and  Justice  of  the  Peace.  He 
has  also  served  as  Alderman,  and  the  prompt  and 
faithful  discharge  of  his  public  duties  has  won  for 
him  high  commendation. 

Since  the  age  of  nine  years.  Captain  Walker  has 
been  a  member  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church, 
but  has  served  as  a  local  preacher  since  the  fall  of 
1858.  He  served  as  Sunday-school  Superinten- 
dent for  five  3'ears,  and  has  ever  been  active  in 
church  and  benevolent  work.  Socially,  he  is  a 
member  of  the  Knights  of  Honor,  and  belongs  to 
John  W.  Lawrence  Post  No.  297,  G.  A.  R.,  of 
which  he  has  served  as  Commander  and  Chaplain. 
He  has  three  times  served  as  its  delegate  to  the 
State  Encampment.  In  politics  he  is  an  inflexible 
adherent  to  the  Republican  party,  and  is  ever 
found  true  to  his  colors. 


^>-^^<%^ 


J  RANK  W.  CRAIN,  who  owns  forty  acres 
(<w  of  land  on  section  8,  township  7,  range  8, 
Randolph  County,  has  resided  upon  that 
propert}'  since  September,  1880.  He  is  a  native  of 
this  state,  and  was  born  in  Chester,  September  28, 
1848.  He  has  been  a  resident  of  this  county-  his  en- 
tire life,  with  the  exception  of  two  years  spent  in 
Jackson  County.  The  first  ten  years  of  his  life  were 
passed  in  Chester,  where  he  attended  school. 

In  1858  the  parents  of  our  subject,  James  H.  and 
Phcebe  Crain,  removed  to  tlie  southern  portion  of 
tliis  countj',  where  the^'  purchased  a  farm  on  sec- 
tion 33,  township  7,  range  5,  upon  which  Mrs. 
Crain  still  resides.     Frank  W.,  of  this  sketch,  re- 


mained at  home,  aiding  his  father  in  carrj'ing  on 
the  home  farm,  until  reaching  his  twentieth  j'ear, 
at  whicli  time  he  was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss 
Content  E..  daughter  of  John  H.  and  Mary  E. 
(Vickers)  Clendinen.  This  event  occurred  Octo- 
ber 18,  1874,  at  the  Presb^'terian  parsonage  at 
Chester,  the  Rev.  A.  B.  Clark  oHiciating. 

For  two  years  after  their  marriage  our  subject 
operated  the  farm  of  his  brother-in-iaw,  Benjamin 
Richards,  in  Jackson  County,  and  at  the  end  of 
that  time  came  to  this  county  and  farmed  a  tract 
of  land  near  the  village  of  Rock  wood,  where  the 
family'  made  their  home  until  the  fall  of  1880. 

The  father  of  Mrs.  Crain  was  a  native  of  Ran- 
dolph Count}-,  while  her  mother  hailed  from  Cov- 
ington, Ky.,  whence  her  parents  moved  to  Illinois. 
To  our  subject  and  his  wife  were  born  seven  chil- 
dren, of  whom  Leslie  and  Herbert  are  deceased. 
Those  living  are,  Amelia  A.,  Benjamin  L.,  ?]unice. 
Amy  and  Ruth. 

Mr.  Crain  and  his  wife  are  members  of  the  Rock- 
wood  Presbyterian  Church,  and  are  highly  re- 
spected b}'  all  who  know  them.  In  his  political 
relations  our  subject  votes  with  the  Democratic 
party,  and  is  a  member  of  the  County  Central  Com- 
mittee. He  is  also  a  member  of  Rockwood  Lodge 
No.  351,  I.  O.  O.  F.,  in  which  order  he  always  takes 
a  prominent  part.  He  has  been  very  active  in  local 
affairs,  and  for  two  years  was  Deputy-  Countj'  As- 
sessor under  William  A.  Campbell. 

James  H.  Crain,  the  father  of  our  subject,  was 
born  in  Illinois,  near  the  banks  of  Mar^-'s  River, 
on  what  is  known  as  the  Whitson  farm,  February 
18,  1820.  His  earl}-  years  were  spent  in  this  pio- 
neer home,  and  although  never  having  accumu- 
lated wealth,  was  a  man  who  commanded  the  re- 
spect and  esteem  of  all  who  knew  him.  For  some 
time  he  resided  on  Crain 's  Island,  which  was 
formerly  owned  and  was  named  b}-  his  father.  The 
paternal  grandparents  of  our  subject  were  John 
and  Marj-  (Gastin)  Crain,  the  former  a  native 
of  Tennessee,  and  the  latter  of  South  Carolina. 
James  H.  Crain  was  united  in  marriage  March  14, 
1844,  to  Miss  Phtebe,  daughter  of  AV'illiam  and  Mar- 
garet (Wagner)  Morris,  natives  respectively  of  West 
Virginia  and  New  York.  Mrs.  Crain,  who  was 
their  only  child,  was  born  in  Wood  County,  AV.  Va., 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


533 


October  22, 1826,  and  was  twelve  years  of  age  when 
she  accompanied  her  parents  on  their  removal  to 
this  countj,  iu  April.  1838. 

Our  subject  was  the  eldest  child  in  the  parental 
family  which  included  eleven  children.  Those 
living  besides  himself  are,  John  L.;  Ellen,  Mrs. 
James  McConkey.and  Sarah  Jane,  who  makes  her 
liome  with  her  mother.  Tiie  father  of  our  subject 
departed  this  life  January  8,  1889,  mourned  b}'  a 
large  ciicle  of  friends. 


-f= 


=+ 


^Sli^^ALENTINE  SCnNEIDER.  who  follows 
\Y  /  farming  on  section  7,  township  3,  range  9, 
ly  Monroe  County,  was  born  in  southern  Ger- 
many, on  the  13th  of  December,  1824,  and  iu  his 
native  land  spent  tlie  days  of  his  boyhood  and 
youth.  He  is  the  eldest  in  a  family  of  three  chil- 
dren whose  parents  were  Henry  and  Mary  (Stiller) 
Schneider.  They  too  were  natives  of  German}', 
and  in  that  country  the  father  followed  farming  as 
a  means  of  livelihood.  He  was  educated  in  the 
public  schools,  and  served  in  the  German  army  in 
accordance  with  the  laws  of  the  country.  In  1844, 
accompanied  bj'  his  family',  he  bade  adieu  to  his 
old  home  and  crossed  the  briny  deep  to  the  New 
World.  He  took  up  his  residence  near  Waterloo, 
where  he  carried  on  agricultural  pursuits  until  his 
death,  which  resulted  from  an  attack  of  cholera  in 
1848.  With  the  German  Evangelical  Church  he 
held  membership,  as  did  his  wife.  Her  death  oc- 
curred in  1845,  after  only  three  days'  illness,  the 
effect  of  fright  and  shock  caused  by  the  burning  of 
their  home. 

Our  subject  is  the  only  surviving  meniberof  the 
family.  His  brother  Jack  died  in  this  state,  and  Peter 
died  in  California.  Valentine  was  a  young  man  of 
nineteen  j-ears  when  with  his  parents  he  emigrated 
to  the  New  World.  He  has  since  been  a  resident 
of  Illinois,  and  is  now  numbered  among  the  lead- 
ing agriculturists  of  this  communit}-.  He  continued 
with  his  parents  and  gave  to  his  father  the  benefit 
of  his  services  until  his  marriage,  which  was  cele- 
brated in  1850,  Miss  Caroline  Dagi  becoming  his 
wife.     She  was  born  in  Germany,  and  was  brought 


b}'  lier  parents  to  America  at  the  age  of  seven. 
The  famil}-  located  in  New  Orleans,  and  thence 
came  to  Monroe  County.  She  is  a  faithful  member 
of  the  German  Evangelical  Church,  and  is  a  lady 
of  many  excellencies  of  character,  which  have  won 
for  her  a  large  circle  of  warm  friends. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Schneider  were  born  thirteen 
children,  but  four  died  in  infanc}'.  Seven  sons 
and  two  daughters  are  j-et  living,  namely:  Adam, 
Henry,  Caroline,  Jack,  Louisa,  Peter,  William, 
Lewis  and  Gustavus. 

Mr.  Schneider  has  followed  fanning  throughout 
his  entire  life  and  still  lives  on  the  old  homestead 
of  two  hundred  and  forty  acres  near  Waterloo. 
He  has  been  prospered  in  his  business  affairs,  for 
he  is  industrious  and  energetic,  and  has  therefore 
won  success.  In  the  community  he  is  recognized 
as  a  man  of  sterling  worth,  and  has  twice  been 
elected  Supervisor.  For  twenty-one  years  he  has 
held  the  office  of  School  Director,  and  the  cause  of 
education  finds  in  him  a  warm  friend.  A  public 
spirited  and  progressive  citizen,  he  gives  his  sup- 
port to  all  interests  which  are  calculated  to  prove 
of  public  benefit  and  to  promote  the  general  wel- 
fare. At  the  age  of  sixty-nine  years  he  is  now  en- 
J03'ing  good  health,  and  is  living  a  quiet  life  sur- 
rounded by  his  family  on  the  old  home  farm. 


^-- 


=4- 


j)^ALENTINE  WEHRHEIM.  This  name  will 
be  at  once  recognized  as  that  of  a  leading 
business  man  of  Evansville,  who  is  probablv 
better  known  than  any  other  merchant  within  its 
bounds.  The  diy-goods  establishment  over  which  he 
presides  is  supplied  with  a  complete  line  of  carefully 
chosen  goods,  suited  to  the  needs  of  the  section 
over  which  his  trade  extends,  and  he  dpes  a  busi- 
ness of  ¥17,000  annually. 

A  native  of  Randolph  Count}*,  our  subject  was 
born  January  12,  1847,  to  John  and  Elizabeth 
(Radish)  Wehrheim.  The  father  was  born  January 
6,  1814,  in  a  small  village  in  Germany,  near  Frank- 
fort-on-the-Main.  He  emigrated  to  the  United- 
States  with  his  parents  in  1834,  and  located  with 
them  in  St.  Louis.     Later  they  removed  to  Mon- 


534 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


roe  County,  this  state,  where  the  father  followed 
the  trade  of  a  cooper.  October  11,  1841,  be  mai-- 
ried  Elizabeth  Radish,  wiio  was  born  in  Germany, 
October  24,  1826.  After  their  union  tiiej'  came  to 
Randolph  County,  settling  two  miles  west  of  Red 
Bud,  where  he  was  busily  engaged  at  his  trade. 

In  18.54  the  father  of  our  subject  removed  to 
Evansville,  where  in  company'  with  a  Mr.  Evans 
lie  erected  and  operated  a  large  flour  mill.  This 
structure  was  destroyed  b3'  fire  in  1864,  but  later 
he  built  another  mill,  which  he  sold  in  1866.  He 
employed  as  many  as  thirtj-  men  at  various  times, 
and  owned  two  flatboats,  which  plied  up  and  down 
tlie  river  loaded  with  wheat  and  flour.  Though 
starting  in  business  with  small  expectations  or 
capital,  at  his  death  he  had  accumulated  a  hand- 
some competence.  He  was  very  generous  and 
kind,  and  more  than  one  man  in  this  county  se- 
cured his  start  in  life  while  in  his  emplo\'.  His 
disease  occurred  November  23,  1872,  and  was 
widely  mourned. 

Valentine  Wehrheim,  of  this  sketch,  was  the 
second  of  nine  children,  and  continued  to  remain 
under  the  home  roof  until  reaching  his  majority. 
His  education  was  quite  limited,  the  little  knowl- 
edge which  he  gained  during  the  winter  season 
being  supplemented  by  a  six  months'  course  in  a 
private  school  in  Chester.  After  leaving  home,  he 
formed  a  partnership  wiih  his  brother  George  in 
18V1,  and  opened  a  general  store  in  this  citv, 
which  he  is  still  carrying  on  in  the  same  building. 
A  twelvemonth  later  the  brother  sold  his  interest 
to  his  father,  and  since  the  death  of  the  latter  our 
subject  has  continued  to  conduct  affairs  on  his  own 
account.  He  has  been  continuously  engaged  in  the 
mercantile  business  since  embarking  therein,  with 
the  exception  of  a  short  time  spent  on  a  farm  in 
this  count}-. 

The  ladj-  whom  our  subject  married  .January  23, 
1873,  was  Miss  Wilhelmena  H.  Struckman.  Mrs. 
Wehrheim  was  born  in  St.  Louis,  March  14,  1855, 
and  bj"  her  union  with  our  subject  has  become  the 
mother  of  thirteen  children,  two  of  whom  are  de- 
ceased, Elizabeth  and  Joseph  A.  Those  living  are, 
William  H.,  John  M.,  Valentine  G.,  Mary  L.,  Louis 
E.,  Charles  F.,  Minnie  A.  E.,  Roland  O.,  Ralph  I., 
Ernest   A.   and   Oscar  W.     Mr.  Wehrheim  always 


takes  a  great  interest  in  politics,  and  is  at  all  times 
a  supporter  of  the  Republican  party.  He  cast  his 
first  Presidential  vote  for  General  Grant, and  dur- 
ing the  administrations  of  Garfield  and-  Harrison 
served  as  Postmaster  at  Evansville.  Socially  he  is 
a  member  of  Red  Bud  Lodge  No.  285,  I.  O.  O.  F. 
He  is  highly  esteemed  as  a  man  of  honorable  busi- 
ness traits.  With  his  wife  and  family  he  is  an 
influential  member  of  the  Lutheran  Church,  and 
all  have  many  sincere  friends  throughout  this 
community. 


^I^R.  HENRY  G.  ARMBRUESTER,  who  is 
successful!)-  engaged  in  the  practice  of 
medicine  in  Steeleville,  where  he  has  a 
liberal  patronage  and  has  won  an  envi- 
able reputation  on  account  of  his  skill  and  ability, 
is  a  native  of  St.  Louis,  Mo.  He  was  born  on  the 
4th  of  March,  1857,  and  is  the  third  in  order  of 
birth  in  a  family  of  ten  children,  whose  parents, 
Henry  and  Louise  (Unfried)  Armbruesler,  were 
natives  of  Germany,  who  when  young  came  to 
America.  The  father  had  lived  near  the  boundary 
line  of  France  in  Germany,  but  the  mother's  people 
lived  in  the  central  part  of  the  empire.  Henry 
Armbruester,  Sr.,  is  an  architect  and  builder.  Since 
coming  to  America,  he  has  spent  the  greater  part  of 
his  time  in  Madison  Countj-,  111.,  but  resided  for 
a  short  time  in  St.  Louis,  Mo. 

The  Doctor  spent  the  days  of  his  boyhood  and 
youth  in  his  parents'  home  and  attended  the  pa- 
rochial schools  in  CoUinsville,  where  he  remained 
until  the  age  of  thirteen.  He  then  entered  the 
public  schools,  where  he  pursued  his  studies  for 
about  four  years,  when  he  began  clerking  in  a 
drug  store,  continuing  in  that  occupation  for  two 
years.  Wishing  to  make  the  practice  of  medi- 
cine his  life  work,  he  began  its  study  under  the 
direction  of  Dr.  F.  Brendemuhl,  of  CoUinsville, 
with  whom  he  continued  to  read  for  tliree  years, 
when  he  entered  the  Homeopathic  Medical  .School 
of  St.  Louis,  Mo.  There  he  pursued  his  studies 
for  three  terms,  after  which  he  was  graduated 
from  that  institution  in  March,  1881. 

Dr.  Armbruesler,  after  winning  the  degree  of 
M.  D.,  located   in   Steeleville,  111.,  where  he    has 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


535 


since  been  actively  engaged  in  the  practice  of  his 
profession,  covering  a  period  of  thirteen  consecu- 
tive years.  He  has  an  elegant  office,  complete  in 
all  its  appointments,  and  has  built  up  a  large  prac- 
tice as  the  result  of  his  skill  and  ability.  He  keeps 
abreast  witli  all  the  discoveries  and  theories  con- 
nected with  tiie  science  of  medicine,  and  iiis  deep 
researches  in  the  line  of  his  profession  iiave  gained 
him  a  most  enviable  reputation. 

An  important  event  in  tiie  life  of  the  Doctor 
occurred  on  the  17th  of  May,  1883,  when  was 
celebrated  his  marriage  with  Miss  Louisa  W.  Stahl- 
berg,  a  daughter  of  Charles  and  Louise  (Long) 
Stahlberg.  both  of  whom  were  natives  of  Germany. 
One  child  graces  the  union  of  our  subject  and  his 
wife,  Charles  A.,  who  is  now  living  with  his  par- 
ents and  attends  the  public  schools.  The  Doctor 
was  reared  in  the  faith  of  the  Lutheran  Church, 
and  ins  wife  holds  membership  with  the  Presby- 
terian Church.  Both  are  estimable  people,  who 
are  held  in  high  regard  throughout  tlic  community 
in  which  they  make  their  home.  For  five  years 
the  Doctor  has  served  as  School  Director  in  Steele- 
ville.  The  cause  of  education  finds  in  bim  a 
warm  friend,  as  does  every  other  enterprise  or 
interest  which  is  calculated  to  prove  of  public 
benefit. 

♦>?-=^^ 

NDREW  JACKSON  ETHERTON,  who  is 

(SSs/LJI  successfully  engaged  in  general  farming 
and  stock-raising  on  section  28,  Murphys- 
boro  Township,  Jackson  County,  111.,  is 
numbered  among  the  leading  citizens  of  this  com- 
munity, and  is  a  representative  of  one  of  the  hon- 
ored pioneer  families.  His  father,  A.  J.  Etherton, 
Sr.,  was  born  in  Tennessee,  July  19,  1822,  and  is  a 
son  of  Thomas  Etherton,  who  came  to  Jackson 
County  in  1828,  locating  in  Ridge  Township. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  bore  the  maiden  name 
of  Lydia  Luvisa  Waller,  and  was  a  daughter  of 
Joseph  and  Polly  (McDanicl)  Waller.  Her  parents 
were  married  in  Illinois,  and  located  in  Union  Coun- 
ty, where  the  father  died  in  1823.  His  wife  sur- 
vived him  many  years,  passing  away  in  1855.  Of 
their  f.amily  of  five  children,  INIrs.  Etherton  is  now 
the  only  survivor.     She  was  born  in  Union  Coun- 


ty November  25,  1819,  and  on  the  23d  of  Decem- 
ber, 1841,  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  the  par- 
ents of  our  subject.  They  began  their  domestic 
life  upon  an  unimproved  farm  on  section  27, 
Murphysboro  Township,  and  there  made  their 
home  for  five  years,  when  they  removed  to  sec- 
tion 28.  There  Mr.  Etherton  carried  on  agri- 
cultural pursuits  continuously  until  the  3'ear  1868, 
when  he  sold  out  and  removed  to  the  farm  on 
which  his  son  A.  J.  now  resides.  In  connection 
with  his  agricultural  pursuits,  he  opened  a  store 
in  Eltham,  and  afterward  removed  it  to  Pomona. 
The  cause  of  education  found  in  liim  a  warm 
friend,  and  he  was  ever  active  in  supporting  the 
best  interests  of  the  community  in  which  he  so 
long  made  his  home.  He  and.  his  wife  were  active 
and  faithful  members  of  the  Missionary  Baptist 
Church,  in  which  he  served  as  Trustee  for  some 
years.     His  death  occurred  in  April,  1878. 

In  the  Etherton  family  were  nine  children,  seven 
of  whom  are  j'Ct  living:  Mary  Jane,  wife  of  Hiram 
A.  Whitlow;  William  C;  Matilda  E.,  wife  of  John 
Crawshaw;  A.  J.,  of  this  sketch;  Luvisa  A.,  wife 
of  Joseph  Hunsaker;  Maria  Emma,  wife  of  Scott 
Ilinchcliff;   and  Sarah  F.,  wife  of   Joseph  Hagler. 

Andrew  J.  Etherton,  was  born  May  6,  1853, 
upon  a  farm  of  Murphysboro  Township,  and  in 
the  public  schools  of  the  neighborhood  acquired 
the  greater  part  of  his  education.  He  spent  three 
months  as  a  student  in  a  college  in  Carbondale, 
and  three  months  in  Shawnee  County,  Kan.  Af- 
ter he  had  arrived  at  mature  years,  he  was  united 
in  marriage,  on  the  4th  of  November,  1875,  with 
Lydia  E.  Spence,  daughter  of  William  and  Lydia 
E.  (Butcher)  Spence.  Her  father  was  a  native  of 
Ireland,  and  her  mother  of  Union  County,  111., 
where  their  marriage  was  celebrated.  They  located 
in  Ridge  Township,  upon  a  tract  of  wild  land,  and 
there  Mr.  Spence  began  the  development  of  a  farm. 
He  was  in  very  limited  circumstances,  but  he  la- 
bored on  industriously,  and  at  length  success 
crowned  his  efforts.  He  is  now  living  a  retired 
life  in  Murphjsboro,  having  lost  his  wife  in  Au- 
gust, 1886.  She  was  a  member  of  the  Methodist 
Episcopal  Church. 

Mrs.  Etherton  was  born  in  Ridge  Township  in 
January,  1854,  and  was  one  of  fourteen  children, 


536 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


eight  of  whom  are  still  living.  By  her  marriage 
she  became  tlie  mother  of  eight  children,  of  whom 
six  are  now  living:  William. I.,  Joseph  E.,LulaM., 
Minnie  L.,  Myrtie  and  Mary  F.  Benjamin  F.  and 
Lydia  E.  are  deceased. 

Upon  his  marriage,  Mr.  Elherton  located  on  a 
farm  on  section  32,  Murphysboro  Township,  where 
he  lived  for  three  years,  and  then  removed  to  his 
present  farm.  He  now  owns  five  hundred  and 
thirty-five  and  a-half  acres  of  valuable  land,  the 
greater  part  of  which  is  under  a  high  state  of  cul- 
tivation. He  carries  on  general  farming  and  stock- 
raising,  and  in  his  business  dealings  meets  with 
good  success.  In  1888  he  erected  a  comfortable 
residence  at  a  cost  of  5^2,000.  Socially,  he  is  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Odd  Fellows'  society  of  Sugar  Creek, 
and  is  now  serving  as  Noble  Grand.  His  wife  is  a 
member  of  the  Missionary  Baptist  Church.  The 
cause  of  education  finds  in  him  a  warm  friend,  and 
he  has  done  effective  service  in  its  interest  during 
the  fifteen  3ears  he  has  filled  the  office  of  School 
Director.  He  has  also  served  as  Township  Com- 
missioner, and  in  politics  is  a  Democrat. 


^^EORGE  G.  WILL,  the  son  of  an  early  set- 
III  (-— ,  tier  of  Jackson  Count)',  may  also  be  de- 
^J|l  nominated  one  of  its  pioneers,  as  he  had  a 
hand  in  developing  its  great  agricultural  resources 
and  assisted  in  laying  the  foundations  of  its 
wealth.  He  is  to-day  one  of  the  foremost  farmers 
of  Somerset  Township,  and  is  a  man  of  considera- 
ble importance  in  the  public  life  of  the  commu- 
nity. He  owns  a  fine  farm  comprising  two  hun- 
dred and  forty  acres,  located  on  sections  26,  27 
and  35.  The  land  is  under  excellent  cultivation, 
and  is  supplied  with  roomj'  and  conveniently 
arranged  buildings  and  all  the  appliances  for 
facilitating  farm  work,  while  ever3-thing  about  the 
place  betokens  order  and  superior  management. 

Our  subject  is  a  native  of  Illinois,  having  been 
born  in  Sangamon  County,  September  3,  1836.  His 
parents,  Peter  and  Mary  (Gebhart)  Will,  were  born 
in  Pennsvlvania,  and  some  time  during  the  '30s 
emigrated  from  Somerset  County,  that  state,  to 
Illinois,  where    for  a  few  months  the)'  sojourned 


in  Sangamon  County.  Thence  in  the  year  1836 
the)'  came  to  Jackson  County  and  settled  upon  the 
farm  now  owned  by  George  G.  At  that  early  day 
wild  animals  roamed  unmolested  through  the 
trackless  forests  and  the  wide-reaching  prairie. 
Tlie  country  was  sparsely  settled,  and  the  hardy 
pioneers  who  braved  the  dangers  of  that  unde- 
veloped district  were  subjected  to  great  privations 
and  hardships. 

The  first  home  of  tlio  Will  family  in  Jackson 
County  was  a  double  log  cabin,  which  with  its 
puncheon  floor  and  primitive  furnishings  re- 
sembled the  other  buildings  of  pioneer  days.  After 
living  there  for  a  short  time  the  father  erected  a 
better  and  more  substantial  structure,  which  still 
stands  on  the  old  homestead  and  is  now  used  for  a 
granary.  The  lumber  used  in  this  house  was  sawed 
witli  a  whip-saw.  At  the  time  of  locatinsj  liere 
about  fifty-two  acres  had  been  cleared,  and  to  the 
improvement  of  this  tract  and  the  clearing  of  the 
remaining  acres  the  father  devoted  his  attention 
until  1859,  when  he  passed  away.  His  widow  sur- 
vived him  for  several  years.  Of  their  children  the 
following  survive:  John,  who  served  in  the  Union 
army  during  tlie  Civil  War  and  is  now  a  resident 
of  Ava,  111.;  Daniel  G.,  living  in  Campbell  Hill, 
this  state;  Benjamin  F.,  mention  of  whom  is  made 
elsewhere  in  this  volume;  Mary  M.,  the  widow  of 
Logan  Wheeler,  and  George  G. 

In  the  death  of  Peter  Will  the  county  lost  one  of 
its  honored  pioneers  and  representative  citizens. 
During  the  entire  period  of  his  residence  here, 
covering  a  period  of  twenty-three  years,  he  was 
intimately  associated  with  the  development  of  its 
best  interests,  and  was  a  man  whom  to  know  was  a 
pleasure  and  a  privilege,  his  sturdy  integrity  win- 
ning for  him  the  confidence  of  his  associates  dur- 
ing the  early  days  of  the  history  of  Somerset 
Township.  He  and  his  wife  were  industrious  and 
economical  and  exerted  a  good  influence  ui)ou  the 
people  of  the  community. 

Brought  by  his  parents  to  Jackson  County  in 
his  infancy,  the  subject  of  this  sketch  grew  to 
manhood  amid  scenes  of  pioneer  life  and  aided  in 
the  task  of  clearing  the  home  farm.  Frequently 
in  those  early  d.ays  he  saw  wild  deer,  turkeys  and 
foxes,  and  game  being  abundant,  it  formed  no  un- 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


539 


important  addition  to  tlie  larder.  His  education 
was  gained  in  tlie  subscription  schools  in  tlie  home 
neighborhood,  and  the  knowledge  there  acquired 
has  been  supplemented  by  reading  and  self-culture. 
Having  been  reared  upon  a  farm,  and  being  thor- 
oughly informed  concerning  agriculture,  it  was 
natural  that  he  should  choose  it  as  his  life  occupa- 
tion, and  succeeding  events  have  proved  iiis 
choice  a  wise  one. 

November  17,  1850,  Mr.  Will  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Arab  A.  Bouscher,  who  was 
born  in  Pennsylvania,  being  the  daughter  of  Sam- 
uel Bouscher,  now  a  resident  of  Somerset  Town- 
ship. Twelve  children  were  horn  of  this  union, 
of  whom  six  now  survive:  Samuel  G.,  William 
L.,  Ida  E.,  Solomon  S.,  Maggie  and  Nora.  In 
politics  a  Republican,  Mr.  Will  has  for  several 
years  served  as  Treasurer  of  the  Board  of  High- 
way Commissioners  of  Somerset  Township,  and  has 
also  been  identified  with  the  Sciiool  Board  for 
a  long  time,  being  clerk  of  the  board.  In  religious 
connections  he  is  a  member  of  the  Lutheran 
Church  and  a  generous  contributor  to  its  support. 


^ 


"Jl  OSHUA  THORP,  one  of  the  most  skilled  en- 
gineers in  southern  Illinois,  and  the  oldest 
engineer  in  years  of  service  on  the  St.  Louis 
Division  of  the  Mobile  A-  Ohio  Railroad,  is 
so  well  known  in  Murpiij'sboro  and  .Jackson  Coun- 
ty that  he  will  need  no  special  introduction  to  our 
readers.  He  was  born  in  Carbondale  March  10, 
1852,  and  is  a  son  of  Capt.  Joseph  Thorp,  County 
Treasurer,  whose  sketch  appears  elsewhere  in  this 
work. 

Upon  his  father's  farm  .Joshua  was  reared,  and 
his  education  was  acquired  in  tlie  Carbondale  High 
School  and  the  Carbondale  Normal.  Later  he  spent 
one  year  in  the  stud}'  of  mechanical  engineering, 
and  then  put  his  knowledge  into  practice  b}'  engag- 
ing in  work  along  that  line.  In  1870  he  went  to 
southeastern  Missouri  with  Mr.  Spiller,  and  for  one 
season  put  up  cotton  gins  at  Bloomfield,  Mo.  He 
was  then  in  the  service  of  the  Iron  Mountain 
18 


Railroad  at  Carondelet  for  three  years,  being  em- 
ployed as  fireman  and  engine  dispatcher,  and  run- 
ning between  St.  Louis  and  Fredericktown. 

The  next  employment  of  Mr.  Thorp  w.as  with 
the  St.  Louis  &  Southe.astern  Railroad,  running  as 
fireman  for  one  year  between  Nashville,  Tenn., 
and  Earlington,  Kj'.,  when  in  1874  he  formed  a 
connection  with  the  St.  Louis  ife  Cairo  Railroad 
(now  the  Mobile  &  Ohio),  with  which  he  has  since 
continued  as  locomotive  engineer  except  for  a 
very  short  period.  In  tiie  fall  of  1879  he  went  to 
New  Mexico  in  the  employ  of  the  Atlantic  &  Pa- 
cific Railroad,  running  as  engineer  between  Albu- 
querque and  Ft.  Wingate  for  four  months,  for  he 
believed  the  change  would  prove  beneficial,  as  his 
health  was  somewhat  impaired. 

In  the  spring  of  1880  Mr.  Thorp  returned  to 
Murphysboro,  and  after  the  St.  Louis  &  Cairo 
Railroad  became  the  property  of  the  Mobile  ifeOhio 
Railroad,  in  1886,  he  still  continued  his  connec- 
tion with  the  latter.  In  1889  he  went  to  Europe 
as  the  representative  of  the  Brotherhood  of  Loco- 
motive Engineers,  sailing  from  New  York  to  Liv- 
verpool.  He  was  sent  to  get  information  for  the 
Scrips  League  Association  concerning  the  different 
trades,  there  being  one  representative  from  each 
trade  who  made  that  journey.  He  spent  three 
months  in  traveling  through  England,  Scotland, 
Belgium,  Germany,  Holland  and  France,  and  vis- 
ited the  Paris  Exposition  for  ten  days.  Both  voy- 
ages were  made  on  the  steamer  "City  of  Rome." 
Mr.  Thorp  made  a  report  to  the  Executive  Com- 
mittee of  the  Brotherhood  of  Locomotive  Engi- 
neers, which  was  copied  in  all  the  journals  of  the 
country.  His  visit  proved  a  most  interesting  one, 
for  every  opportunity  was  furnished  him  for  seeing 
the  country. 

In  St.  Louis,  December  20,  1876,  Mr.  Thorp  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Mrs.  Jennie  A.  Wilson, 
daughter  of  Louis  Lajey,  who  was  born  near  On- 
tario, Canada,  and  was  of  French  descent.  At  the 
age  of  nineteen  he  went  to  St.  Louis,  where  he 
worked  at  the  blacksmith's  trade.  He  was  killed 
on  the  Iron  Mountain  Railroad.  His  wife,  whose 
maiden  name  was  Martha  Wilkerson,  was  a  native 
of  Scotland,  and  with  her  parents  came  to  America 
when  a  child.     Her  father  was  a   soldier   in    the 


540 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Black  Hawk  War.  Mre.  Lajey  is  now  living  in  St- 
Louis.  Mrs.  Thorp  is  the  eldest  of  three  living 
children,  and  is  a  devoted  Christian,  being  identi- 
fied with  tiie  Baptist  Church.  By  her  first  mar- 
riage she  liad  one  son,  John  Wilson,  who  is  now 
a  fireman  on  the  Mobile  &  Ohio  Railroad.  The 
children  of  the  second  marriage  ar^  Joseph  L., 
Joshua,  Grace  and  ^Lary.  The  family  has  a  pleas- 
ant home  on  Front  .Street. 

Mr.  Thorp  runs  the  Murphysboro  accommoda- 
tion between  this  place  and  St.  Louis.  He  is  care- 
ful and  painstaking,  and  in  the  man}'  j-ears  of  his 
service  lias  never  had  an  accident,  a  record  of 
which  he  maj'  well  be  proud.  He  belongs  to  tlie 
Knights  of  Pythias,  and  is  a  charter  member  and 
Chief  of  Division  No.  444,  B.  L.  E.  He  has  taken 
an  active  i)art  in  the  work  of  this  fraternity,  and 
has  aided  in  organizing  man}'  societies.  He  gives 
his  political  support  to  tiie  Republican  part}'.  Of 
a  kindly  nature,  generous  hearted  and  true,  he 
makes  friends  wherever  he  goes,  and  always  re- 
tains their  high  regard. 


JAMES  CHAPLIN,  whose  sketch  now  claims 
attention,  is  well  known  throughout  Ran- 
dolph  County.  He  is  one  of  the  honored 
and  respected  citizens  of  Chester,  and  is 
alwa3-s  one  of  the  first  to  push  forward  any  move- 
ment that  will  prosper  his  cit}'  and  count}-.  He  is 
a  native  of  Perthshire,  Scotland,  and  his  birth  oc- 
curred April  1,  1852.  His  parents,  John  and  Susan 
(Gow)  Chaplin,  are  both  natives  of  Scotland,  and 
still  make  that  country  their  home.  The  father, 
who  in  his  earlier  days  was  a  lumber  cutter,  is  now 
eighty-two  years  of  .age,  while  his  good  wife  is  sev- 
enty-five years  old. 

Our  subject  received  a  meagre  education  in  his 
native  land,  and  when  fourteen  years  of  age  en- 
tered the  flouring-millof  William  Whittel,  serving 
an  apprenticeship  of  three  years.  At  the  expiration 
of  that  time  he  entered  the  mill  of  Pan  ton  it  Co., 
of  Blair-Gowrie,  as  second  miller.  The  building  soon 
burned  down,  however,  and  he  secured  a  like  po- 
sition in  the  mill  at  Hunting  Tower.  After  work- 
ing at  different  places  for   some    time,  our  subject 


secured  the  position  of  assistant  manager  of  the 
Panton  &  Co.  Mills,  which  position  he  filled  with 
satisfaction  to  all  concerned.  He  remained  there 
until  reaching  his  majority,  when  he  determined 
to  come  to  the  United  States,  and  after  an  un- 
eventful voyage,  safely  lauded  in  New  York  City, 
where  he  remained  for  some  time.  He  thence 
journeyed  to  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  and  thence  on  to 
St.  Louis.  Mo.,  but  not  finding  a  suitable  location, 
came  to  Chester  and  engaged  with  the  H.  C.  Cole 
Milling  Company.  In  1882,  when  the  mill  was 
repaired  and  a  full  roller  system  put  in,  Mr.  Chap- 
lin was  proffered  the  position  of  head  miller,  which 
he  accepted  and  still  holds.  He  has  greatly  added 
to  the  reputation  of  the  various  brands  of  the 
flour,  and  considers  the  "F.  F.  F.  G."  and  the 
"Omega"  the  best  in  the  world. 

Mr.  Chaplin  was  married  in  1876  to  Miss  Fan- 
nie, a  daughter  of  Lisander  and  Mary  J.  (Sher- 
man) Davis,  natives  of  Illinois  and  Ohio  respec- 
tively. To  this  marriage  three  children  have  been 
born,  namely:  Arthur,  Helen  Marr  and  Hazel  B. 
The  children  are  attending  the  city  schools  and 
are  being  given  the  best  possible  advantages  for 
good  educations.  Our  subject,  with  his  estimable 
wife,  is  a  member  of  the  Presbyterian  Church. 

Socially,  our  subject  is  connected  with  the  In- 
dependent Order  of  Odd  Fellows,  which  lodge  he 
joined  in  1876,  and  has  filled  all  the  chairs,  hold- 
ing the  Noble  Grand  Chair  for  four  terms.  In  1893 
he  was  elected  representative  to  the  Grand  Lodge 
which  was  held  at  Springfield,  and  also  represented 
the  lodge  at  the  November  meeting  in  1893,  held 
in  the  same  city.  He  is  at  present  District  Deput}' 
of  his  lodge,  and  is  a  wide-awake  and  energetic 
worker.  He  is  greatly  interested  in  all  its  doings, 
and  is  recognized  as  one  of  the  leading  Odd  Fel- 
lows of  the  county.  He  is  also  holding  the  prom- 
inent office  of  Past  Chief  Patriarch  of  the  encamp- 
ment. 

In  his  political  affiliations  Mr.  Chaplin  is  a 
stanch  Republican,  but  in  local  matters  thinks  it 
best  to  vote  for  the  man,  irrespective  of  party  prin- 
ciples. In  1890  he  was  elected  Alderman  of  the 
First  Ward  in  Chester,  and  his  service  was  so 
satisfactory  to  his  constituents  that  it  caused  his 
re-election  in  1892.     For  two  years  he  was  Chair- 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


541 


mail  of  the  Street  Committee,  and  was  especiallj- 
instrumenlal  in  securing  the  electric  lights  for  tlie 
city.  He  is  one  of  the  most  active  members  that 
the  City  Council  has  ever  had,  and  is  foremost  in 
all  enterprises  that  will  further  the  interests  of 
Chester,  the  town  he  has  chosen  for  his  home 
through  life.  Mr.  Chaplin  is  one  of  the  stock- 
holders in  the  Chester  Canning  Factory,  in  the 
Chester  Broom  Factory  and  the  Union  Creamery 
Company.  He  is  always  willing  and  ready  to 
lend  a  helping  hand,  so  far  as  his  means  will  per- 
mit, to  anj'  creditable  movement.  His  reputation 
is  well  established  as  a  man  of  honor,  reliabilitj- 
and  true  worth,  and  he  is  respected  in  due  pro- 
portion. 

• 0^P • 

^1^7^ RANK  B.  ERNEST.  This  gentleman  is  the 
\ir4&,  *^^'^^''  *"*^  occupant  of  a  fine  tract  of  land 
/l^  on  section    13,  township  4,  i-ange  4,  Perry 

County,  which  in  its  improvements  and  general 
appearance  will  compare  favorably  with  an>- estate 
in  the  county.  It  consists  of  one  hundred  and 
forty-seven  acres,  occupying  a  good  location,  and 
bears  all  the  improvements  which  are  to  be  found 
on  a  first-class  farm. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  1858,  within  one-half 
mile  of  where  he  now  resides.  His  parents,  Henry 
and  Charlotta  (Kauffmann)  Ernest,  were  natives 
of  Germany,  the  father  having  been  born  in  1819, 
and  the  mother  in  1818.  The  paternal  grandpar- 
ents of  our  subject,  Frederick  and  Sophia  (House) 
Ernest,  made  their  home  in  German}-.  When  nine- 
teen years  of  age,  the  grandfather  entered  the 
Germau  array,  and  in  the  battle  of  Waterloo  re- 
ceived a  severe  wound  in  the  leg.  He  was  a  car- 
penter by  trade,  which  occupation  he  followed  in 
bis  native  land  until  1851,  when  he  emigrated  to 
the  United  States,  dying  two  years  later  in  St. 
Louis. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Henry  Ernest  were  united  in  mar- 
riage in  Germany  in  1845,  and  two  years  later 
came  to  America.  The  mother  was  a  daughter  of 
Earnest  and  Elizabeth  (Tenter)  Kauffmann.  After 
landing  on  American  soil,  the  parents  had  a  few 
hundred  dollars,  and  making  their  way  to  St. 
Louis,  the    father    there    prosecuted    bis   trade  of 


cabinet-making  for  ten  years.  At  the  expiration 
of  that  time  he  came  to  Perry  Count}',  this  state, 
and  purchased  a  quarter-section  of  land  where  our 
subject  was  born.  When  it  came  into  his  possession 
the  land  was  a  wild  and  uncultivated  tract,  which 
he  immediately  began  improving,  and  he  found 
the  soil  capable  of  yielding  large  crops.  He  was 
very  successful  in  this  enterprise  and  soon  accu- 
mulated a  handsome  pi-opertv,  which  consisted  of 
three  hundred  and  forty  acres. 

The  parental  family  included  three  sons  and 
four  daughters,  namely:  Lewis  H.;  J.  Henry; 
Emma,  now  Mrs.  J.  S.  Maxwell;  Clara,  Mrs.  M.  G. 
Maxwell;  Frank  B.,our  subject;  Sarah,  Mrs.  James 
Bickett;  and  Mary, Mrs.  David  Fulton.  The  latter 
died  when  twenty-three  years  of  age,  leaving  two 
children.  The  father  of  these  children  died  in 
1873.  While  living  in  Germany  he  was  a  devoted 
member  of  the  Lutheran  Church.  Forafew  j-ears 
after  coming  to  America  he  voted  with  the  Demo- 
cratic party,  but  soon  changed  his  views,  and  dur- 
ing the  remainder  of  his  life  was  a  stanch  Repub- 
lican. Mrs.  Ernest  is  still  living  and  makes  her 
home  with  our  subject. 

Our  subject  was  given  a  common-school  educa- 
tion, and  when  old  enough  to  do  so  aided  his  fa- 
ther in  caring  for  the  family.  In  his  political  re- 
lations he  is  a  Democrat,  and  in  local  affairs  always 
votes  for  the  man  whom  he  considers  will  best  fill 
the  office. 

■ — '^mc^ — • 

fr^ALPH  E.  SPRIGG,  the  Mayor  of  Chester, 
Li^  enjoys  the  reputation  of  being  a  thoroughly 
(^mV  posted  man  in  public  affairs.  He  has  had  a 
^  vast  amount  of  experience,  and  his  most  triv- 
ial business  transactions  are  characterized  by  good 
judgment  and  strict  integrity.  He  is  a  prominent 
citizen,  and  one  who  h.as  been  of  much  benefit  to 
the  city  where  he  resides. 

A  son  of  James  D.  and  Amanda  E.  (Mudd) 
Sprigg,  our  subject  was  born  in  Prairie  du  Roche', 
111.,  October  9,  1860.  His  paternal  grandfather, 
Ignatius  Sprigg,  was  a  native  of  Maryland,  and  on 
locating  in  Randolph  Count}',  this  slate,  became 
one  of  the  pioneers  of  this  section,  and  in  1825 
was  elected  Sheriff.     The  maternal  grandfather  of 


542 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


our  subject  was  Felix  Mudd  He  was  a  farmer  bj' 
occupation  and  liailed  from  Kentucky.  James  D. 
Sprigg  died  in  this  county  in  1871.  He  was  a 
stanch  Democrat  politicall}'  and  was  always  greatly 
interested  in  local  and  state  politics.  His  wife,  the 
mother  of  our  subject,  is  still  living,  making  her 
home  in  Chester. 

Ralph  E.  Sprigg  was  the  j-oungest  in  a  fam- 
ily of  six  children  born  to  his  parents,  all  of 
whom  are  deceased  but  one,  John  D.  He  passed 
his  boyhood  and  youth  in  attending  the  public 
schools  at  home,  and  later,  desiring  to  gain  a  more 
extended  knowledge,  became  a  student  at  St.  Vin- 
cent College.  Being  matriculated  from  that  insti- 
tution, j'oung  Sprigg  went  north  and  entered  the 
University  of  INIichigan,  remaining  there  for  some 
time.  After  completing  his  studios,  our  subject 
returned  to  this  city  and  read  law  in  the  office  of 
Johnson  &  Horner.  Later,  in  1878,  he  took  a 
course  of  lectures  in  the  Georgetown  University  at 
Washington,  D.  C. 

June  9,  1880,  in  Chester,  our  subject  was  mar- 
ried to  Miss  Betty,  daughter  of  John  H.  and 
Margaret  Lindsej-,  of  this  place,  and  to  them  has 
been  born  one  daughter,  Nora.  After  his  marriage 
Mr.  Sprigg  began  the  practice  of  law,  associating 
himself  with  Judge  Lindsey,  which  partnership 
continued  until  the  death  of  the  latter,  in  1885 
For  the  succeeding  two  j-ears  Mr.  Sprigg  carried 
on  his  professional  work  alone,  and  at  the  expira- 
tion of  that  time  became  associated  with  William 
Hartzell,  under  the  firm  name  of  Hartzell  &  Sprigg, 
which  connection  exists  at  the  present  time. 

Upon  political  issues  Mr.  Sprigg  is  in  sympathy 
with  the  principles  of  the  Democratic  party.  He 
has  filled  the  office  of  City  Attorney,  and  for  eight 
years  has  been  the  efficient  State's  Attorney  of 
Randolph  County.  In  1890  our  subject  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  School  Board,  and  he  performed  in  the 
most  reliable  manner  eveiy  dutj'  devolving  upon 
him,  thus  winning  the  esteem  of  all  who  know 
him.  He  has  attained  success,  and  he  full}'  merits  the 
confidence  accorded  him  throughout  the  commu- 
nity in  which  he  resides.  He  is  a  very  popular  young 
man,  and  in  1893  w.as  elected  Mayor  of  Ches- 
ter. He  is  Vice-President  of  the  Southern  Illinois 
Stock  and  Agricultural  Association,  and  socially  is 


a  Knight  of  Pythias.  Judging  from  the  qualities 
of  his  mind  and  the  energy  of  his  nature,  the 
friends  of  Mr.  Sprigg  predict  for  him  a  still  more 
brilliant  and  useful  future. 


•f^^-r- 


-^ 


Q.  A.  KIMMEL.  B.  S.,  M.  S.,  LL.  B.,  occu- 
pies the  position  of  City  Attorney  of  Mur- 
^_,  ,  pLysboro,  and  is  one  of  its  prominent  and 
^^fJ  successful  lawyers,  whom  merit  have  placed 
in  an  enviable  position.  He  has  the  honor  of  be- 
ing a  native  of  this  count}-,  for  his  birth  occurred 
in  Somerset  Township,  February  8,  1849.  His 
grandfather  was  Abraham  Kimmel.  His  father, 
Philip  Kimmel,  was  born  in  Somerset  Count}-,  Pa., 
and  there  wedded  Mary  Will,  a  native  of  the  same 
county,  and  a  daughter  of  Daniel  Will.  In  1840, 
accompanied  by  his  family,  he  went  down  the  Ohio 
and  up  the  ^lississippi  Rivers  and  made  a  location 
in  Somerset  Township,  becoming  one  of  its  ear- 
liest settlers. 

From  time  to  time  Philip  Kimmel  purchased 
land  until  he  had  six  hundred  acres,  which  he  at 
length  divided  among  his  children.  In  local  pol- 
itics he  took  a  very  prominent  part  and  was  one 
of  the  leaders  of  the  Republican  party  in  this  eom- 
munitj-.  He  served  as  County  Commissioner  of 
Schools,  afterward  was  Count}-  Superintendent  of 
Schools,  and  for  many  long  year^has  been  School 
Treasurer,  which  position  he  still  fills.  The  cause 
of  education  has  ever  found  in  him  a  warm  friend 
and  he  has  done  much  in  its  interest.  He  belongs 
to  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church,  and  has  been 
active  in  church  work.  He  is  now  nearly  eighty- 
four  years  of  age.  His  wife  passed  away  in  1882. 
In  the  family  were  eleven  children,  eight  of  whom 
grew  to  mature  years,  while  seven  are  yet  living. 
One  son,  Joseph,  served  in  the  late  war. 

In  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lands  J.  Q.  A. 
Kimmel  was  reared  to  manhood.  He  attended  the 
common  schools  until  twenty  years  of  age,  and 
then  entered  Carthage  College,  at  Carthage,  111., 
graduating  in  May,  1876,  with  the  degree  of 
B.  S.  He  afterward  received  the  degree  of 
M.  S.  from  the  same  institution.  Like  his  father 
be  has   always  maintained  an  interest  in  educa- 


PORTRAIT  AKD  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


543 


tional  work.  In  1876  he  became  Principal  of  the 
schools  of  Murphysboro,  which  (lositlon  he  filled 
three  j'ears.  He  was  then  for  a  time  in  a  similar 
position  in  Cape  Girardeau,  ]Mo.  In  1882,  through 
the  instrumentality  of  Gen.  John  A.  Logan,  he  re- 
ceived the  appointment  of  Examiner  of  Pension 
Claims,  and  spent  three  years  in  Washington,  D.  C. 
During  this  time  he  pursued  a  course  in  the  Co- 
lumbia Law  School  at  Washington, studying  nights, 
and  was  graduated  in  June,  1885,  with  the  degree 
of  LL.  B. 

In  the  Capitol  City,  August  15,  1881,  Mr.  Kim- 
mel  was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Martha  R. 
Moon,  a  native  of  New  Jersey.  They  have  four 
children,  Xettie,  Gertrude,  John  and  Percy.  The 
family  has  a  wide  acquaintance  in  this  community 
and  occupies  an  enviable  position  in  social  circles. 
Since  his  return  to  Murphysboro  Mr.  Kimmel  has 
successfully  engaged  in  general  law  practice.  In 
1888  he  was  elected  and  served  for  one  term  as 
Alderman  of  the  Fourth  Ward.  In  1893  lie  was 
elected  City  Attorney  on  the  Republican  ticket, 
and  is  now  filling  the  position  with  credit  to  him- 
self and  to  the  satisfaction  of  his  constituents.  So- 
ciall}-  he  is  connected  with  the  Ancient  Order  of 
United  Workmen,  and  is  Recorder  of  the  lodge. 
He  is  a  stockholder  in  the  building  and  loan  asso- 
ciation. His  office  is  situated  in  the  Willis  Block, 
and  his  pleasant  home  is  located  in  the  southwest 
corner  of  Blanchard  and  Chestnut  Streets. 


AMUEL  MORRISON,  who  is  filling  the  po- 
sition of  janitor  in  the  Southern  Illinois 
Penitentiarj-,  located  at  Chester,  was  born 
within  six  miles  of  Londonderry,  Ireland. 
December  30,  1835.  His  father,  James  Morrison, 
was  a  native  of  the  same  count\',  and  there  lived 
until  some  years  after  his  marriage  to  Miss  Jane 
Parkhill.  By  their  union  this  worthy  couple  be- 
came the  parents  of  eight  children,  all  of  whom  were 
born  on  the  Emerald  Isle.  In  1837,  the  father  emi- 
grated with  his  family  to  the  New  World,  and  after 
a  six  3ears'  residence  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  made 
his  wa3'  westward  to  Randolph  County.  111.,  where 
he  spent   his  remaining  daj'S  as  an  honored  and 


highly  respected  citizen.  His  wife  was  called  to  her 
final  rest  in  1852,  and  his  death  occurred  in  1870. 

Samuel  Morrison  was  the  youngest  in  the  fam- 
ily, and  was  only  two  years  of  age  at  the  time 
they  crossed  the  briny  deep.  With  his  parents  he 
came  to  the  west,  and  his  education  was  gleaned  in 
the  common  schools  of  .Steeleville.  During  his 
younger  days  he  worked  as  a  farm  hand,  and  at 
the  age  of  twenty  he  purchased  land  and  began 
farming  for  himself.  He  also  engaged  in  trading 
in  live  stock  and  followed  the  two  pursuits  con- 
tin  uouslj'  until  December,  1860.  At  that  time  here- 
moved  to  Chester,  111.,  and  established  a  livery  and 
trading  stable,  which  he  successfull}' conducted  for 
a  number  of  years.  He  bought  and  shipped  stock 
to  the  Memphis  market  besides  conducting  his 
business  in  this  locality.  He  is  an  excellent  judge 
of  horses,  and  this  enterprise  proved  to  him  a  prof- 
itable one.  In  December,  1880,  Mr.  Morrison  re- 
moved to  Sparta,  111.,  where  he  carried  on  a  livery 
stable  for  some  time.  Since  1863,  he  has  been  al- 
most continuously  engaged  in  the  stock  business  in 
one  or  more  of  its  various  branches.  Ever  since  re- 
ceiving the  appointment  of  janitor  of  the  Southern 
Illinois  Penitentiary,  he  has  filled  the  position  in 
a  creditable  and  acceptable  manner. 

On  the  15th  of  September,  1853,  was  celebrated 
the  marriage  of  Mr.  Morrison  and  Miss  Mary 
Jane  Campbell,  a  daughter  of  Judge  John  and 
Jane  (Lively)  Campbell.  The  lady  died  in  May, 
1878,  and  her  loss  was  deeply  mourned.  She  was 
a  faithful  member  of  the  Methodist  Church.  In 
the  family  were  six  children,  three  sons  and  three 
daughters,  John  E.,  now  a  resident  of  Colorado: 
James  L.,  Nancy  Jane,  William  A;  Mary  B.,  who 
died  at  the  age  of  fourteen  years,  and  Susan  C. 
The  surviving  children,  excepting  the  eldest,  re- 
side in  Sparta.  jNIr.  Morrison  has  three  brothers, 
who  are  numbered  among  the  leading  citizens  of 
Randolph  County,  John,  who  has  been  County 
Commissioner,  William  J.  and  Robert.  They 
are  numbered  among  the  representative  farmers  of 
the  community. 

Mr.  Morrison  and  his  family  are  all  members  of 
the  Presbyterian  Church.  Socially,  he  is  connect- 
ed with  Kaskaskia  Lodge  No.  82,  A.  F.  A  A.  M., 
and  has  been  a  Chapter  Mason  since  1864.     He 


544 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


has  been  honored  with  various  offices  in  the  lodge. 
In  politics  he  has  ever  been  a  stalwart  supiwrter  of 
the  Democratic  part}'  and  still  clings  to  the  Jeffer- 
sonian  principles.  lie  is  ever  found  true  and 
faitliful  to  the  trust  reposed  in  him,  and  his  prompt 
discharge  of  public  duties  in  his  present  position 
has  won   him  liigli  approval  and  commendation. 


<;<;».;..{..}.  ^»}.»».^4.».;.^»4..i.».}"}-i"i-4"M"»Z)0' 

LEXANDER  HOOD.  This  name  will  be 
at  once  recognized  as  that  of  one  of  the 
leading  attorneys  of  Randolph  Count}', 
who  is  probably  as  well  known  as  any 
other  resident  within  its  bounds.  He  resides  in 
Chester,  where  lie  is  carrying  on  a  lucrative  prac- 
tice as  an  attorney.  A  native  of  Chester,  S.  C,  our 
subject  was  born  July  24,  1829,  and  is  the  son  of 
John  and  Sarah  (Burns)  Hood.  John  Hood,  the 
father  of  our  subject,  was  the  son  of  Alexander 
Hood,  a  native  of  Ireland,  and  during  his  life  fol- 
lowed the  combined  occupations  of  carpenter  and 
farmer.  The  maternal  grandfather  of  our  subject, 
Samuel  Burns,  was  born  in  South  Carolina,  and 
was  of  Irisli  descent. 

Alexander  Hood,  of  this  sketch,  was  the  second 
child  in  the  order  of  birth  in  the  parental  family 
of  ten  children,  eigiit  of  whom  grew  to  mature 
years,  and  seven  of  whom  are  yet  living.  He  spent 
his  boyhood  and  youth  in  South  Carolina,  and  up 
to  the  age  of  sixteen  years  attended  school  in  that 
state.  In  1845  he  accompanied  his  parents  on  their 
removal  to  this  state,  where  the  father  purchased 
a  tract  of  land  in  Randolph  County.  The  farm 
was  in  its  primitive  wildness,  and  _young  Hood 
proved  of  great  assistance  to  his  father  in  its  clear- 
ing and  cultivation.  Here  the  father  continued 
to  reside  until  he  died,  in  1879,  when  in  his  seven- 
ty-eighth year.  His  good  wife,  wiio  preceded  him 
to  the  better  land,  died  in  1869. 

Having  decided  to  make  the  practice  of  law  his 
life  occupation,  Mr.  Hood  went  to  Ann  Arbor,  and 
was  graduated  from  the  law  department  of  the 
Michigan  Universit}'  in  1861.  Then  returning  to 
this  city,  lie  two  years  later  opened  up  an  office 
and  began  a  general  law  practice,  in  the  prosecu- 
tion of  which  he  has  not  only  gained  a  handsome 


income,  but  the  good  will  of  the  community  at 
large. 

May  25,  1854,  Alexander  Hood  and  Miss  Eliza 
J.  Hunter  were  united  in  marriage.  The  lad}'  was 
born  July  11,  1836,  in  the  state  of  Indiana,  and 
at  her  death,  which  occurred  in  1881,  left  a  family 
of  six  children,  survivors  of  twelve  born  to  them, 
five  of  whom  are  living  at  the  present  time:  John 
IL,  residing  in  Litchfield,  this  state;  Robert  B.,  who 
makes  his  home  in  Indiana;  William  A.,  living  in 
Rescue,  Jliss.;  Belle  R.,  of  Chicago,  111.;  Lula,  Mrs. 
C.  J.  Balthasar,  of  St.  Louis,  Mo.;  and  (^ua  M.,  at 
home.  The  present  wife  of  our  subject,  to  whom 
he  was  married  in  1883,  was  Mrs.  Marj-  J.  Nixon, 
of  Ellis  Grove,  this  county.  She  is  the  daughter 
of  J.  H.  McCarty,  deceased,  who  was  a  prominent 
farmer  of  Randolph  County,  and  was  formcrl}'  As- 
sessor of  the  count}'.  Her  father  and  mother  are 
natives  of  Kentucky  and  Illinois,  respectively.  She 
is  a  native  of  this  county. 

Mr.  Hood  sustains  a  most  enviable  reputation 
for  strict  integrity  and  firmness  of  purpose  among 
his  professional  brethren,  and  has  served  three 
terms  as  City  Attorney.  He  has  also  been  honored 
with  the  position  of  County  Judge,  and  for  six 
years,  was  Master  in  Chancery  of  the  county. 
Socially  he  is  an  Odd  Fellow.  He  is  a  member  of 
Chester  Lodge  No.  57,  and  also  of  Randolph  En- 
campment No.  55.  In  politics  he  always  votes  the 
straitrht  Democratic  ticket. 


"•i"5"5"i-'? 


^♦•{•♦♦F 


JEAN  DAGLE,  one  of  the  finest  photographic 
I  artists  of  southern  Illinois,  is  proprietor  of 
;  an  art  gallery  in  Murphysboro.  His  life 
,^^_^''  record  is  as  follows:  He  was  born  in  Port 
Huron,  Mich.,  April  6,  1855,  and  is  of  French  de- 
scent. His  grandfather,  Jean  Dagle,  was  a  native 
of  France,  and  when  a  child  was  taken  by  his  par- 
ents to  Canada.  He  became  a  farmer  of  New 
Brunswick,  and  there  Francis  Dagle,  father  of  our 
subject,  was  born  and  reared.  Having  attained 
to  mature  years,  the  latter  married  Mary  Smith,  a 
a  native  of  Essex  County,  Vt.,  and  they  became 
the  parents  of  five  sons  and  two  daughters.  One 
son,  Henry,  served  as  First  Lieutenant  of  Com- 


PORTRAIT  AKD  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


545 


paDy  A,  Twenty-sixth  Michigan  Infantry,  and 
was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Spottsylvania  Court 
House.  Charles,  a  Sergeant  of  the  Ninth  Michigan 
Cavalr}',  was  captured,  and  incarcerated  in  Flor- 
ence Prison  for  nine  months.  In  the  fall  of  1872, 
he  was  on  the  steam  propeller  "Souvenir,"  which 
sank  in  Lake  Michigan  off  the  coast  of  Ludington. 
His  was  the  only  bod_v  found,  and  it  was  recovered 
after  eleven  months.  Jackson,  who  was  Orderly 
in  Company  A.  Twenty -sixth  Michigan  Infantry, 
now  resides  in  Kalkaska.  Mich.  Frank,  who  was  a 
member  of  the  same  companj',  lost  his  left  arm  in 
the  battle  of  Spottsylvania.  He  was  then  trans- 
ferred to  the  Invalid  Corps,  and  continued  in  the 
service  until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  has  since 
been  a  member  of  the  Pinkerton  Detective  Agency, 
and  now  resides  in  Silver  City,  N.  Mex.  The 
daughters  are.  Mrs.  Lura  Poltgen,  of  Waco,  Tex.; 
and  Mrs.  Emma  Dunham,  of  Kalkaska,  Mich. 

The  father  of  this  family  is  a  farmer  by  occupa- 
tion. He  removed  to  Port  Huron,  Mich.,  where 
he  owned  a  tract  of  pine  land,  and  engaged  in  the 
manufacture  of  lumber.  In  1864  he  removed  to 
PentAVater.  Mich.,  where  he  bought  pine  land  and 
engaged  in  the  same  line  of  business  until  his  re- 
tirement. His  wife  died  in  1883,  in  Pent  Water, 
since  which  time  he  has  made  his  home  with  his 
children. 

Our  subject  is  the  youngest  of  the  Dagle  familj'. 
The  fii-st  nine  years  of  his  life  were  spent  in  Port 
Huron,  after  which  he  went  with  the  family  to 
Pent  Water,  and  in  its  common  and  high  schools 
acquired  a  good  education.  He  became  a  mill- 
■wright.  and  worked  in  sawmills  and  gristmills  in 
western  Michigan  until  1883,  which  year  wit- 
nessed his  removal  to  Texas,  where  he  learned  the 
photographic  art.  He  afterward  bought  a  galleiT 
in  Texas,  where,  as  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Dagle 
<fe  Arvin,  he  carried  on  business  for  about  three 
years.  On  the  expiration  of  that  period  he  sold 
out,  and  was  employed  by  a  New  York  firm  as 
traveling  photographer,  taking  views  of  fine  scen- 
evy.  After  two  j'ears  spent  in  that  wa^-,  he  came 
to  Murphj-sboro,  in  May,  1889,  and  purchased  the 
pliotograph  gallery  of  John  Minner.  His  studio 
is  located  in  the  Murphysboro  Bank  Block,  is  sup- 
plied with  all  necessai}-  apparatus  of  the  most  im- 


proved methods,  and  is  lighted  by  electricity.  In 
May,  1893,  he  established  a  gallery  in  Cairo,  and 
is  doing  a  good  business  at  that  place. 

In  Belleville.  111.,  in  February,  1887,  Mr.  Dagle 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Mi-s.  Ella  Crain,  a  na- 
tive of  St.  Clair  Count}-.  Her  father  was  killed 
in  the  Civil  War.  By  her  first  marriage  she  had  a 
daughter,  Minnie.  Mrs.  Dagle  is  a  member  of  the 
Lutheran  Church,  and  Mr.  Dagle  belongs  to  the 
National  Photographers'  Association.  He  is  also 
Past  Chancellor  of  the  Knights  of  Pythias  lodge, 
is  a  member  of  the  Knights  of  Honor,  and  of  the 
Fraternal  Mystic  Circle.  He  exercises  his  right  of 
franchise  in  support  of  the  Democracy.  In  con- 
nection with  his  other  interests,  Mr.  Dagle  is  a 
stockholder  in  the  Mississippi  Valley  Building  and 
Loan  Association  of  Chicago,  and  in  the  National 
Homestead  and  Loan  Association  of  Bloomington, 
HI.  As  before  stated,  he  is  one  of  the  finest  pho- 
tographic artists  in  southern  Illinois,  and  his  ex- 
cellent workmanship  has  gained  for  him  a  liberal 
patronage  and  high  reputation. 

AVID  L.  HUDSON  takes  a  leading  part  in 
,  advancing  the  agricultural  interests  of 
township  6,  range  7,  Randolph  County, 
where  he  has  an  interest  in  forty-eight 
acres  of  land  on  section  18.  Besides  his  farming, 
he  is  connected  with  the  Clover  Creamery  Com- 
pany at  New  Palestine,  of  which  he  is  the  present 
manager.  He  is  a  son  of  Charles  M.  and  Mary 
Hudson,  and  was  born  December  28,  18-49.  His 
mother  died  when  he  was  a  lad  of  ten  j'ears,  and 
the  father  immediately  broke  up  housekeeping,  so 
our  subject  was  thrown  upon  his  own  resources. 
He  worked  for  one  man  seven  years,  but  on  ac- 
count of  ill  treatment,  left  hira  and  commenced 
with  John  W.  Vaughan,  for  whom  he  worked  for 
a  like  period.  He  afterward  ran  a  stationary  en- 
gine in  a  mill  in  Seneca  County,  Ohio,  and  in 
1871  came  to  Illinois  and  located  in  Chicago. 

After  a  sojourn  in  the  last  named  city  for  three 
years,  Mr.  Hudson  came  to  Randolph  County  and 
located  on  his  present  farm,  which  he  yet  oversees. 
Our  subject  received  but  a  very  limited  education 


546 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


in  his  youth,  and  is  a  self-made  man  in  the  truest 
sense  of  the  word.  He  had  two  sisters  and  five 
brothers,  but  does  not  know  where  they  are  resid- 
ing, or  whether  they  are  dead  or  alive.  His  father 
was  a  soldier  in  the  Union  army,  and  while  in  the 
service  was  taken  sick  and  died. 

The  marriage  of  Mr.  Hudson  and  Mrs.  Mary 
(Harman)  Crisler  occurred  December  20,  1883. 
Mrs.  Hudson  was  a  daughter  of  George  and  Polly 
Harman,  who  were  among  the  oldest  settlers  of 
Randolph  County.  Two  cliildren,  twins,  came  to 
brighten  the  home  of  our  subject  and  his  \yife, 
Clara  Mertte  and  Charles  Milton.  The  daughter 
died  in  infancy,  and  the  son  is  yet  with  his  par- 
ents. Mrs.  Hudson  is  a  Christian  .Scientist  in  her 
religious  views. 

Our  subject  is  a  member  of  Kaskaskia  Lodge  No. 
86,  F.  &  A.  M.,  socially,  and  politically  is  a  stanch 
Democrat,  and  takes  an  active  part  in  the  politics 
of  his  community.  He  has  served  as  Constable  of 
the  township,  and  was  Township  Assessor  for  two 
years.  He  is  a  man  of  many  pleasant  social  quali- 
ties and  of  sterling  habits,  and  is  well  liked  by  the 
entire  communit}'. 


|p^  B.  EATON  is  a  worth}-  representative  of 
the  business  interests  of  Du  Quoin.  He  is 
the  senior  member  of  the  firm  of  S.  B. 
Eaton  &  Co.,  proprietor  of  the  Jupiter 
Coal  Mines,  and  also  of  a  large  mercantile  estab- 
lishment, and  is  one  of  the  Directors  of  the  First 
National  Bank  of  Du  Quoin.  His  excellent  busi- 
ness and  executive  ability,  and  his  honorable, 
straightforward  dealings  have  given  him  a  )}romi- 
nence  that  places  him  at  the  front  in  business  cir- 
cles. 

Mr.  Eaton  was  born  July  15,  1857,  on  a  farm 
two  and  a-half  miles  south  of  Du  Quoin.  His  f.a- 
ther,  W.  B.  Eaton,  was  born  in  Gratton,  Mass.,  in 
1831,  and  was  the  eldest  son  of  Abel  B.  Eaton, 
who  was  also  an  eldest  son.  The  latter  was  for 
some  3'ears  a  shoemaker  of  Massachusetts,  but  af- 
ter his  removal  to  New  York  was  employed  on 
the  Hudson    River.     The    family  is   directly   de- 


scended from  General  Eaton,  of  Revolutionary 
fame,  and  traces  its  ancestry  back  to  the  landing 
of  the  "Mayflower."  Daniel  Eaton,  the  great- 
grandfather of  our  subject,  was  quite  a  prominent 
man,  and  he  and  his  son,  Abel  B.,  together  with 
the  latter's  son,  W.  B.,  came  to  Illinois.  The  first- 
named  died  in  Chicago,  and  the  second  in  Madi- 
son County,  111.,  where  he  engaged  in  farming. 

Like  his  father,  W.  B.  Eaton  learned  the  shoe- 
maker's trade,  and  was  employed  on  the  Hudson 
River  for  several  years,  but  after  coming  to  the 
west,  turned  his  attention  to  agricultural  pursuits. 
Later  he  came  to  DuC^uoin,  where  he  is  now  act- 
ing as  Superintendent  of  the  large  coal  mines  be- 
longing to  his  son.  He  married  Elizabeth  Buckels, 
who  was  a  native  of  Knoxville,  Ind.,  and  died  in 
May,  1890.  In  the  family  were  three  children: 
S.  B.;  Abel  C,  who  is  a  master  mechanic  and  is 
employed  in  the  mines  in  that  capacity;  and  Mar}^ 
F,.,  wife  of  Edward  Musselnian,  the  partner  of  the 
subject  of  this  sketch. 

S.  B.  Eaton  was  the  eldest  of  the  family,  and 
was  descended  from  a  line  of  eldest  sons  dating 
back  five  generations.  His  school  privileges  were 
quite  limited.  When  a  lad  of  twelve,  he  managed 
to  get  })OSsession  of  a  one-horse  rig,  and  commenced 
to  run  an  express  wagon  in  Du  Quoin,  following 
this  business  for  several  years.  At  the  age  of  sev- 
enteen be  went  to  St.  John,  a  little  salt  manufac- 
turing town  near  Du  Quoin,  where  he  was  em- 
ployed in  a  store  for  ten  years.  Returning  to  this 
place,  Mr.  Eaton  embarked  in  merchandising  in 
company  with  his  father-in-law,  William  Black- 
burn. They  began  operations  on  a  small  scale,  but 
the  young  man  possessed  energ}',  enterprise  and 
ambition,  and  it  was  not  long  before  he  was  mak- 
ing money.  He  enlarged  bis  stock  to  meet  the 
growing  demands  of  his  trade,  and  is  now  at  the 
head  of  an  extensive  mercantile  establishment, 
which  yields  him  a  handsome  income.  In  1886 
he  became  interested  in  a  coal  mine,  in  company 
with  others,  and  opened  up  what  is  known  as  the 
Jupiter  Coal  Mines.  Employment  is  furnished  to 
some  two  hundred  men,  and  the  mine  3'ields  a 
large  output.  Mr.  Eaton  is  also  one  of  the  stock- 
holders and  a  Director  in  the  First  National  Bank 
of  which  he  is  now  Vice-President.     He  has  other 


/f        f 


'  i  "f"  K  a"  ^' 


-  ^ 


t^„    '-^j 


<s* 


"^/'^?f^^ 


^^*"     ^ 

^•F^    ^ 


k^O  PfeP    1   ^^^,  <y,j? 


+ 


^  V^  "-^"^f  .:i« 


_¥r 


..j^  '■ 


«■►«- 

'>^ 

'-r^ 


L 


RLOIuLf^UL    UF    JUMf.      HlNRY,    olC.k.^  IviURPHYSBORO   7  P,  j  ACnSi/ 1  <  ^u,,ILl. 


RESIDENCEOF  5.  B.  EATON,  HEAD    OF    MAIN    5T.,  DU    QUOU.  .,  ILL. 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOORAPIOCAL  RECOM), 


549 


business  interests  of  an  extensive  and  important 
nature. 

On  the  2d  of  May,  1888,  Mr.  Eaton  wedded 
Laura,  youngest  daughter  of  William  Blackburn, 
his  former  partner  in  business,  and  now  a  wealthy 
retired  merchant.  They  have  one  child,  William 
Leslie,  three  3'ears  old.  Their  home,  which  is  one 
of  the  elegant  residences  in  southern  Illinois,  was 
erected  at  a  cost  of  $20,000,  and  is  richly  and  taste- 
fully furnished.  It  is  also  the  abode  of  hospital- 
itj%  for  their  man}'  friends  always  receive  within 
its  doors  a  hearty  welcome. 

Mr.  Eaton  is  a  Prohibitionist  in  politics,  but  has 
never  been  an  office  seeker.  He  is  one  of  the  Trus- 
tees of  the  Methodist  Church,  to  which  his  wife 
belongs.  Whatever  he  undertakes  he  always  car- 
ries forward  to  a  successful  completion,  and  few 
men  in  this  part  of  the  state  have  made  such  rapid 
strides  in  the  financial  world. 

-5— ^^>^-<^^-  *- 

'.F^^RAXTON  M.  I'ARRISH,  who  carries  on 
lY^K,  general  farming  on  section  14,  Vergennes 
Township,  .lackson  County,  was  born  on 
the  old  Parrish  homestead,  on  the  14th  of 
October,  1833.  His  father,  Thomas  Parrish,  was  a 
native  of  North  Carolina.  He  was  born  in  1799, 
and  on  arriving  at  man's  estate  he  emigrated 
westward  to  Illinois,  locating  in  Franklin  County, 
and  in  1823  came  to  Jackson  County,  settling 
near  where  the  town  of  Murphysboro  now  stands. 
In  1826,  he  married  Lucy  Moss,  and  a  year  later 
removed  to  a  farm  on  section  21,  Vergennes  Town- 
ship, entering  the  laud  from  the  Government  and 
transforming  it  from  a  wild  tract  into  rich  and 
fertile  fields.  The  nearest  postofflce  was  Browns- 
ville, the  county  seat,  then  eighteen  miles  distant. 
In  the  family  were  the  following  children: 
Polly,  who  died  at  the  age  of  twelve;  Elizabeth, 
twin  sister  of  Polly,  and  the  wife  of  B.  F.  Porter; 
Lucinda  J.,  wife  of  Eliphas  Porter;  Braxton  M.; 
Margaret  C,  wife  of  Philip  Davis;  Lucretia,  who 
died  in  childhood;  Sarah  Ann,  wife  of  Frederick 
Buddenbaum;  Thomas  J.,  who  enlisted  in  the 
Union  army  in  1861,  and  died  in  the  service;  Will- 
iam C,  who  also  laid  down  his  life  on  the  altar  of 


his  country;  John  W.,  who  was  killed  in  the 
charge  on  Missionaiy  Ridge  during  the  late  war; 
George  W.,  of  Jackson  County;  Joseph  N.,  who 
resides  on  a  farm  adjoining  that  of  our  subject; 
and  Frank  P.,  who  lives  on  the  old  homestead. 

The  parents  were  consistent  and  earnest  mem- 
bers of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  and  in 
their  home  church  services  were  often  held.  Mr. 
Parrish  long  served  as  Class-leader.  He  was  a 
Democrat  until  after  the  breaking  out  of  the  late 
war,  when  he  became  a  stanch  Republican.  For 
some  years  he  held  the  office  of  Justice  of  the 
Peace,  and  was  County  Commissioner  one  term. 
He  died  at  the  age  of  sixty-eight.  His  wife  was 
early  left  an  orphan,  and  was  reared  by  a  Mr. 
Garner,  who  lived  south  of  Murphysboro,  where 
there  was  a  fort  for  the  protection  of  the  settlers 
against  the  Kaskaskia  and  Shawnee  Indians.  She 
was  born  in  Jackson  County,  in  August,  1807,  and 
died  March  15,  1887.  For  years  before  her  death 
she  was  the  oldest   native  resident  of  the  county. 

Upon  the  home  farm  Braxton  Parrish  remained 
until  twenty-two  jears  of  age,  when,  on  the  6th  of 
May,  1856,  he  wedded  Margaret  Davis,  who  died 
January  16,  1873.  Of  their  children  Thomas 
was  born  September  1,  1859,  and  Lucy  H.  was 
born  March  3,  1862,  while  Benjamin  F.  was  born 
April  6,  1867.  The  daughter  is  now  the  wife  of 
Warren  Porter.  Mr.  Parrish  was  again  married 
May  30,  1873,  his  second  union  being  with  Jo- 
sephine, daughter  of  Jesse  O.  and  P^mil}'  Dees. 
She  was  born  in  Perry  County,  May  24,  1852. 
Her  father  was  a  native  of  Tennessee,  and  came  to 
Illinois  with  his  father,  Jesse  Dees,  Sr.,  who  be- 
came one  of  the  pioneers  of  Jefferson  County.  The 
father  afterwards  removed  to  Perry  County,  where 
he  improved  a  farm  and  made  his  home  for  forty- 
five  yeais,  dying  May  11,  1893,  at  the  age  of  sev- 
enty-five years  and  six  months.  His  widow  is  still 
living  on  the  old  homestead.^ Their  children  were, 
Edwin  J.,  Eva  Josephine;  Anna  B.,  wife  of  Louis 
Tuttle;  Ella,  wife  of  E.  Rees;  Byron  W.,  Edgar  R  ; 
Hattie,  who  died  at  the  age  of  eight  years,  and 
Williarii.  Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Parrish  were  born 
nine  children,  Eddie  B.,  who  was  born  March  4, 
1874,  and  died  November  25,  1883;  Annie  C, 
born  September  4,  1875;  Harlan,  January  3,  1877; 


550 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Bertha  E.,  September  5,  1878;  Effle,  March  28, 
1880;  Vida  R.,  December  19, 1881;  Eva  May,  May 
28,  1883;  Robert  I.,  July  8,  1886;  and  Nora  J., 
February  15,  1888. 

With  the  exception  of  a  few  months  spent  in 
Carthage,  Mo.,  Mr.  Parrish  has  always  lived  in 
Jackson  County.  He  has  cleared  and  improved 
four  new  farms,  and  ten  years  ago  removed  to  his 
present  farm,  which  he  has  transformed  from  a 
barren  tract  into  one  of  the  most  highly  cultivated 
and  best  improved  farms  of  the  localitj-.  He  and 
his  wife  are  both  members  of  tlie  Methodist  Epis- 
copal Churcli.  In  politics  he  has  always  been  a 
stalwart  advocate  of  Republican  principles.  He 
served  as  County  Treasurer  and  Assessor  in 
1856-57,  but  resigned  before  the  expiration  of  his 
term.  He  has  been  Township  Assessor  two  terras, 
Justice  of  the  Peace  one  term,  and  was  re-elected, 
but  refused  to  qualif}-.  He  is  a  man  of  sterling 
worth  and  strict  integrity,  who  stands  high  in  the 
community,  having  the  warm  regard  of  many 
friends. 

.     ■ ^^P • 


\Y|  AMES  ALEXANDER,  one  of  Murphysboro's 
well  known  and  prominent  citizens,  is  also 
numbered  among  her  leading  business  men. 
He  is  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Alexander 
Brothers,  proprietors  of  a  foundry  and  machine 
shop,  and  is  also  President  of  the  Jackson  County 
Homestead  and  Loan  Association,  and  President 
of  the  Southern  Illinois  Building  and  Loan  Asso- 
ciation. He  was  born  seven  miles  from  Glasgow, 
Scotland,  in  Lanarkshire,  in  January,  1837.  His 
father,  John  Alexander,  was  born  in  the  eastern 
part  of  that  country,  and  for  many  years  was 
forester  to  Lord  Douglas.  He  receives  a  large  pen- 
sion, and  is  now  living  retired  at  iiis  home,  Alex- 
ander Cottage,  at  Uddington,  within  a  mile  of  the 
battlefield  of  Boswell  Bridge.  He  lias  reached  the 
advanced  age  of  ninety-eight.  He  was  formerly  a 
Ruling  Elder  in  the  Presbyterian  Church.  His 
wife  was  Margaret  Carlisle.  She  died  in  1860, 
leaving  six  children,  all  of  whom  survive  except 
one.     Two  are  3^et  living  in  this  country. 

James  Alexander,  who  is  the  j-oungest  of  the 
family,  attended  school  in  his  native    land    until 


fourteen  years  of  age,  and  then  spent  four  yeai-s 
in  a  merchant's  office  in  order  to  gain  a  i)ractical 
knowledge  of  commercial  business.  He  then  learned 
the  trade  of  a  machinist,  becoming  an  expert 
workman.  Tiie  year  1865  witnessed  his  emigra- 
tion to  New  York,  whence  he  made  his  way 
to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  he  worke<l  in  the  Eagle 
Foundry  until  1867.  He  then  secured  emplo^'- 
ment  in  the  Chicago,  Burlington  it  Quincy  Rail- 
road shops  at  Galesburg,  111.,  where  he  continued 
until  1871,  when  he  came  to  Murphysboro,  then  a 
small  town.  Here  he  engaged  in  the  dry-goods 
and  grocery  business  for  about  three  years,  when 
it  seemed  a  favorable  opportunity  to  establish  a 
foundr}'.  ft  was  in  1873,  the  j^ear  of  the  panic, 
when,  in  connection  with  his  brother,  he  began 
business.  Their  trade  has  steadily  increased,  and 
in  proportion  the}'  have  enlarged  their  facilities. 
They  now  have  a  machine  shop  35x80  feet,  a  black- 
smith shop  30x50  feet,  a  brick  foundry  40x60 
feet,  and  a  pattern  shop  and  storeroom  25x30 
feet.  Their  buildings  occup}-  an  acre  of  ground 
on  the  Mobile  &  Ohio  Railroad,  and  employment 
is  furnished  to  twenty-flve  men.  They  manufact- 
ure general  mining  machinery,  stationary  engines, 
mining  cages  and  cars,  pumps,  wheels  and  axles, 
and  are  the  patentees  and  sole  manufacturers  of 
the  Murray  Automatic  Hoisting  Cage.  They  are 
now  doing  a  large  business,  and  receive  ordeis 
from  all  over  the  country. 

The  lady  who  bears  the  name  of  Mrs.  Alexander 
was  in  her  maidenhood  Jessie  Glen.  They  were 
married  in  Scotland  in  1859,  and  to  them  were 
born  five  children,  four  of  whom  are  yet  liv- 
ing. John,  who  was  educated  in  Murphysboro  and 
St.  Louis,  is  cashier  for  the  firm  of  Kingman  &  Co., 
of  the  latter  city;  AValter  is  assistant  chief  engin- 
eer with  the  Consolidated  Coal  Company  of  St. 
Louis;  Mary  and  Kate  are  at  home;  Maggie  is  de- 
ceased. 

Other  business  interests  have  occupied  the  at- 
tention of  our  subject.  He  was  one  of  the  organ- 
izers of,  and  is  a  stockholder  in,  the  City  National 
Bank.  He  aided  in  organizing  tlie  Jackson  County 
Building  and  Loan  Association,  and  has  been  its 
only  President,  and  lias  been  the  President  of  the 
Southern  Illinois  Building  and  Loan  Association 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


551 


since  its  formation.  He  takes  considerable  inter- 
est in  civic  societies,  belonging  to  the  Masonic  and 
Knights  of  P^tliias  fraternities;  the  Ancient  Or- 
der of  United  Worlimen,  of  winch  he  is  Deputy 
Grand  Master;  the  Knights  of  Honor  and  tiie  La- 
dies of  Honor.  He  is  also  a  member  of  the  Grand 
Lodges  of  all  these  organizations  save  the  Masonic. 
He  .'ilways  exercises  his  right  of  francliise  in  sup- 
port of  tiie  Republican  party,  and  is  a  stalwart  ad- 
vocate of  its  principles.  In  social  and  business 
circles  he  is  alike  honored  and  esteemed,  for  an 
upright  and  straightforward  life  has  won  him  high 
regard.  In  his  Ijusiness  career  he  has  won  a  well 
merited  success,  and  is  now  at  the  head  of  one  of 
the  leading  industries  of  this  county. 


-^^^{ 


iB.mniJl 


\^^ 


OHARLES  HESSt^  is  one  of  the  worthy  Ger- 
,  man  citizens  of  Monroe  County,  and  now 
^_  lives  on  section  17,  township  3,  range  9 
west.  He  was  born,  reared  and  educated  in  Ger- 
many, where  his  early  life  was  quietly  passed,  un- 
marked by  any  event  of  sjiecial  importance.  When 
a  young  man  he  deterinined  to  seek  a  home  and 
fortune  in  the  New  World,  for  he  had  heard  much 
of  its  advantages  and  privileges,  and  believed  he 
might  tliereby  benefit  his  financial  condition. 

It  was  in  1851  that  Mr.  Hesse  sailed  for  Amer- 
ica. He  landed  in  New  Orleans,  whence  he  made 
his  way  up  the  Mississippi  to  St.  Louis,  continuing 
his  journey  from  that  place  to  Floraville,  St.  Clair 
County,  111.,  where  he  made  a  location.  He  lo- 
cated upon  a  farm,  a^nd  the  same  year  chose  as  a 
companion  and  helpmate  on  life's  journey  Miss 
Dora  Hesse.  She  claims  the  province  of  Saxony, 
Germany,  as  her  native  land,  and  like  her  husband 
she  came  to  America  in  1851.  Twelve  children 
were  horn  of  their  union,  but  eight  of  the  number 
died  in  infancy,  and  Augusta  died  in  July,  1893. 
Only  three  of  the  family  now  survive,  namely: 
Antonio,  Frederick  and  William.  The  last-named 
was  born  in  St.  Clair  County  in  the  year  1866, 
and  was  brouglit  by  his  parents  to  Monroe  Coun- 
ty, where  he  acquired  his  education  in  the  com- 
mon schools.  In  1887  he  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Mary  Berneking,  one   of    the  fair 


daughters  of  this  community.  Two  children  grace 
this  union.  For  ten  years  William  Hesse  success- 
tuUy  engaged  in  teaching,  and  in  November,  1892, 
embarked  in  merchandising,  which  pursuit  he  now 
follows.  At  this  writing  he  is  serving  as  Justice 
of  the  Peace  and  Township  Treasurer,  and  proves 
a  capable  officer  in  e.ach  position.  He  holds  mem- 
bership with  the  German  livangelical  Church. 

Charles  Hesse,' of  this  sketch,  was  a  soldier  in 
his  native  land,  and  fought  in  the  Prussian  War 
against  Denmark  in  1848.  After  coming  to  America 
he  lived  in  St.  Clair  County  until  1866,  when  with 
his  family  he  removed  to  Monroe  County,  where 
he  has  since  resided.  His  time  and  attention  have 
been  devoted  to  agricultural  pursuits,  and  through 
good  business  ability  he  has  made  his  career  a 
prosperous  one  and  acquired  a  comfortable  com- 
petence. In  1882  he  was  called  upon  to  mourn 
the  loss  of  his  wife,  a  lady  highly  respected  by  all 
who  knew  her.  She  was  a  member  of  the  United 
Evangelical  Church. 

William  Hesse  belongs  to  the  German  Evangeli- 
cal Church,  and  in  his  social  relations  is  a  Mas- 
ter Mason.  He  exercises  his  right  of  franchise  in 
support  of  the  Republican  party,  but  has  never 
sought  or  desired  public  office,  preferring  to  devote 
his  entire  attention  to  his  business  interests.  He 
is  a  loyal  citizen,  one  ever  alive  to  the  best  Inter- 
ests of  the  community  in  whicli  he  makes  his  home, 
and  throughout  Monroe  County  he  is  held  in  high 
regard. 


•jf/  EWIS  TREFFTZS,  formerly  a  prominent 
I  (^  citizen  of  township  5,  range  3,  departed 
jlLM,  this  life  July  31,  1893.  He  was  a  man  well 
and  favorably  known  throughout  Perry  County, 
and  as  every  life  has  a  history  of  its  own,  although 
in  appearance  it  may  seem  to  possess  little  to  dis- 
tinguish it  from  others,  the  reader  will  be  inter- 
ested in  learning  the  details  of  the  business  career 
and  private  life  of  our  subject. 

Mr.  Trefftzs  was  born  in  the  province  of  Wur- 
temberg,  Germany,  in  1832,  and  was  a  lad  of  six 
years  when  he  accompanied  his  parents,  Gabiiel 
and  Mary  Trefftzs,  on  their  emigration  to  the 
United  States.     Landing  in  New  York,  the  family 


552 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAt>mCAl,  RECORD. 


made  their  way  immediately  to  Ohio  and  located 

in  Gallia  County,  where  the}'  resided  for  about 
fourteen  years.  During  that  time  the)'  did  not 
|i\irciiase  land,  but  were  renters  until  coming  to 
Illinois  in  1854.  Upon  locating  in  the  Prairie 
■State,  they  selected  as  their  future  home  a  tract  of 
land  about  five  miles  southwest  of  Pinckneyville. 

Our  subject  learned  the  trade  of  a  wagon-maker 
in  Ohio,  and  after  coming  to  Illinois  was  thus  em- 
ployed for  ten  years  in  Pinckneyville.  During 
that  period  he  accumulated  a  little  property,  con- 
sisting of  a  wagon  shop  and  a  hou.se,  surrounded  by 
three  acres  of  land.  In  1871  he  traded  his  town 
property  for  two  hundred  acres  of  land  lying  north 
of  the  above  place.  At  his  death  he  left  his  widow 
only  one  hundred  and  twenty  acres,  having  given 
his  son  Robert  the  remaining  eighty. 

Of  the  sisters  and  brothers  of  our  subject,  we 
note  the  following:  Caroline  married  Wilson  Mc- 
Waid,  and  after  his  death  became  the  wife  of 
James  Montague;  Gabriel  died  January  14,  1894; 
Jacob  resides  in  Ohio;  Gottlcib  died  in  Germany; 
Mathias  is  a  resident  of  this  county;  Rebecca,  Mrs. 
John  Tyler,  makes  her  home  in  Kansas,  while  AV. 
Frank  is  a  resident  of  this  county.  The  lady  whom 
our  subject  married  in  1859  was  Miss  Philena  C, 
daughter  of  Thomas  and  Jane  (Packingham)  Sterl- 
ino-.  Her  parents  were  married  November  25, 
1830,  and  were  old  settlers  of  this  county,  iiaving 
come  hither  from  Lancaster,  Pa.,  in  1854.  The 
mother  passed  away  in  April,  1857;  the  father  sur- 
vived her  for  several  j'ears,  his  death  occurring 
March  21,  1868.  The  union  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Trefftzs  resulted  in  the  birth  of  four  sons  and 
three  daughters,  namely:  Frank,  Belle,  Robert,  Zoe, 
Maude,  Ethel  and  John.  Mr.  Treflftzs  was  a  de- 
voted member  of  the  Methodist  Church,  and  soci- 
ally was  a  charter  member  of  the  Pinckneyville 
Lodge,  1.  O.  O.  F.,  and  the  Grand  Army  of  the 
Republic.  Mrs.  Trefftzs  is  also  a  Methodist  in 
religion. 

In  1862  our  subject  enlisted  in  Company  C, 
Eightv-lirst  Illinois  Infantry,  and  served  in  the 
I'nion  army  until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  was 
wounded  and  captured  in  the  battle  of  Champion 
Hills,  Miss.,  just  prior  to  the  siege  of  Vicksburg. 
Three  weeks  later,  however,  he  was  released  from 


captivity  on  account  of  the  Confederates  having 
no  means  of  keeping  their  prisoners.  He  was  so 
seriously  wounded  that  his  recovery  was  not 
thought  possible.  On  regaining  the  Union  line, 
however,  he  was  well  taken  care  of,  and  although 
afterward  incapacitated  for  active  service,  did  effi- 
cient work  as  a  member  of  the  Veteran  Reserve 
Corps. 

Politically  a  Republican,  Mr.  Trefftzs  always 
took  a  leading  part  in  local  matters  and  was  thor- 
oughly posted  in  the  issues  of  the  hour.  He  held 
the  office  of  Count}'  Commissioner  for  three  years 
and  was  Trustee  of  the  .School  Board  for  some 
time.  The  death  of  our  subject  occurred  Jul}'  31, 
1893.  His  residence,  located  on  the  top  of  a  short 
rise  in  the  ground,  was  one  of  the  most  pleasant  in 
this  section,  and  was  the  abode  of  hospitality  and 
the  center  of  attractions  to  numerous  friends.  He 
was  well  known  to  the  citizens  of  the  county,  and 
his  correct  mode  of  living  gained  for  him  a  popu- 
larity whicli  was  merited  in  ever}-  respect. 

i^  TEPHEN  JANY,  the  owner  of  one  of  the 
fine  farms  of  Randolph  County,  living  on 
section  9,  township  7,  is  a  native  of  Po- 
land, and  his  birth  occurred  there  on  the 
10th  of  January,  1845.  His  father,  Joseph  Jany, 
was  born  in  the  same  locality,  and  lived  and 
died  in  his  native  home.  He  married  Wilhelmina 
Singer,  who  was  also  born  in  Poland,  and  who 
spent  her  entire  life  in  that  country.  Under  the 
parental  roof  our  subject  was  reared,  the  days  of 
his  childhood  and  youth  being  quietly  passed. 
When  a  young  man  of  twenty-four  years,  he  de- 
termined to  seek  a  home  beyond  the  Atlantic,  for 
he  believed  that  better  opportunities  and  privi- 
leges were  here  afforded  than  in  the  older  and 
more  thickly  settled  states  of  the  east.  On  land- 
ing on  the  shores  of  America  he  came  at  once  to 
the  west,  taking  up  his  residence  in  Chester,  III. 
For  three  years,  Mr.  Jany  worked  as  a  farm  hand, 
for  he  had  no  capital.  During  that  time,  however, 
he  saved  enough  from  his  earnings  to  make  a  pur- 
chase and  bought  the  farm  on  which  he  now  re- 
sides.    He  has  placed  the  laud  under  a  high  state 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


553 


of  cultivation,  and  has  erected  good  buildings  and 
made  other  improvements  that  add  to  the  value 
and  attractive  appearance  of  the  place.  He  has  a 
well  upon  his  farm  which  was  made  at  a  cost  of 
$250.  The  well  tilled  fields  and  neat  appearance 
of  the  place  indicate  the  careful  supervision  of  the 
owner,  who  is  justly  numbered  among  the  prac- 
tical and  progressive  agriculturist?  of  the  commu- 
nitv. 

In  the  year  1871,  Mr.  .Ian\'  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Marv  Gorznj-,  a  daughter  of  Val- 
entine Gorzny,  and  by  their  union  has  been  born 
a  family  of  six  children,  who  in  order  of  birth  are 
as  follows:  Frank,  .Joseph,  Mena,  Mary,  Rosa  and 
John  A.  The  family  circle  3'et  remains  unbroken 
bj-  the  hand  of  death,  and  the  children  are  all  3-et 
under  the  parental  roof.  The  .Tan}'  famil}-  is  one 
of  prominence  in  the  community,  the  household  is 
the  abode  of  hospitality  and  good  cheer,  and  its 
members  rank  high  in  the  social  circles  in  which 
the3^   move. 

In  his  political  views,  Mr.  Jan^'  is  a  Democrat. 
He  is  somewhat  conservative  and  has  never  aspired 
to  public  office,  preferring  to  devote  his  entire 
time  and  attention  to  his  business  interests,  in 
which  he  has  met  with  signal  success.  His  enter- 
prise and  industrj-  overcame  the  difl3culties  and 
obstacles  in  his  path  and  he  has  steadil}'  worked 
his  wa3'  upward  to  a  position  of  affluence.  He 
and  his  family  are  all  devout  membei-s  of  the 
Catholic  Church  and  are  worth3-  of  representation 
in  this  volume. 

^'AMES  W.  WEIR,  M.  D.  AYidely  known 
and  universallv  esteemed  as  a  citizen  and 
^^^.^1  honored  i)hysician.  Dr.  Weir  commands 
'^^fJ  the  entire  confidence  of  his  fellow-towns- 
men and  the  general  public.  He  has  been  engaged 
in  the  practice  of  his  profession  since  1882,  and  has 
a  large  and  paving  business,  which  extends  far  be- 
3'ond  the  corporate  limits  of  Sparta,  where  he  is 
residing. 

William  Weir,  the  father  of  our  subject,  was 
born  December  2,  18 13,  in  South  Carolina,  and  was 
only  eight  years  old  when  his  parents  came  to  this 
count}-,  settling  on  what  is  known  as  Lively  Prai- 
rie.    This  was  in  1821,  and  as  might  be  supposed, 


only  a  few  families  were  residing  here  at  that  time. 
Indians  were  frequent  callers  at  the  cabin  of 
Grandfather  Weir,  but  hostilities  were  prevented 
by  his  kindlv  treatment,  as  he  never  refused  them 
food  or  shelter.  Amid  these  surroundings,  void  of 
all  the  advantages  for  scholastic  and  social  im- 
provement, our  subject's  father  was  reared.  Not- 
withstanding these  hindrances,  he  possessed  a 
strong  will  and  a  good  mind,  and  developed  into 
a  man  whose  judgment  was  sought  in  his  neigh- 
borhood on  questions  touching  public  interest. 

December  31.  1835.  the  parents  of  our  subject 
were  married.  They  located  on  an  unimproved 
farm  about  one-half  mile  from  the  home  of  the 
elder  Mr.  Weir.  There  the  couple  enjoyed  a  peace- 
ful life  for  over  fifty-six  years,  when  death  broke 
the  ties  that  bound  their  hearts  together.  He  died 
July  15,  1802,  and  was  buried  in  Hill  Prairie  Ceme- 
ter3'  two  da3's  later,  Juh-  17.  In  his  political  rela- 
tions, the  father  of  our  subject  affiliated  with  the 
Republican  party,  and  while  he  never  held  or 
sought  office,  no  man  was  more  generall}-  known 
throughout  the  count3-.  He  was  a  devoted  mem- 
ber of  the  Reformed  Presb3'terian  Church,  in  which 
he  held  the  office  of  Elder  until  his  death.  He 
and  his  wife  were  the  parents  of  the  following 
children:  Robert,  who  died  in  infanc3-;  Joseph  T.; 
Elizabeth,  who  died  in  infancy;  and  James  W. 
The  mother  makes  her  home  with  her  son,  J.  AV. 
Weir.  She  was  born  May  18,  1818,  near  Vin- 
cennes,  Ind.,  and  was  not  quite  eighteen  3'ears  of 
age  when  she  married.  She  was  brought  in  in- 
fanc3'  to  this  county  b}'  her  parents,  who  died  here. 

The  paternal  grandparents  of  our  subject,  Rob- 
ert and  Jane  (Bo3-d)  Weir,  were  natives  of  Ireland, 
and  on  emigrating  to  America,  about  1800,  made 
their  home  in  South  Carolina.  On  coming  to 
Randolph  Count3-  the3'  were  classed  among  its 
earliest  pioneers.  Here  the  grandfatner  died  in 
1869,  and  the  grandmother  died  in  October,  1872. 
In  politics  he  was  a  Republican.  He  was  a  Deacon 
and  one  of  the  charter  members  of  the  Old  Bethel 
congregation  of  the  Reformed  Presbyterian  Church. 
His  parents,  Thomas  and  Mary  (Withrow)  Weir, 
were  married  in   1789,  in  County  Antrim,  Ireland. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  Randolph  Count3'  in 
1850,  and  remained  under  the  parental  roof  until 


554 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


1870.  He  is  a  man  of  fine  education,  being  a  grad- 
uate of  the  Ionia  (Mich.)  High  School.  He  was  a 
student  during  1875-76  in  the  liteiary  department 
of  the  Michigan  University,  and  was  graduated 
in  the  classical  course  of  1879  from  Monmouth 
(111.)  College.  In  that  year  he  returned  to  his 
home  in  Sparta,  where  he  spent  one  year  teaching 
in  the  grammar  school.  He  conducted  his  profes- 
sional studies  in  the  Missouri  Medical  College  at 
St.  Louis,  from  which  he  was  graduated  in  1882. 
He  at  once  began  the  practice  of  his  profession  iu 
Sparta,  and  as  a  successful  physician  and  skillful 
surgeon  he  has  built  up  ii  lucrative  practice. 

September  7,  1881,  Dr.  Weir  and  M.Ella,  daugh- 
ter of  Samuel  M.  and  Rachael  Joanna  (Kyle)  Fos- 
ter, of  BellefoQtaine,  Ohio,  were  united  in  mar- 
riage. Mrs.  Weir  has  three  brothers  and  two  sis- 
ters. Rev.  J.  M.  Foster,  of  Boston;  Rev.  F.  M.  Fos- 
ter, of  New  York  City;  Rev.  H.  G.  Foster,  of  Al- 
leghen}'.  Pa.;  Mrs.  Laura  C.  (Foster)  Boyd,  wife 
of  Rev.  P.  P.  Boyd,  of  Belle  Centre,  Ohio,  and 
Mrs.  Ada  (Foster)  Thompson,  wife  of  Rev.  D.  G. 
Thompson,  of  La  Junta,  Colo.  To  our  subject  and 
his  wife  were  born  three  children,  William  Foster, 
Rachel  Myia  and  Harold  Ewing.  In  his  political 
relations  the  Doctor  is  a  Republican.  With  his 
wife  he  is  an  active  member  of  the  United  Presby- 
terian Church.  His  pleasant  home  in  the  city  is 
the  abode  of  hospitality  and  the  center  of  attrac- 
tion to  numerous  friends. 


^.     *     !>^f 


i;h/ 


■.H 


1^^-- 


-^i  NTHONY  PATE.  .Jackson  County  con- 
WtUi  tains  many  valuable  and  highly  improved 
(i)  farms,  among  which  the  traveler  invaria- 
bl\'  pauses  to  notice,  wath  interest  and  ad- 
miration, the  fertile  tract  lying  on  sections  20  and 
21,  Somerset  Township,  and  owned  bj-  the  gentle- 
man whose  name  introduces  this  sketch.  The 
propert}-  consists  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  acres, 
upon  which  first-class  improvements  have  been 
made,  and  which  has  also  been  embellished  with 
substantial  and  conveniently  arranged  buildings. 
The  owner  of  this  valuable  farm  is  a  native  of 
Jackson  Countj',  and  was  born  June  17,  1843.  He 
is   a   son    of    Perleamon    and   Ravenna  (Draper) 


Pate,  both  of  whom  were  natives  of  Tennessee. 
The  paternal  ancestors  were  of  Irish  stock,  and  the 
great-grandfather  was  a  soldier  in  the  Revolution- 
ary War.  In  1841  Perleamon  Pate,  accompanied 
by  his  family,  removed  from  Tennessee  to  Illinois, 
the  journey  being  made  with  four  horses  and  one 
3'oke  of  cattle  and  a  wagon.  In  this  way  the  dis- 
tance was  traversed  and  the  tedious  journey  com- 
pleted. 

Arriving  at  Jackson  County,  the  family  pur- 
chased a  tract  of  Government  land  in  Somerset 
Township  and  settled  in  the  midst  of  surrounding 
woods,  their  home  being  a  hewed-log  house.  In 
that  early  period  of  the  settlement  of  the  county 
settlers  were  few  and  hardships  many,  nor  was 
the  Pate  family'  exempted  from  the  privations  of 
other  pioneers.  The  father,  who  was  a  man  of 
great  energy  and  firmness  of  purpose,  worked  his 
wa\'  upward  to  a  position  of  prominence  in  the 
township,  and  while  advancing  his  personal  inter- 
ests also  promoted  the  material  welfare  of  the 
people.  He  died  January  14,  1894,  honored  in  his 
old  age,  and  regarded  as  one  of  the  representative 
pioneers  of  the  county.  Having  met  with  success 
in  his  enterprises,  he  was  well-to-do  and  enjoj'ed 
every  comfort  calculated  to  enhance  the  pleasure 
of  living.  While  never  an  active  politician,  he 
was  a  loyal  Democrat  and  one  of  the  influential 
members  of  his  party. 

In  the  dail^'  routine  of  farm  work,  varied  by 
occasional  attendance  at  the  subscription  schools 
of  the  township,  the  subject  of  this  sketch  grew  to 
a  sturd}'  manhood.  He  was  united  in  marriage 
May  22,  1865,  with  Miss  Isabel  Carbaugh,  who  was 
born  in  Jackson  County,  111.,  May  28,  1844.  Her 
parents,  George  and  Mary  (Bowlby)  Carbaugh, 
came  to  Jackson  County  in  1838,  and  located  in 
Somerset  Township,  of  which  they  were  early  set- 
tlers, and  where  they  continued  to  reside  until 
death.  Of  their  children  the  following  survive: 
George  W.,  a  resident  of  St.  Louis,  Mo.;  Philip,  of 
Murphysboro;  Mary,  wife  of  F.  M.  Perry,  of  Car- 
bondale.  111.;  Julia  A.,  who  married  Monroe  Mar- 
tin and  lives  in  Jackson  County;  IBabel,  Mrs. 
Pate;  Harriet,  wife  of  Uriah  Blue,  of  Jackson 
County;  Martha,  Mrs.  Bradford  Morgan,  of  Jack- 
son County;  Mrs.  Jane  Mitchell,  a  widow  living 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


555 


in  Jackson  County;  and  William,  who  also  resides 
in  Jackson  Coiint3'. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Fate  are  the  parents  of  seven  liv- 
ing children,  namely:  William  E.;  Ravenna  A., 
wife  of  J.  E.  Rees;  Arley  XL,  Effie  M.,  Louisa  J., 
Gertrude  E.  and  Myrtle  I.  Mary  O.  and  Daniel 
are  deceased.  The  religious  home  of  the  family  is 
in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  South,  in  which 
Mr.  Pate  and  his  estimable  wife  are  active  work- 
ers. In  political  belief  he  is  a  Democrat,  devoted 
to  party  principles.  P'or  many  3'ears  he  served  as 
Justice  of  the  Peace. 


[(§), ^m^  .(SJ 


SAAC  HARDY  (deceased)  was  born  in  the 
town  of  Monkton,  Addison  County,  Vt.,  Sep- 
/Jl  tember  22,  1803.  His  parents  were  farmers, 
and  lie  followed  the  same  avocation  until  his 
twenty-first  year.  He  had  few  educational  advan- 
tages, and  those  were  confined  to  a  few  winters' 
schooling.  Being  one  of  the  younger  sons  in  a 
large  family,  and  ambitious  to  strike  out  for  him- 
self, he  proposed  to  relinquish  all  claims  on  his 
father's  estate  to  his  elder  brothers  in  consider- 
ation of  a  team  of  horses,  harness  and  a  wagon 
and  a  15  bill.  With  that  capital  and  a  light 
heart  lie  faced  the  future,  first  going  to  St.  Al- 
bans, Vt.,  where  for  a  time  he  trafflced  in  furs. 
From  there  he  went  to  Quebec,  Canada,  and  then  to 
Three  Rivers,  engaging  in  logging,  and  after  a  sea- 
sou's  work  that  brought  a  fair  measure  of  success, 
moved  to  Prescolt,  Canada,  and  engaged  in  build- 
ing public  works,  for  which  he  was  eminently  fjuali- 
fied.  His  contracts  included  the  building  of  a  lock 
and  rock  work  on  the  Redion  Canal,  and  he  was 
thus  engaged  until  the  winter  of  1839-40.  He  not 
only  accumulated  a  great  deal  of  money  for  those 
times,  but  contact  with  the  bus^'  world  had  made 
him  a  self-reliant  man  in  evciy  sense.  That  win- 
ter, the  sleighing  being  good,  he  drove  across  Mich- 
igan to  Chicago,  and  on  to  Lockport,  111.,  to  see 
William  Gooding,  the  chief  engineer  of  the  Illinois 
it  Michigan  Canal,  which  was  tlien  being  con- 
structed, to  learn  what  inducements  there  were  for 


himself  and  other  contractors  to  come  on  and  bid 
for  work.  He  returned  to  Canada,  reporting  so 
favorably  that  on  his  return  in  the  spring  he  was 
accompanied  by  George  Barnett,  George  Steele  and 
several  others,  all  of  whom  had  secured  contracts 
on  the  canal. 

Jlr.  Hardy's  first  job  was  rock  work  at  Romeo, 
later  receiving  the  contract  to  build  the  steam- 
boat basin  connecting  the  Illinois  River  with  the 
canal  terminus  at  La  .Salle.  His  bid  had  caused 
tlie  failure  of  one  contractor,  but  in  two  years  he 
finished  the  basin,  witli  a  profit  of  l^l  17,000.  In 
the  meantime  he  had  bid  for  Lock  No.  1,  at  Bridge- 
port, upon  the  identical  figures  that  had  caused 
a  former  contractor  to  suspend.  His  friends  in 
both  instances  predicted  failure,  and  demonstrated 
to  their  own  satisfaction  that  such  must  follow  at 
the  lock,  predicated  on  the  fact  that  the  stone  had 
to  be  waggoned  from  Lemonl.  He  obviated  that 
by  securing  the  same  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  already 
to  place,  bringing  it  around  tlie  Lakes. 

In  January,  1841,  Mr.  Hardy  married  Miss  Mary 
Adaline  Cutting,  a  daughter  of  Joseph  and  Fanny 
(Hatcli)  Cutting,  of  Norwich,  Vt.  About  this  time 
he  purchased  a  farm  across  the  Vermilion  River, 
near  La  Salle,  for  his  early  taste  for  fine  stock  had 
increased  with  the  passing  years.  He  built  the 
first  line  of  canal  boats,  seven  in  number,  and  also 
had  his  own  towing  stock,  and  a  steamer  on  the 
Illinois  River  to  tow  to  and  from  St.  Louis.  He 
established  a  dock  in  Chicago,  built  a  large  grain 
elevator  at  La  Salle  (where  he  had  a  lumber  J'ard), 
as  well  as  at  other  points  between  Chicago  and  St. 
Louis.  In  the  late  '40s  and  early  '50s,  railroads  were 
few  in  Illinois,  and  the  greater  part  of  both  the 
freiglit  and  passenger  traffic  between  the  south  and 
east  moved  by  the  wa}'  of  the  canal  and  steamers 
on  the  Illinois  River.  In  1849  he  built  a  large 
hotel,  for  those  times,  at  La  Salle,  called  the  Hardy 
House.  He  moved  to  Chicago,  where  he  lived  a 
few  years,  investing  in  city  and  near-by  acre 
property,  accumulating  hundreds  of  acres,  all  of 
which  is  now  within  the  city  limits.  In  1851  he 
removed  to  La  Salle,  and  there  passed  his  declin- 
ing years,  dying  September  14,  1864. 

Isaac  Hardy  was  a  typical  New  Englander — 
stood  six  feet,  three  inches,  and  weighed  about  two 


556 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


hundred  and  sixtj'  pounds — and  was  broadened  by 
contact  with  busy  times,  large  ventures  and  associa- 
tion with  intellectual  men.  He  numbered  among  his 
long  list  of  friends  such  men  as  Judge  McLean,  of 
Ohio,  Abbott  Lawrence  and  Honest  John  Davis,  of 
Massachusetts,  Judge  Douglass,  Abraham  Lincoln, 
Dick  Yates,  Gen.  "William  Thornton,  Lyle  Smith, 
Col.  E.  D.  Taylor,  William  B.  Ogden,  Alexander 
Campbell  and  others,  and  was  well  known  through- 
out the  Mississippi  Valle^'.  He  was  of  marked  in- 
dividuality, with  a  warm  heart  for  all  in  distress. 
His  friends  could  alwiiys  command  him,  and  while 
his  enemies  had  to  take  a  tongue  lashing,  yet 
wrongs  were  easily  overlooked  and  forgotten. 
Physical  and  mental  courage  he  had  without  limit. 
He  was  a  man  of  great  foresight  and  determina- 
tion, and  had  a  strong  will.  General  Grant  in  an 
interview  said:  "I  never  met  him  but  once,  but 
realized  that  he  was  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
men  I  had  ever  known — what  he  undertook  he 
would  finish." 

He  was  first  a  Henrv  Clay  Whig  in  politics,  and 
afterward  a  Republican.  In  1861  Governor  Yates 
tendered  hira  the  Commissary  Generalship  of  the 
state,  but  he  refused  it  on  account  of  poor  health. 
His  home  life  was  .as  sweet  as  tiie  da^'S  were  long. 
He  had  a  family  of  fourteen  children,  seven  of 
whom,  with  his  wife,  survive  him.  They  are:  Charles 
Isaac,  Abbott  Lawrence,  Kate  B.,  Jessie  L.,  Fanny 
J.,  Campbell  and  Theodore  Burton. 


jf^  ENRY  AUSTIN,  one  of  the  enterprising 
jvjl  and  successful  farmers  of  Kinkaid  Town- 
/^^^  ship,  Jackson  Count3%  residing  on  section 
(^)  2,  has  the  honor  of  being  a  native  of  this 
locality,  for  his  birth  occurred  in  Bradley  Town- 
ship, on  the  24th  of  December,  1850.  His  father, 
John  Austin,  was  a  native  of  Tennessee,  and  when 
a  3'oung  man  came  to  Illinois,  settling  in  Bradley 
Township.  Throughout  life  he  followed  farming, 
and  was  verj"  successful  in  his  undertakings.  His 
death  occurred  in  1872,  at  the  age  of  fifty-five.  His 
wife,  who  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Lucinda  Ptflk, 
p.assed  away  during  the  early  childhood  of  our 
subject.     Their  children   were,  Thomas,  deceased; 


Mary,  deceased  wife  of  Elias  Glenn;  Ann,  wife  of 
Frank  McBride;  Minerva,  deceased  wife  of  Will- 
iam Stanton;  Oliver,  deceased;  Matilda,  wife  of 
Willis  H.  Bilderback;  Mahala,  widow  of  Benjamin 
Bilderback;  Sarah,  who  died  in  ciiildliood;  John, 
Caroline  and  George,  all  deceased;  and  Jane,  widow 
of  Alfred  Wiggins.  After  the  death  of  his  first 
wife,  Mr.  Austin  wedded  Susan  Creatli,  and  they 
became  the  parents  of  three  children,  but  all  died 
in  early  life.  Mr.  Austin  was  a  popular  and  prom- 
inent citizen  of  this  county,  and  took  an  active 
part  in  politics,  supporting  the  Democracy.  So- 
cially, he  was  connected  with   the  Masonic   order. 

Henry  Austin  passed  his  boyhood  quietly  upon 
his  father's  farm,  and  early  became  familiar  with 
all  the  duties  of  agricultural  life.  When  he  had 
attained  man's  estate,  he  began  farming  for  himself 
on  the  place  where  he  now  lives.  It  was  then  a  tract 
of  wild  land,  but  with  characteristic  energy  he 
began  its  improvement.  The  farm  comprises  one 
hundred  and  forty-seven  acres,  much  of  which  is 
highly  cultivated.  The  tine  residence,  good  barns 
and  other  necessary  outbuildings  all  stand  as  mon- 
uments to  his  thrift  and  enterprise.  He  also  pur- 
chased the  old  home  farm  of  three  hundred  and 
twentj'  acres  in  the  same  township,  of  which  one 
hundred  and  sixtj-  acresare  under  the  plow.  Much 
of  the  remainder  is  pasture  land.  This  place  is 
also  improved  with  good  buildings  and  a  large 
orchard. 

On  the  21st  of  September,  1871,  Mr.  Austin  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Sophronia  J.  Tal- 
bott,  daughter  of  William  E.  Talbott.  Ten  chil- 
dren were  born  to  them.  Horace  G.,  born  Sep- 
tember 22,  1872,  was  married  July  .31,  1892,  to 
Lavanda  Jarrett,  and  they  have  one  child,  Grace. 
The  other  children  arc,  Albert,  born  September 
14,  1874;  Emma,  December  8,  1876;  Harry,  born 
September  27,  1878,  and  died  September  29,  1880; 
Charlie  E.,  born  August  10,  1880;  Lydia,  born 
October  1, 1882,  and  died  August  30, 1889;  Freddie 
H.,  born  April  20,  1885;  George  Morris,  Septem- 
ber 19,  1887;  Minnie  Beatrice.  December  11,  1889; 
and  John  Conner,  November  11,  1893. 

Mr.  Austin  is  a  member  of  the  Masonic  frater- 
nity of  Ava  and  the  Knights  of  Honor.  He  has 
always  been  a  faithful  Democrat  and  is  prominent 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


559 


in  local  politics.  He  has  served  as  Highway  Com- 
missioner, was  elected  Justice  of  the  Peace,  but 
refused  to  qualify,  and  is  now  holding  the  office  of 
Collector  for  the  fourth  term,  discharging  his  du- 
ties with  a  promptness  and  fidelity  which  win 
him  high  commendation.  Pleasant  and  genial  in 
manner,  he  has  many  friends  throughout  the  com- 
munity, and  the  high  regard  in  which  he  is  held 
is  justly  merited. 


JOHN  W.  LEWIS,  who  occupies  the  responsi- 
ble position  of  master  mechanic  of  the  Chi- 
cago &  Texas  Railroad,  claims  Pennsylvania 
as  the  state  of  his  nativity.  Born  in  Min- 
ersville,  Schuylkill  County,  October  24,  1843,  he 
is  a  son  of  William  H.  and  Martha  (Matthews) 
Lewis,  both  of  whom  were  natives  of  Wales  and 
were  there  married.  Shortly  after  their  union  they 
moved  to  Schuylkill  County,  Pa.,  where  the  father 
engaged  in  mining.  Later  he  removed  to  Luzerne 
Count}-,  Pa.,and  became  Superintendent  and  fore- 
man of  the  coal  mines  of  that  region.  He  died  in 
1881,  at  the  advanced  age  of  eightj'-four.  His 
wife  died  when  our  subject  was  quite  young.  They 
were  the  parents  of  four  children,  of  whom  three 
are  now  living. 

The  subject  of  this  record  was  reared  In  Hazle- 
ton,  Luzerne  County,  acquired  his  education  in 
the  common  schools,  and  assisted  his  father  as 
foreman  of  the  mines.  He  later  served  an  appren- 
ticeship as  a  machinist,  but  in  1861,  when  the  war 
broke  out,  he  abandoned  the  pursuits  of  peace  to 
aid  his  country  in  the  struggle  for  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  Union.  He  joined  Company  N, Twenty- 
eighth  Pennsylvania  Infautr}',  was  mustered  in  at 
Pliiladelpliia  and  assigned  to  the  Arm)'  of  the  Po- 
tomac. The  regiment  numbered  twenty  compan- 
ies, and  participated  in  the  battles  of  Autietam, 
Chancellorsville.  Gettysburg  and  others. 

Later,  Compan)'  N  was  transferred,  becoming 
Company  C,  One  Hundred  and  Forty-seventh 
Pennsylvania  Infantry,  and  was  sent  to  Tennessee 
under  General  Hooker.  They  then  took  part  in 
the  battles  of  Lookout  Mountain,  Missionary 
19 


Ridge  and  Ringgold,  Ga.,  and  went  into  winter 
quarters  at  Wauhatchie  Valley.  Mr.  Lewis  there 
veteranized  and  went  home  on  a  thirty  da.ys'  fur- 
lough. When  his  time  had  expired  he  rejoined  his 
command,  and  participated  in  the  engagements  at 
Resaca,  Dallas,  Peach  Tree  Creek,  Snake  Creek 
Gap,  Buzzard's  Roost,  Kenesaw  Mountain,  the 
siege  of  Atlanta,  the  celebrated  march  to  the  sea, 
and  then  through  the  Carolinas.  He  took  part  in 
the  battle  of  Goldsboro,  witnessed  the  surrender 
of  .Johnston  at  Raleigh,  went  on  the  forced  march 
to  AVashington,  D.  C,  and  participated  in  the 
Grand  Review  in  the  Capitol  City.  He  was  then 
honorably  discharged,  after  three  years  and  eleven 
months  of  faithful  and  arduous  service. 

Returning  home,  Mr.  Lewis  continued  to  work 
in  the  machine  shop  for  about  a  year,  and  then  in 
1866  emigrated  to  Clinton  County,  Iowa,  where  he 
worked  at  locomotive  building  in  the  shops  of  the 
Chicago  it  Northwestern  Railroad  three  years.  The 
succeeding  four  years  were  passed  as  a  machinist 
in  the  shops  of  the  Chicago,  Rock  Island  &  Pacific 
Railroad,  at  Rock  Island,  111.,  after  which  he  went 
to  Rapids  City,  111.,  where  he  put  up  the  machinery 
at  a  mine.  He  then  became  Superintendent  of  the 
mine,  serving  as  such  until  the  spring  of  1879, 
at  which  time  he  came  to  Murpliysboro  .as  machin- 
ist for  the  Carbondale  Coal  Railroad,  now  the 
Cairo  Short  Line.  He  remained  in  the  shops  at 
Harrison  during  their  continuance  at  that  place, 
and  in  1883  became  a  machinist  of  Grand  Tower. 
In  1886  he  was  promoted  to  the  i)osition  of  master 
mechanic  of  the  Chicago  it  Texas  Railroad  at 
Murph^sboro.  He  has  the  entire  supervision  of 
all  the  mechanical  work,  there  being  some  thirty 
hands  employed  in  the  machine  shop,  car  shop, 
paint  shop  and  boiler  shop.  They  rebuild  their 
own  locomotives.  The  shops  have  been  greatly 
improved  since  Mr.  Lewis  took  charge,  and  the 
work  in  the  various  departments  is  admirablj' 
conducted. 

Our  subject  was  first  married  in  York  County, 
Pa.,  his  wife  being  Miss  Mary  Bowen,  a  native  of 
that  place.  She  died  in  Jackson  County,  leaving 
three  children:  Mrs.  Ella  Jeffry,  of  Peoria,  111.; 
and  William  and  John,  who  are  firemen  ou  the 
Chicago  i&  Texas  Railroad.     For  his  second  wife 


560 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Mr.  Lewis  chose  Miss  Eliza  Francis,  a  native  of 
P^ngland.  They  have  one  son,  Philip.  The  lady 
is  a  member  of^the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church. 
Socially,  Mr.  Lewis  is  connected  with  the  Masonic 
lodge  of  Port  Byron,  111.,  and  the  Royal  Arch 
chapter  of  Murphysboro.  In  politics  he  is  a  Re- 
publican. 

The  parents  of  Mrs.  Lewis,  Elisha  and  Emma 
(Hancock)  Francis,  were  natives  of  England,  and 
came  to  America  in  1849,  when  their  daughter  Eliza 
was  but  one  year  old.  For  twelve  months  they 
remained  in  New  Jersey,  after  which  they  moved 
to  Grant  County,  AVis.,  and  there  resided  until 
1865.  Later  thej-  spent  three  and  one-half  years 
in  Hardin  County,  111.,  and  from  there  came  to 
Murphysboro,  111.  In  1874  the  father  was  thrown 
from  a  load  of  corn  and  killed.  Tiie  mother  still 
survives,  and  makes  her  home  in  Murphysboro. 
They  had  a  family  of  seven  children,  of  whom 
three  are  now  living:  Mrs.  Lewis,  Elijah  and 
Emilv. 


♦^ 


^ 


ETER  WILL  GRIFFITH,  an  honored  vet- 
eran of  the  late  war  who  is  now  living  in 
^  Murphysboro,  and  who  is  a  representative 
of  one  of  the  prominent  pioneer  families 
of  Jackson  County,  was  born  in  vSomerset  Township 
December  28,  1845.  His  grandfather,  John  Grif- 
flth,  was  a  native  of  Wales,  and  after  emigrating 
to  this  country  became  a  farmer  of  Pennsylvania. 
In  Somerset  County  of  the  Keystone  State,  John 
J.  Griffith,  father  of  our  subject,  was  born  and 
reared,  and  when  a  young  man  came  west  with 
teams  and  wagons,  making  a  permanent  location 
in  Jackson  County.  Here  he  entered  land,  built 
a  small  log  house  .and  began  the  development  of  a 
farm.  He  engaged  quite  extensively  in  the  rais- 
ing of  stock,  which  he  drove  to  market  in  .St.  Louis, 
and  his  wheat  he  hauled  to  Chester  in  the  early 
days.  During  the  war  he  engaged  in  buying 
horses  for  the  Government  and  was  a  very  success- 
ful trader.  He  owned  four  hundred  and  forty 
acres  of  land  and  became  well-to-do.  He  belonged 
to   the    Lutheran  Church  and  was  a  Republican  in 


politics.  His  death  occurred  in  1863.  at  which 
I  time  his  entire  family  were  ill  with  tyi)iioid  fever. 
j  The  father,  mother,  three  daughters  and  a  son  all 
died  within  three  mouths.  The  mother,  Mrs.  Har- 
riet Griffith,  was  a  daughter  of  Peter  Will,  one  of 
the  honored  pioneers  of  this  county.  In  the  fam- 
ily were  eleven  children,  seven  of  whom  are  yet 
living. 

Our  subject  early  became  familiar  with  farm 
work  in  all  its  details,  and  experienced  the  ardu- 
ous labor  of  developing  wild  land.  His  educational 
privileges  were  limited  to  the  opportunities  of  the 
subscription  schools.  In  1864,  at  the  age  of  nine- 
teen, he  joined  Company  H,  Eighteenth  Illinois 
Infantry,  and  was  mustered  out  at  Springfield. 
The  troops  went  down  the  Mississippi  and  up  the 
Red  and  Yazoo  Rivers,  participated  in  the  Bank's 
expedition  and  raised  the  blockade  at  Greenville, 
Miss.  Mr.  Griffith  was  actively  engaged  during 
his  entire  service,  which  ended  only  with  the  close 
of  the  war,  when  he  went  to  Yicksburg  and  was 
honorably  discharged. 

Returning  to  his  home,  Mr.  Griflith  formed  a 
partnership  with  Dr.  F.  C.  Bierer  in  the  dry-goods 
business,  which  continued  three  3'ears,  when  he 
sold  out  and  turned  his  attention  to  farming  in 
Somerset  Township.  His  line  of  work  was  again 
changed  in  1870,  when  he  established  a  liver3' 
stable,  which  he  carried  on  for  eight  years  in  con- 
nection with  dealing  in  stock.  He  bought  and 
shipped  cattle  and  hogs  to  St.  Louis,  and  in  that 
venture  met  with  good  success.  While  in  the  liv- 
ery business  he  raised  grain  and  hay  enough  to 
feed  his  stock.  He  had  thirty-six  head  of  horses, 
a  fine  line  of  carriages,  and  from  the  public  he  re- 
ceived a  liberal  patronage.  As  his  financial  re- 
sources increased  he  made  judicious  investments 
in  land  and  now  owns  four  good  farms,  compris- 
ing four  hundre<l  and  eighty  acres.  In  the  city 
he  also  owns  five  good  residences  and  is  a  stock- 
holder in  the  City  National  Bank  and  the  Jackson 
County  Homestead  and  Loan  Association. 

Mr.  Griffith  has  been  twice  married.  He  first  wed- 
ded Miss  Sarah  Francis,  a  native  of  Westmoreland, 
Pa.,  where  their  marriage  was  celebrated.  She  died 
in  Murphysboro,  leaving  (^ne  son,  Frank  P.,  who  is 
now  in   the   freight  and  transfer  business  in  Mur- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BlOGRAPmCAL   RECORD. 


561 


physboro.  In  East  Cairo,  Ky.,  in  1881,  Mr.  Grif- 
fith married  Miss  Leona,  daughter  of  B.  F.  Sams, 
of  Cartersville,  and  a  native  of  Jonesboro. 

Sociall}',  Mr.  Griftitii  is  connected  with  Aniit}' 
Lodge,  I.  O.  O.  F.;  the  Knights  of  Honor,  and  Wor- 
then  Post  No.  128,  G.  A.  R.  He  also  belongs  to 
the  Zion  Lutheran  Church  and  is  one  of  its  liberal 
supporters.  In  politics  he  is  a  stalwart  Republican 
and  has  served  as  a  member  of  the  County  Central 
Committee.  He  has  been  honored  with  local  offices, 
was  twice  elected  Alderman  from  the  First  Ward 
and  was  once  a  member  of  the  Council  from  the 
Fourth  Ward.  He  was  as  faithful  in  his  official 
duties  as  when  on  the  field  of  battle  aiding  in 
the  defense  of  the  Union.  In  his  business  he  has 
met  with  excellent  success,  his  enterprise,  indus- 
try, perseverance  and  careful  management  having 
brought  him  a  handsome  competency. 


GT; 


^^EORGE  RICHARDSON,  M.  D.,  deceased, 
as  one  of  tlie  most  successful  physicians 
of  Randol|)h  County.  He  conducted  a  good 
practice  in  township  6,  range  7,  for  a  number  of 
years  and  became  a  well  known  and  honored  citi- 
zen, as  well  as  a  noted  phj'sician.  He  was  born 
in  Atherton,  a  small  town  in  Warwickshire,  Eng- 
land, June  24,  1833,  where  both  of  his  parents  died 
when  he  was  quite  young.  He  attended  school  in 
his  native  place,  and  when  very  young  began  to 
read  medicine  under  Dr.  Richings.  AVhen  but  a 
lad  of  fifteen  he  came  to  this  country  with  his  pre- 
ceptor, locating  in  Winnebago  County,  111.  Dur- 
ing the  winter  of  1856-57  Mr.  Richardson  attended 
the  Rusli  Medical  College  at  Chicago,  and  the  fol- 
lowing year  came  to  Randolph  County,  locating 
a  mile  south  of  Ellis  Grove.  Here  he  began  to 
practice  his  profession  and  soon  worked  his  way 
into  the  favor  and  confidence  of  the  entire  com- 
munit3'.  He  was  for  a  long  time  the  only  practic- 
ing physician  in  the  neighborhood,  where  he  be- 
came noted  for  his  rare  skill  in  the  treatment  of 
difficult  cases. 

In  April,  1880,  in  Ellis  Grove,  Dr.  Richardson's 
great,  warm  heart  was  stilled  forever,  and  his  weary 
brain  and  overtaxed  body  found  rest  in  death.    He 


was  mourned  by  many  far  beyond  his  sorrowing 
home  circle,  for  he  was  the  beloved  physician  and 
cherished  friend  in  many  a  household,  where  his 
presence  had  brought  healing,  or  had  soothed  the 
last  hours  of  the  dying.  In  his  death  his  profession 
was  deprived  of  one  of  its  noblest  representatives, 
and  the  citizenship  of  the  community  suffered  a 
sad  loss.  He  was  a  consistent  member  of  the  Epis- 
copal Church,  and  socially  was  connected  with 
Kaskaskia  Lodge  No.  86,  F.  &  A.  M.  He  was  an 
advocate  of  the  Democracy  politically,  and  was  an 
active  worker  for  his  party's  principles. 

Dr.  Richardson  in  1861,  and  again  in  1863,  vis- 
ited his  old  home  in  England,  and  during  the  lat- 
ter trip  was  married  to  Miss  Ann  Brooker.a  native 
of  Chelsea,  London,  the  ceremony  occurring  Jan- 
uary 26,  1864.  On  his  return  the  following  spring 
he  moved  on  a  farm  near  Kaskaskia,  where  he  re- 
sided until  the  death  of  his  wife,  in  the  fall  of 
of  1865.  He  then  resumed  his  practice  in  Ellis 
Grove.  On  the  28th  of  February,  1867,  Dr.  Rich- 
ardson was  again  married,  taking  as  his  life  com- 
panion Miss  Mary  Lilly,  a  daughter  of  John  I.  and 
Eliza  (Fink)  Lilly,  both  natives  of  Pennsylvania, 
who  came  to  Ellis  Grove  in  1853.  To  this  marriage 
were  born  two  children:  Annie  E.,  who  is  the  wife 
of  Elias  Hall,  and  makes  her  home  in  Ellis  Grove; 
and  Carrie  A.,  who  was  married  to  John  Feaman 
and  died  two  years  later.  Mrs.  Richardson  is  still 
making  her  home  in  Ellis  Grove,  where  she  is  sur- 
rounded by  hosts  of  friends  and  acquaintances.  She 
is  a  devout  member  of  the  Catholic  Church. 


0'  RRA  HAVILL,  of  Chester,  is  now  the 
chief  clerk  at  the  Southern  Illinois  Peni- 
^^  tentiary,  and  was  the  first  Democrat  ap- 
pointed by  Warden  Baker  under  the  new  admin- 
istration. He  is  a  prominent  young  man  and  has 
had  many  years  of  political  training,  his  early 
education  in  that  line  having  been  under  "Bob" 
AVilbanks  and  Frank  Havill. 

Mr.  Havill  was  born  February  3,  1868,  in  Mt. 
Carmel,  111.,  and  is  a  son  of  Frank  W.  and  Lizzie 
Havill.  He  has  served  as  foreman  of  the  mails  in 
the  Chicago  postolfice  and  was  also  in  the  railway 


562 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


mail  service  under  President,  Cleveland's  first  ad- 
ministration. For  two  3ears  he  was  Master  in  Chan- 
cery in  Wabash  County.  He  has  had  several  years' 
experience  in  newspaper  work  also,  having  served 
as  manager  of  the  Mt.  Carniol  Register.  Politically, 
he  is  a  strong  Altgeld  man  and  an  ardent  admirer 
of  David  Bennett  Hill. 

^    "^  I* 

^/OHN  T.  BEKM,  the  able  editor  and  pro- 
prietor of  the  Du  Quoin  Tribune,  claims 
^_^  Penns3'lvania  as  the  state  of  his  nativity. 
(^^  He  was  born  in  Pittsburg  on  the  23d  of 
August,  1839,  and  when  five  years  of  age,  in  1844, 
was  brought  to  Illinois  by  his  father,  the  fam- 
ily settling  in  Alton,  in  which  city  he  was  reared 
to  manhood.  There  he  al.so  acquired  his  educa- 
tion. At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  went  into  the  of- 
fice of  the  Alton  Telegraph,  where  he  learned  the 
printer's  trade,  and  worked  his  way  upward  until 
he  became  one  of  the  owners  of  that  paper  in 
1860. 

When  the  war  broke  out,  Mr.  Beem  was  just 
getting  a  good  start  in  business,  but  the  President 
issued  his  call  for  troops  and  he  sacrificed  his 
business  interests  for  the  good  of  his  country. 
He  donned  the  blue  and  entered  the  service  in 
1862,  as  a  member  of  Company  G,  Ninety-seventh 
Illinois  Infantry.  He  remained  with  his  regiment 
onl^'  six  months,  when  he  was  placed  on  detached 
duty.  He  then  served  for  one  j-ear  with  the  Chi- 
cago Mercantile  Battery,  and  for  a  year  and  a- 
half  was  stationed  at  the  headquarters  of  Gens. 
T.  E.  G.  Ransom,  M.  Lawler  and  E.  R.  S.  Canby  as 
clerk.  He  was  alwajs  faithful  to  the  duty  entrusted 
to  his  care,  and  when  the  war  was  over  received 
an  honorable  discharge. 

The  country  no  longer  needing  his  services, 
Mr.  Beem  returned  to  his  old  home  in  Alton,  and 
in  1868  removed  to  Du  Quoin  to  become  the  fore- 
man on  the  Tribune.  On  the  7th  of  November, 
1870,  he  became  one  of  the  proprietors  of  the 
paper,  and  continued  his  connection  with  it  as 
part  owner  until  1887,  when  he  became  sole  pro- 
prietor. Since  that  time  he  has  had  entire  control 
of  the    Tribune,  and  it   is   due  to  his  energy  and 


push  that  it  is  one  of  the  most  able,  clean  and 
progressive  papers  of  southern  Illinois.  There  are 
few  newspaper  men  that  put  more  hard  work  intf) 
the  management  of  a  paper  than  does  Mr.  I'.cciii. 
When  he  is  not  at  the  editorial  desk,  he  is  found 
in  the  press  room  or  engaged  in  superintending  the 
job  department.  Owing  to  liis  good  management 
and  well  directed  efforts,  he  has  built  up  a  large 
business  and  weil  deserves  his  liberal  patronage. 

On  the  17th  of  May,  1866,  Sir.  Beem  was  united 
in  marriage  with  Miss  Elvina  McGowen,  a  native 
of  Butler  County,  Pa.,  and  a  daughter  of  James 
McGowen.  She  died  June  10,  1878,  leaving  two 
children:  Delia,  now  an  assistant  in  the  Tribune 
olHce;  and  Loren.  Mr.  Beem's  father  and  two  of 
his  brotheis  also  did  service  in  the  Civil  War,  and 
both  brothers  died  from  the  effects  of  hard  service. 
His  father  is  still  living  in  Alton,  at  the  advanced 
age  of  ninety-two  years. 

Mr.  Beem  is  an  active  member  of  Loomis  Post 
No.  106,  G.  A.  R.,  and  in  [lolitical  sentiment  is  a 
stalwart  Republican,  but  has  never  sought  or  de- 
sired public  office,  preferring  to  devote  his  entire 
time  and  attention  to  his  business  interests.  He 
is  wide-awake  to  the  best  interests  of  the  city,  and 
is  ever  ready  to  aid  in  the  advancement  of  those 
enterprises  which  are  calculated  to  promote  the 
general  welfare. 

1£  c=J  •<    T    >■  [S  §) 

,EV.  J.  A.  F.  W.  MUELLER,  Pastor  of  the 
St.  John's  Lutheran  Church, Chester.  While 
there  are  manj'  avenues  by  which  mental 
jj)abilit3'  leads  to  distinction,  there  is  scarcely 
one  of  more  benefit  to  humanity  as  a  family  than 
that  of  caring  for  the  immortal  soul.  A  pastor's 
duty  entails  upon  him  a  great  deal  of  responsibil- 
it}'.  Not  only  must  he  guide  people  safely  through 
the  shoals  of  this  world,  but  prepare  them  for  the 
safe  passage  into  the  unknown  world.  Among  the 
men  who  have  labored  early  and  late  to  accom- 
plish this  purpose  and  lobe  of  inestimable  benefit 
to  frail  humanity,  ranks  the  Rev.  Mr.  Mueller. 

A  native  of  Prussia,  our  subject  was  born  in  the 
province  of  Saxony,  October  29,  1825.  He  is  the 
sou  of  Christian  and  Mary  Mueller,  also  natives  of 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAl'mCAL  RECORD. 


563 


the  Fatlierland.  The  parents  crossed  the  Atlantic 
to  America  in  1839,  and  landing  in  !Xew  Orleans, 
made  their  wa\'  up  the  Mississippi  River  to  St. 
Louis.  From  the  latter  place  they  went  to  Witten- 
berg, Perr}-  County,  Mo.,  where  the  elder  Mr. 
Mueller  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  brick,  and 
where  he  was  residing  at  the  time  of  his  decease  in 
1846.  The  death  of  his  wife  occurred  two  years 
previously,  during  the  great  flood  of  18-44. 

Mr.  Mueller  of  this  sketch  spent  the  first  thir- 
teen years  of  his  life  in  his  native  land  and  when 
old  enough  attended  the  model  schools  near  his 
Lome.  After  coming  to  America  he  acquired  some 
knowledge  of  the  English  language  by  a  six 
months'  attendance  in  the  schools  of  Perrj'  Coun- 
ty, Mo.  After  his  confirmation,  in  1839,  he  entered 
the  Lutheran  Concordia  .Seminar}',  in  that  county, 
where  he  carried  on  his  studies  from  1839  to  1847. 
In  the  last  named  year  he  was  ordained  for  the 
rainistr}'  by  the  Rev.  F.  Buenger,  of  St.  Louis. 

For  the  first  nine  j'ears  of  his  ministerial  labors, 
our  subject  was  engaged  in  preaching  near  .St. 
Louis,  and  later  was  called  to  Chicago,  where  he  re- 
mained from  1856  to  1863,  also  engaging  in  pioneer 
work.  In  the  latter  j-ear  he  was  called  to  Pittsburgh, 
Pa.,  where  he  took  charge  of  a  large  city  congrega- 
tion, over  which  he  had  charge  until  1870.  Then 
going  into  Somerset  County,  that  state,  he  acted  as 
Pastor  over  four  small  congregations  until  1875, 
at  which  time  he  came  to  Chester,  111.  At  the 
time  of  taking  up  the  work  in  this  place,  the  Rev. 
Mr.  Mueller  found  a  very  small  following,  but  at 
the  present  time  his  congregation  numbers  one 
hundred  and  twenty-five  families.  Mr.  Mueller 
has  a  pleasant  and  attractive  appearance,  is  bright, 
read}'  and  a  lively  speaker,  and  commands  the  at- 
tention of  his  audience  from  the  beginning.  His 
deliver}'  is  good,  his  manner  earnest,  and  he  handles 
his  subject  as  one  perfect!}'  at  home.  In  1879  he 
had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  erected  a  fine  brick  edi- 
fice, in  which  the  congregation  meets.  He  also  has 
a  large  parochial  school  in  connection  with  the 
church,  and  he  procured  his  teachers  from  the 
Lutheran  Normal  .School  located    at  Addison,   111. 

In  May,  1849,  our  subject  and  Miss  Jane  Hoehne 
were  united  in  marriage.  Mrs.  Mueller  was  a  na- 
tive of  Saxony,  Germany,  but  at  the  time  of  her 


marriage  was  a  resident  of  Perry  County,  Mo. 
She  died  in  Chester  in  1877,  after  having  become 
the  mother  of  ten  children,  seven  of  whom  are  now 
living:  Herman;  Gotthold;  Concordia,  the  wife 
of  Rev.  C.  Frank,  of  Evansville,  Ind.;  Martin;  Ma- 
tilda, now  Mrs.  Charles  Waschilewsky,  of  Frank- 
enmuth,  Mich.;  William,  a  teacher;  and  Gustave,  a 
minister  at  West  Point,  Neb.  The  present  wife  of 
our  subject,  to  whom  he  w.as  married  in  1880,  bore 
the  maiden  name  of  Christiana  Seidler.  and  was 
also  a  native  of  Perry  County,  Mo. 


]^^-^[ 


O.  YOUNGER,  proprietor  of  The  Fair,  a 
^  dry-goods  establishment  of  Murphysboro, 
/ii  was  born  in   Bunker  Hill,  III.,  October  30, 

1865,  and  is  the  eldest  of  a  family  of  six  children, 
whose  parents  were  John  and  Annie  E.  (Campbell) 
Younger,  the  former  a  native  of  Kentucky,  and  the 
latter  of  Madison  County.  111.,  where  the  maternal 
grandfather,  John  Campbell,  a  native  of  New  Jer- 
sey, settled  at  a  very  early  day,  becoming  one  of 
its  pioneei's.  John  Younger  was  reared  in  his  na- 
tive state,  and  when  a  young  man  went  to  St. 
Louis,  where  he  joined  the  Union  army,  serving 
for  three  months.  He  afterward  located  in  Bunker 
Hill,  and  is  now  engaged  in  farming  in  that  lo- 
cality. 

No  event  of  special  importance  occurred  during 
the  boyhood  and  youth  of  our  subject,  which  were 
quietly  passed  upon  the  homestead  farm  near 
Bunker  Hill.  The  common  schools  aflforded  him 
his  educational  privileges,  and  to  his  father  he 
gave  the  benefit  of  his  services  until  nineteen 
years  of  age.  He  then  determined  to  follow  some 
other  pursuit  than  that  to  which  he  had  been 
reared,  and  in  1884  went  to  .St.  Louis.  Mo.,  where 
he  began  clei'king. 

After  a  short  time,  however,  he  entered  the  em- 
ploy of  Russack  d:  Sons,  wholesale  clothing  dealers, 
and  traveled  as  their  representative  through  Ne- 
braska, Iowa  and  Missouri.  He  continued  with 
that  firm  for  five  years  and  did  a  good  business  in 
their  interests. 

In  1891,  in  Hoyleton,  111.,  was  celebrated  the 
marriage  of  Mr.  Younger  and  Miss  Mamie  Hake, 


564 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


a  native  of  that  place.  Their  residence  is  situated 
on  Rorer  Street,  and  their  home  is  brightened  by 
the  presence  of  a  little  son,  Ra\-mond.  During 
their  short  residence  here  the  parents  have  already 
won  many  friends. 

In  the  spring  of  1892  Mr.  Younger  left  the 
road,  locating  in  Murph^-sboro,  where  lie  formed  a 
partnership  with  M.  Evans  in  the  dry-goods  busi- 
ness, opening  a  store  which  is  known  as  The  Fair. 
This  connection  still  continues.  The  members  of 
the  firm  are  both  men  of  good  business  ability, 
progressive  and  enterprising,  and  from  the  begin- 
ning have  enjo3"ed  a  good  trade,  which  is  steadily 
increasing.  They  carr}'  a  fine  line  of  dry  goods, 
clothing,  and  in  fact  everything  found  in  a  first- 
class  general  merchandise  store.  Mr.  Younger  in  his 
political  views  is  a  Republican.  He  is  still  a  young 
man,  but  he  has  displayed  the  qualifications  which 
lead  to  a  successful  business  career,  and  if  the  past 
is  a  criterion,  we  feel  assured  that  his  future  will 
be  a  prosperous  one. 


.  JOHN  M.  BRYAN  is  the  capable 
efHcient  Superintendent  of  the  public 
schools  of  Jackson  Count}-,  who  makes  his 
\  home  in  Murphysboro.  A  native  of  Mis- 
sissippi, he  was  born  February  6,  1853,  and  is  a 
son  of  E.  W.  and  Mary  (Medley)  Bryan.  The  fa- 
ther was  born  in  Sparta,  Tenn.,  and  was  of  Scotch- 
Irish  descent.  His  wife  was  born  in  White  County, 
Tenn.,  near  Sparta.  For  some  years  he  engaged 
in  merchandising  in  his  native  state,  but  after- 
ward removed  to  Fulton,  Miss.  There  he  served 
as  County  Clerk,  was  Probate  Judge,  Circuit 
Clerk,  and  for  thirty-five  years  was  Revenue  Col- 
lector. In  1866  he  came  to  Murph3-sboro,  where 
he  was  engaged  in  teaching  school.  Here  he  was 
honored  b}'  being  many  times  elected  as  Assessor 
and  Collector.  He  died  in  1884,  at  the  age  of 
seventy-three  years.  He  held  membership  with 
the  Christian  Church.  Mrs.  Bryan  still  makes  her 
home  in  this  place.  In  the  family  were  two  sons 
and  two  daugliters,  and  the  surviving  members  are, 
William  M.,  a  conductor  on  the  Chicago  &  Texas 
Railroad,  and  John  M. 

Our  subject  spent  the  first  twelve  years  of  his  life 


in  his  native  state  and  then  came  with  his  parents 
to  Illinois.  He  attended  Ewing  College  for  two 
years,  after  which  he  spent  one  year  in  the  Ohio 
Normal  School  of  Lebanon.  He  also  attended  the 
County  Normal  .School  of  De  Soto  at  different  times, 
and  in  1874  he  began  teaching.  He  was  employed 
as  Principal  of  the  schools  at  Mt.  Carbon  until 
1884,  and  then  became  Principal  of  the  east  side 
public  schools  of  Murphjsboro.  which  position  he 
held  until  1890,  when  he  was  elected  on  the  Dem- 
ocratic ticket  as  Countj'  Superintendent.  In  De- 
cember he  entered  upon  the  duties  of  the  office, 
which  he  has  since  eflfectivcl}-  filled.  In  addition 
to  having  the  supervision  of  all  of  the  schools  of 
the  county  he  holds  examinations  at  this  place  and 
issues  certificates  to  teachers.  They  also  hold  a 
successful  normal  school  each  summer,  lasting  ten 
weeks,  and  the  annual  teachers'  institute,  which  is 
conducted  with  abilit}'  by  competent  instructors 
and  has  therefore  proved  of  great  value  to  the 
teachers. 

On  the  5th  of  June,  1879,  Professor  Bryan  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Emma  McGowan, 
and  their  union  has  been  blessed  with  four  chil- 
dren, Walter,  Minnie,  Akka  and  Bessie.  The  par- 
ents hold  an  enviable  position  in  the  social  circles, 
and  their  friends  throughout  the  comnuinit}-  are 
many.  Mrs.  Bryan  is  also  a  teacher  and  has  spent 
twenty  3'ears  in  that  profession,  having  been  asso- 
ciated as  instructor  with  nearl}'  all  of  the  county 
normals.  She  has  also  filled  the  highest  positions 
in  the  count}'  as  teacher,  having  served  as  Princi- 
pal of  the  Murphjsboro  schools. 

For  the  past  ten  jears  Professor  BiTan  has  been 
Seeretarj-  of  the  Odd  Fellows'  societj-  and  has  rep- 
resented his  lodge  in  the  Grand  Lodge.  He  also 
belongs  to  the  Ancient  Order  of  United  Work- 
men, and  is  a  member  of  the  .Southern  Illinois 
Teachers'  Association.  He  is  a  stockholder  in  the 
Jackson  County  Homestead  Building  and  Loan 
Association.  In  ix)litics  he  is  a  stalwart  Democrat. 
He  and  his  wife  are  faithful  members  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church.  He  has  served  as  Superintendent  of 
the  Sunday-school  and  takes  an  active  part  in 
church  and  benevolent  work. 

Professor  Bryan  is  highly  educated  and  is  a  suc- 
cessful  instructor.     Since  becoming   County  Su- 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


565 


peri  u  ten  dent  of  Schools,  he  lias  succeded  in  secur- 
ing a  uniform  system  of  text  books  in  nearly 
every  district  and  in  organizing  township  teachers' 
meetings.  His  untiring  labors  on  behalf  of  the 
scliools  of  tills  community  have  given  them  an 
excellence  of  which  the  count}'  may  well  be  proud. 


s^^^je^^ 


t|/  ENRY  BEISNER,  of  Steeleville,  who  car- 
ries on  a  meat-mark(!t,  is  one  of  the  wortliy 
citizens  tliat  German}^  has  furnished  to 
Randolph  County.  He  was  born  on  the 
21st  of  April,  1848,  and  is  the  third  child  of  Fred- 
erick and  Sophia  (Steinman)  Beisner,  who  were 
also  born  and  reared  in  Germany.  The  mother 
died  in  that  country  in  1878,  after  which  the 
father  came  to  America  and  spent  his  last  days  in 
Lockwood,  Mo.,  where  his  death  occurred  in  1892. 
The  subject  of  this  sketch  acquired  his  educa- 
tion in  the  public  schools  of  Germanj',  which  he 
attended  until  fourteen  3-ears  of  age,  when  he  began 
to  earn  his  own  livelihood.  Since  that  time  he  has 
been  dependent  on  his  own  resources.  He  learned 
the  basket-maker's  trade,  which  pursuit  he  followed 
for  a  period  of  five  years,  and  then  learned  the 
butcher's  trade.  It  was  in  1867  that  he  bade  adieu 
to  friends  and  Fatherland  and  sailed  for  the  New 
World,  having  determined  to  try  liis  fortune  in  tlie 
United  States.  He  took  up  his  residence  in  Jackson 
County,  111.,  and  a  month  later  located  near  Red 
Bud.  He  worked  as  a  farm  hand  for  three  years,  and 
then  removed  to  Washington  County,  111.,  where 
he  engaged  in  the  Ijutchering  business.  The  suc- 
ceeding four  years  of  his  life  were  there  passed, 
and  in  1880  he  came  to  Steeleville,  where  he  has 
since  carried  on  a  meat-market. 

In  1870  BIr.  Beisner  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Sophia  Beferschen,  daughter  of  Ernst  and 
Sophia  Beferschen,  both  of  whom  were  natives  of 
German}',  and  on  emigrating  to  America  settled  in 
Perry  County,  111.,  in  an  early  da}\  By  this  union 
were  born  four  children,  of  whom  one  died  in  in- 
fancy. Sophia,  John  and  Edward  still  make  their 
home  with  their  father.  The  mother  of  this  fam- 
ily was  called  to  her  final  rest  on  the  I8th  of  May, 
1881,  and  in  August,  1882,  Mr.  Beisner  was  again 


married,  his  second  union  being  with  Miss  Mar- 
garet Brandt,  a  daughter  of  Claus  and  Engle 
Brandt,  both  of  whom  were  natives  of  Germany, 
and  in  that  country  spent  their  entire  lives.  Six 
children  graced  this  second  union,  but  two  are  now 
deceased,  Fritz  and  Mamie.  Those  still  with  their 
parents  are,  Lillie,  Emma,  Herman  and  Robert. 
The  parents  and  children  are  members  of  the 
Evangelical  Lutheran  Church.  In  politics,  Mr. 
Beisner  is  a  supporter  of  the  Republican  partj', 
and  though  lie  warmly  advocates  its  principles,  he 
has  never  been  an  office-seeker,  preferring  to  de- 
vote his  entire  lime  and  attention  to  his  business 
interests.  He  lias  built  up  a  good  trade  in  Steele- 
ville, and  a   liberal    patronage    now    rewards    his 


efforts. 


^mc^ 


/i^  AMPBELL  HARDY,  editor  and  proprietor 
II  of  the  Tamaroa  Bugle,   published  at  Tama- 

^^^  roa,  Perr}'  County,  is  a  native  of  La  Salle,  La 
Salle  County,  III.,  and  is  a  son  of  Isaac  Hardy,  a 
sketch  of  whose  life  appears  above,  and  who  in 
his  day  was  one  of  the  most  prominent  and  fore- 
most citizens  of  northern  Illinois,  a  man  of  marked 
force  and  ability,  who  had  the  distinction  of  being 
the  largest  contractor  on  the  Illinois  <fe  Michigan 
Canal. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  one  of  a  large 
family,  and  when  a  mere  child,  suffered  the  mis- 
fortune of  losing  his  father,  who  died  at  La  Salle, 
Sejjtember  14,  1864,  respected  by  all.  Mr.  Hardy's 
opportunities  for  acijuiring  an  education' except  in 
the  practical  school  of  experience  were  limited,  be- 
ing confined  to  advantages  offered  in  the  free  pub- 
lic schools  of  Chicago,  where  he  spent  his  youth 
and  early  manhood.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  he 
left  school  and  entered  mercantile  pursuits,  being 
employed  by  the  wholesale  dry-goods  house  of 
Field  &  Leiter.  From  boyhood  a  great  lover  of 
reading  and  books,  and  possessing  literary  tastes, 
he  found  his  employment  uncongenial,  and  a  few 
years  afterward  embarked  in  the  newspaper  business 
at  Omaha,  Neb.,  where,  at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  we 
find  him  telegraph  editor  of  the  Omaha  Herald, 
edited  by  that  sterling  Democrat,  Dr.  George  L. 
Miller.     He  has  been   connected  at  various  times 


566 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


since  with  the  following  leading  publications:  The 
New  York  Daily  Graphic^  Kansas  City  Journal, 
Duluth  Herald,  North  American  Review,  Chicago 
Dispatch  and  the  Chicago  Times. 

In  Januar}',  1894,  Mr.  Hardy  moved  to  Perry 
County  and  settled  at  Tamaroa,  believing  that  he 
recognized  in  southern  Illinois  and  in  Perry  Coun- 
ty, in  whose  interests  and  advancement  lie  takes  an 
active  part,  a  field  of  usefulness  worthy  of  culti- 
vation. Mr.  Hardy  is  a  gentleman  of  independent 
thought  and  action,  and  in  politics  is  of  the  Demo- 
cratic faith.  He  is  broad  gauged  and  charitable  in 
his  views  of  men  and  public  measures.  While  a 
protestant  in  his  religious  belief,  he  is  a  member  of 
no  church,  but  an  attendant  of  the  Presbyterian,  in 
whose  good  works  he  is  interested.  The  Tamaroa 
Bugle,  of  which  he  is  the  head,  is  recognized  as 
among  the  best  newspapers  published  in  southern 
Illinois. 

• — 0^P — • 

JACOB  GRAFF  is  a  promineut  and  well 
known  farmer  residing  on  section  20,  Ora 
Township,  Jackson  County.  As  he  is  widely 
and  favorablj-  known  in  this  community 
■we  feel  assured  that  the  record  of  his  life  will 
prove  of  interest  to  many  of  our  readers  and 
therefore  gladly  give  it  a  place  in  this  volume. 
He  was  born  in  Somerset  County,  Pa.,  April  6, 
1831,  and  is  a  son  of  William  and  Rosanna  (Im- 
hoff)  Graff.  They  were  married  in  1829,  and  in 
1841  removed  with  their  family  to  the  west,  tak- 
ing up  their  residence  in  Levan  Township,  Jack- 
son Count}'.  The  father  was  a  farmer  b^-  occupa- 
tion, and  here  followed  agricultural  pursuits  until 
his  death,  which  occurred  September  25,  1878.  His 
wife,  who  was  born  and  reared  in  .Somerset  Coun- 
ty, Pa.,  was  a  member  of  the  Lutheran  Church  in 
early  life,  but  afterward  united  with  the  Christian 
Church.  She  passed  away  on  the  old  homestead, 
September  25,  1892. 

In  the  family  were  the  following  children: 
Henry,  John  O.,  Jacob,  Andrew;  Elmira,  who  died 
at  the  age  of  twelve  years;  and  Mary,  wife  of  Tol- 
bert  Boucher.  The  father  was  a  consistent  mem- 
ber of  the  Lutheran  Church.  In  politics  he  was 
a  stanch  supporter  of  the  Whig  party  in  early  life, 


but  when  the  Republican  party  sprang  into  exist- 
ence he  joined  its  ranks  and  was  one  of  its  stalwart 
advocates  during  his  remaining  da^'s. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  a  youth  of  ten 
summers  when  brought  by  his  famil\'  to  Illinois, 
where  he  w.is  reared  in  the  usual  manner  of  farmer 
lads.  On  the  27th  of  December,  1855,  he  married 
Mary  E.  Levan,  daughter  of  Samuel  and  Amj' 
Levan.  Her  father  was  a  native  of  Somerset 
Count}-,  Pa.,  and  became  one  of  the  pioneer  set- 
tlers of  Jackson  County,  111.  When  the  township 
in  which  he  lived  was  organized  it  was  named  in 
his  honor.  He  improved  a  large  farm,  and  at  his 
death,  which  occurred  June  25.  1890,  was  the 
owner  of  a  valuable  property.  In  his  native 
count}-  he  married  Amy  Husbands.  They  were 
both  faithful  members  of  the  Christian  Church, 
and  in  their  family  were  the  following  children: 
Mrs.  Graff,  O.  J.,  F.  M.;  H.  H.,  who  died  in  the 
army  in  1864;  Ann  A.,  widow  of  Christian  Whist- 
ler; Adeline,  wife  of  William  Kelly,  and  one 
daughter  who  died  in  infancy. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Graff  were  born  seven  chil- 
dren: Harmon  L.,  born  September  20,  1856;  Gran- 
ville, January  13,  1859;  Oliver,  who  was  born 
November  23,  1860,  and  died  April  21,  1890, 
leaving  a  daughter,  who  resides  with  her  grandfa- 
ther; Adeline,  who  was  born  December  29.  1862, 
and  is  the  wife  of  Robert  Redfield:  Henry,  born 
January  22,  1866;  Dora,  who  was  born  April  8, 
1870,  and  died  April  24,1873;  and  Samuel  W., 
who  died  in  infancy. 

Since  voting  for  John  C.  Fremont  in  1856,  Mr. 
Graff  has  been  a  stalwart  supporter  of  the  men  and 
measures  of  the  Republican  party.  For  fifteen 
years  in  early  life  he  was  a  member  of  the  Baptist 
Church,  after  which  he  united  with  the  Christian 
Church  at  Pleasant  Hill.  He  has  been  an  Elder  in 
the  same  for  several  years,  and  his  wife  is  also  one 
of  its  faithful  members  and  active  workers.  When 
this  worthy  couple  began  their  domestic  life  they 
resided  in  Levan  Township,  where  our  subject  im- 
proved a  good  farm.  In  1870  he  purchased  one 
hundred  and  sixty  acres  of  land  on  section  20,  Ora 
Township,  and  has  since  made  their  home  thereon. 
He  placed  his  farm  under  a  high  state  of  cultiva- 
tion   and   stocked   it  with  a  high    grade  of  horses. 


ikyyiyt-<^^<L^^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


569 


cattle  and  bogs.  He  is  now  practically  living  re- 
tired, being  surrounded  b}' all  the  comforts  of  life, 
wliich  were  secured  to  him  b}^  his  labor  in  former 
years.  His  career  has  been  an  honorable  and  up- 
right one  and  he  has  the  respect  of  all. 


G: 


^ 


L*T- 


■^ 


jg^ 


i^ 


JJS^ 


^ 


lEV.  JORDAN  CARROLL  HARRISS,  of  Du 
Quoin,  has  the  honor  of  being  a  native  of 
Perry  Count}',  his  birth  having  occurred 
^^  near  Pinckneyville,  September  8,  1840. 
Tiie  famil}'  is  of  Welsh  origin,  and  was  founded 
in  America  b.y  Edward  Harriss,  a  native  of  Wales, 
who,  when  a  young  man,  came  to  this  country, 
settling  in  Virginia,  where  he  engaged  in  farming. 
The  family  removed  from  that  state  to  South  Car- 
olina, thence  to  Tennessee,  and  in  1829  was  estab- 
lislied  in  Perry  County,  111.  The  above  named  Ed- 
ward Harris,  great-grandfather  of  our  subject,  was 
a  soldier  in  the  Revolutionary  War,  and  was  taken 
prisoner  by  the  British.  The  grandfather,  John- 
son Harriss,  was  a  native  of  Virginia,  born  De- 
cember 18,  1769.  His  death  occurred  at  Paradise 
Prairie,  Perry  Count}-,  HI.,  about  December,  1868, 
he  having  attained  the  advanced  age  of  ninety- 
nine  years,  lacking  a  few  days.  He  was  one  of  the 
honored  men  of  his  daj\ 

The  father  of  our  subject,  Jordan  Harriss,  was 
born  in  Laurens  District,  S.  C,  May  7,  1800, 
and  was  married  in  November,  1823,  in  Bedford 
County,  Tenn.,  to  Lucinda  Casey,  who  was  born 
in  Georgia,  February  19,1805.  Her  father,  James 
Case}-,  who  was  of  Irish  extraction,  wedded  Susan 
Turner.  He  was  a  cousin  of  ex-Governor  Zadoc 
Casey,  and  one  of  his  sons,  Hiram,  was  in  the 
Black  Hawk  War.  Jordan  Harriss  came  to  this 
state  in  very  limited  circumstances,  but  ere  his 
death  he  had  worked  his  way  upward  and  acquired 
a  fair  competence.  He  was  highly  respected  by 
all  who  knew  him,  and  died  April  25,  1874.  His 
wife  passed  away  November  22,  1883,  at  the  age 
of  seventy-eight. 

In  their  family  were  five  sons  and  four  daugli- 
ters.  Sarah  Jane,  now  tlie  wife  of  William  A. 
King,  of  Ewing,  111.,  was  born   October   3,  1824. 


She  was  first  married  to  John  R.  Teague,  now  de- 
ceased. The  Rev.  Marion  Teague,  of  Du  Quoin,  is 
their  son.  Johnson  C,  who  was  born  April  6,  1826, 
was  a  farmer  and  merchant,  and  a  man  of  more 
than  average  intelligence;  he  taught  school  for 
some  years, and  served  two  terms  as  County  Asses- 
sor and  Treasurer  of  Perry  County.  He  died  March 
5, 1881.  Nancy  Eleanor,  wlio  was  born  November  7, 
1828,  married  Edmond  Dry,  a  soldier  in  the  Mexi- 
can War,  and  now  lives  on  Holt's  Prairie,  near 
Pinckneyville.  John  H.,  whose  birth  occurred 
July  29,  1830,  followed  school  teaching  in  early 
life,  and  is  now  a  prosperous  farmer  residing  at 
Denny  Station  (Holt's  P.  O.),  near  Pinckneyville. 
Susan  was  born  on  the  29th  of  April,  1832,  and 
died  at  the  age  of  two  years.  Hiram  M.,  who  was 
born  March  16,  1834,  is  now  a  hardware  merchant 
of  Du  Quoin.  Julia  Ann,  born  on  the  11th  of 
June,  1836,  married  Thomas  J.  Hansford  and  died 
in  April,  1855.  Edward  M.,  born  on  the  24th  of 
July,  1838,  entered  the  army  in  August,  18C2,  as 
a  member  of  Company  A,  Eighty-first  Illinois  In- 
fantry. He  was  taken  prisoner  June  12,  1864, 
and  spent  eleven  months  in  Anderson  ville.  After 
the  war  he  served  as  Sheriff  of  Perry  County,  and 
in  1889  was  appointed  Postmaster  at  Du  Quoin  by 
President  Harrison,  but  was  removed  by  Cleveland 
in  the  fall  of  1893.  He  has  always  been  active 
and  prominent  in  county  affairs.  In  fact,  all  of 
this  family  are  public  spirited,  influential  people. 
Our  subject  was  the  youngest  in  the  family.  He 
acquired  a  fair  education,  spending  the  winter  of 
1858-59  in  Shurtleff  College,  and  afterward  pur- 
suing his  studies  at  Old  Du  Quoin  Seminary.  He 
then  followed  teaching  and  farming  until  join- 
ing the  boys  in  blue,  on  the  7th  of  August,  1862. 
He  was  Sergeant  of  Company  A,  Eighty-first  Illi- 
nois Infantry,  and  participated  in  the  engage- 
ments of  Port  Gibson,  Raymond,  Jackson,  Cham- 
pion Hills,  and  also  in  several  battles  on  the  Red 
River  expedition  and  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  in 
which  he  was  wounded  in  the  left  arm  and  in  the 
right  shoulder.  He  was  taken  prisoner  June  12, 
1864,  at  Guntown,  Miss., and  was  put  into  Ander- 
sonville  Prison,  where  for  eleven  long  months  he 
suffered  the  tortures  of  starvation  and  neglect. 
After  receiving  an  honorable  discharge  he  returned 


570 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


to  Perry  Count}',  and  again  engaged  in  farming 
and  school  teaching. 

In  politics,  Mr.  Ilarriss  is  a  Kepublican.  In  the 
fall  of  1866  he  was  elected  County  Sheriff,  and  in 
the  fall  of  1869  was  chosen  County  Clerk.  From 
the  expiration  of  that  term  of  office  lie  engaged  in 
farming  and  other  business  until  1876,  when  he 
entered  upon  the  work  of  the  Gospel  ministry',  in 
which  he  has  found  his  efforts  crowned  witli  abun- 
dant success.  While  attending  school  at  Old  Uu 
Quoin  Seminary  in  1859,  then  a  .young  man  of 
nineteen,  he  experienced  the  change  of  heart 
which  made  of  him  a  devoted  follower  of  Christ. 
In  October  of  that  year  he  was  baptized  by  Polder 
Peter  Hagler  and  became  a  member  of  the  Nine 
Mile  Baptist  Church.  He  was  early  impressed  witli 
the  duty  of  telling  to  others  the  glad  story  of  sal- 
vation through  faith  in  Christ.  After  becoming 
settled  in  life  he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  Dea- 
con in  the  Nine  Mile  Church. 

On  the  8th  of  July,  1876.  at  Par.adise  Baptist 
Church  (of  which  he  was  then  a  member)  Mr.  Har- 
riss  was  ordained  a  minister  of  the  Gospel,  and  his 
first  appointment  for  preaching  was  at  Holt's  Prai- 
rie Baptist  Church.  In  the  years  1879-80  he  took 
a  course  of  stud}'  in  theology  at  Shurtleff  College. 
In  the  interval  from  that  date  to  the  present,  he 
has  served  acceptably  as  Pastor  of  the  following 
churches  of  the  Nine  Mile  Baptist  Association: 
Nine  Mile  (as  immediate  successor  of  the  vener- 
able Elder  Peter  Hagler);  Paradise,  Pinckneyville, 
Holt's  Prairie,  Galum,  Red  Bud,  Nashville  (about 
seven  years),  Fairview  (where  he  increased  the 
membership  from  about  fifty  to  two  hundred  and 
thirty-nine).  Horse  Prairie  and  Makanda  churches. 

However,  it  would  seem  that  the  most  important 
work  accomplished  by  Mr.  Harriss  has  been  per- 
formed bj'  him  as  missionary  of  the  Nine  Mile 
Baptist  Association,  in  which  capacity  he  is  now 
employed,  and  has  been  much  of  the  time  for 
many  years.  Some  one  has  summarized  the  vis- 
ible results  of  his  work  for  the  years  1883  to 
1886,  and  six  months  of  1887,  as  follows:  sermons 
preached,  ten  hundred  and  thirty-eight;  exhorta- 
tions, one  hundred  and  ninet3--seven;  religious 
visits,  eighteen  hundred  and  nine;  persons  bap- 
tized, six  hundred  and  sixty-one  (the  latter  being 


eighty-one  and  four-tenths  per  cent,  of  the  entire 
number  of  baptisms  within  the  bounds  of  the  as- 
sociation during  the  time  specified).  He  has  been 
honored  b}'  the  association  by  being  chosen  its 
Moderator  from  the  year  1884   to   1889   inclusive. 

On  the  5lh  of  .Tune,  1861,  Mr.  Harriss  was  united 
in  marriage  with  Miss  M.  V.  A.  Thornton,  a  na- 
tive of  Allen  County,  Ky.,  whose  father.  Elder 
William  Thornton,  was  a  Baptist  preacher.  Two 
children  were  born  to  them.  Viola,  who  was  born 
on  the  22d  of  May,  1862,  was  educated  at  Shurtleff 
and  Ewing  Colleges,  and  is  now  the  wife  of  Aaron 
King,  a  farmer  of  Ewing.  111.,  by  whom  she  has 
four  children,  Herbert,  Arthur,  Clarence  and 
Frank.  Clarence  W.,  the  second  child  of  the  sub- 
ject of  this  sketch,  was  born  December  7,  1866,  was 
graduated  from  Ewing  College,  and  tlien  engaged 
in  teaching  at  that  place.  He  was  afterward  Prin- 
cipal of  the  high  school  in  Du  Quoin  for  three 
years,  but  is  now  a  law  student  in  the  Northwest- 
ern University,  of  Chicago.  The  mother  of  this 
family  died  Septembers.  1869. 

On  the  20th  of  .Januar}',  1870,  Mr.  Harriss  mar- 
ried Eliza  A.  Strait,  a  native  of  Perry  Count}',  and 
the  daughter  of  Judge  Hosea  H.  Strait.  To  them 
were  born  seven  children,  five  of  whom  are  yet 
living.  Walter  H.,  born  on  the  25th  of  November, 
1871,  was  educated  in  Ewing  and  Shurtleff  Col- 
leges, and  is  now  a  Baptist  preacher  of  some  note, 
possessing  oratorical  powers  far  in  advance  of  his 
years.  Herschel  S.,  born  July  11,  1874,  died 
March  13,  1881.  Alvah  E.  died  in  infancy,  No- 
vember 4,  1877.  Grace  T.,  born  November  4, 
1878,  is  now  in  school.  Wilfred  C.  was  born  July 
22,  1882;  Judson,  November  5,  1884,  and  Earl, 
August  24,  1887.  Mr.  Harriss  is  one  of  the  hon- 
ored citizens  of  this  community,  who  by  his  well 
spent  life  has  won  the  confidence  and  high  regard 
of  all  with  whom  he  has  been  brought  in  contact. 


ILLIAM  .S.  WILSON,  Superintendent  of 
\\/4W//  ^^^  ^^'  L*5U'®»  Alton  &  Terre  Haute  Kail- 
\y^      road,  with  headquarters  at  Pinckneyville, 

was  born   in    Brandenburg,  Ky.,  in  October,  1852. 

His  father,  who  also   bore  the  name  of  William  S. 


V 


POtlTRAlT  AND  B10atlAI»HlCAL  RECORD. 


671 


Wilson,  was  a  farmer  by  occupation,  and  died 
when  his  son  was  only  four  j-ears  of  age.  After 
that  time  our  subject  lived  with  his  grandfather, 
William  Farleigli,  until  he  was  a  youth  of  fifteen. 
He  had  attended  the  common  schools  of  the  neigh- 
borhood, and  at  that  time  entered  a  school  in 
Owensboro,  Ky.,  where  he  remained  for  eight 
months. 

Entering  the  telegraph  office  in  Owensboro  as 
messenger  boy,  Mr.  Wilson  soon  learned  the  art 
of  telegraphy.  He  then  accepted  the  position  of 
commercial  telegraph  operator,  and  in  tiiat  capa- 
city was  employed  in  various  places  until  the  sum- 
mer of  1870,  when  he  went  to  work  for  tlie  In- 
dianapolis ik  St.  Louis  Railroad  Company  as  night 
operator  in  Danville,  Ind.  In  November  of  the 
same  year,  he  secured  a  position  with  the  road 
with  which  he  is  now  connected,  being  made  sta- 
tion agent  and  operator  at  Freeburg,  111.  From 
that  time  his  advancement  has  been  continual. 

After  a  few  months  spent  as  agent  in  Freeburg, 
Mr.  Wilson  was  called  to  St.  Louis  to  take  a  place 
in  the  general  freight  office,  where  he  continued 
until  he  had  filled  every  position  in  that  office.  His 
duties  then  called  him  to  the  auditor's  office  and 
to  the  office  of  the  general  superintendent.  While 
in  the  former  position  he  was  paymaster  of  the 
road,  and  subsequently  he  acted  as  train  dispatcher 
for  a  short  time.  Next  he  was  made  conductor  on 
a  passenger  train  between  St.  Louis  and  Uu  Quoin, 
and  a  short  time  afterward  became  private  secre- 
tary to  the  President  and  General  Manager  of  the 
road,  in  which  position  he  served  for  five  years. 
In  1883  he  was  made  Master  of  Transporta- 
tion, and  in  January,  1886,  was  promoted  to  the 
position  of  Superintendent.  In  1890  his  offices 
were  removed  to  Pinckneyville. 

Mr.  Wilson  was  married  in  Owensboro,  Ky.,  to 
Miss  Belle,  daughter  of  Col.  Mercer  Moormann,  a 
prominent  merchant,  who  was  a  soldier  in  the 
soutlieru  arm}-.  They  have  two  children,  Sarah 
Deane,  a  maiden  of  fifteen  years,  and  George  Park- 
er, aged  ten.  Their  home  is  also  shared  by  the 
widowed  mother  of  Mr.  Wilson. 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  foregoing  account  that 
Mr.  Wilson  has  served  in  all  .the  various  capaci- 
ties  of   the    road,   from    that   of   messenger   boy 


up  to  his  present  responsible  position.  There  is 
no  place  on  the  road  that  he  cannot  fill,  for  actual 
experience  has  made  him  familiar  with  all  its  du- 
ties. No  more  thorough  or  obliging  man  is  to  be 
found  with  any  road.  He  has  earned  his  promo- 
tion by  hard  work  and  close  attention  to  business, 
and  his  success  is  certainly  well  merited.  Since 
Pinckneyville  was  made  his  headquarters,  he  has 
taken  a  great  interest  in  the  town,  and  has  done 
much  to  give  it  new  life.  One  gentleman  said 
that,  "Since  Mr.  Wilson  came  here  Pinckneyville 
has  grown  more  than  it  had  in  fortj'  years  before." 
He  has  built  the  finest  residence  in  the  cit}',  which 
stands  on  a  two-acre  tract  of  land.  He  is  now 
serving  as  Alderman.  He  is  a  member  of  the 
Board  of  Education  and  is  President  of  the  building 
and  loan  association,  and  is  ever  found  on  the  side 
of  advancement  and  progress,  ready  to  aid  in  the 
promotion  of  all  that  pertains  to  the  general  wel- 
fare. 

»•€ ^i^ 

HARLES  WIEDEMAN.  Among  the  many 
prosperous  farmers  and  fruit-growers  of 
Randolph  County  is  Mr.  Wiedeman,  who 
is  at  present  the  part  owner  and  occupant  of  a  fine 
farm  located  on  sections  7  and  8,  township  8,  range 
5.  The  estate  comprises  eighty  acres  of  vvell  im- 
proved land,  on  which  the  various  cereals  are  raised, 
but  he  makes  a  specialty  of  wheat.  He  also  has  a 
large  and  fine  apple  orchard,  from  which  he  derives 
splendid  profits. 

Our  subject  is  a  native  of  Bohemia,  where  he 
was  born  in  1837,  his  parents  being  INIathias  and 
Fannie  (Hlawac)  Wiedeman,  of  the  city  of  Stra- 
konitz.  The  mother  having  died,  Charles,  with  his 
brothers  and  one  sister,  emigrated  to  the  United 
States  in  the  fall  of  1860,  landing  in  New  Orleans 
in  January  of  the  following  year,  after  a  vo3'.age 
of  over  eight  weeks.  From  that  cit}'  he  made  his 
way  to  Cape  Girardeau,  Mo.,  where  he  learned  the 
trade  of  a  cooper.  After  spending  a  few  weeks 
here,  he  and  his  brother  August  enlisted  in  the 
Union  army,  in  Company  C,  Second  Missouri  In- 
fantry, and  served  for  a  period  of  three  years.  He 
participated  in  many  of  the  important  engagements 
of  the  war,  among  them  being  Pea  Ridge,  Perry- 


572 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


ville,  Stone  River,  Cliickamauga,  Missionary  Ridge 
and  Dalton,  Ga.  lie  was  mustered  out  and  hon- 
orably discharged  September  28,  1864,  at  St. 
Louis.  His  brother  August  was  killed  in  the  bat- 
tle of  ChicUamauga.  .September  20.  1863.  The 
father  died  in  Cape  Girardeau  in  1862. 

Mr.  Wiedeman  remained  in  St.  Louis  for  a  jear 
and  a-half  after  his  service  in  the  Rebellion,  and 
purchased  with  his  brother  Joseph  William  their 
present  possessions.  .Joseph  likewise  fought  for 
the  honor  of  his  adopted  country,  in  Corapanj-  E, 
First  Missouri  Cavalry,  under  Generals  Schofield 
and  Thomas. 

April  15,  1873,  our  subject  was  married  to  Miss 
Mary  Froley,  whose  parents  died  in  Bohemia, 
where  she  was  born  February  22,  1846.  She  em- 
barked for  America  in  1866,  and  landing  in  New 
York  City  made  her  way  direct  to  Cape  Girardeau, 
remaining  there  but  three  months.  She  thence 
came  to  Rockwood,  this  count\-,  where  her  mar- 
riage occurred.  Our  subject  and  his  wife  have  one 
child,  Charles,  Jr.,  whose  birth  occurred  February, 
23,  1874.  He  is  still  at  home  and  assists  his  father 
in  the  care  of  the  farm.  Socially,  Mr.  Wiedeman 
is  a  member  of  Rockwood  Post  No.  734,  G.  A.  R. 
In  politics  he  is  a  strong  supporter  of  the  Reinib- 
lican  party. 


"jf/OHN  MAURICE  HERBERT,  A.  M.,  LL.  B., 
||  is  one  of  iSIurphysboro's  most  prominent 
-^  I  and  influential  citizens.  He  is  the  present 
vj^^  State's  Attorney,  is  Vice-President  of  the 
Citj'  National  Bank,  Vice-President  of  the  Jack- 
son County  Abstract  and  Title  Guarantee  Com- 
pany, and  is  a  member  of  the  law  firm  of  Smith, 
McElvain  &  Herbert,  one  of  the  leading  law  firms 
of  southern  Illinois.  By  merit  and  ability  he  has 
arisen  to  the  proud  position  which  he  now  occu- 
pies and  the  success  of  his  life  is  well  deserved. 

David  Herbert,  his  father,  was  born  near  Laut- 
widd-Vardra,  Wales,  and  was  a  son  of  Philip  Her- 
bert, who  was  of  German  descent,  and  who  was  a 
well-to-do  merchant.  The  father  engaged  in  the 
hotel  business,  and  in  186.5  emigrated  to  Pennsyl- 
vania. Going  to  Schuylkill  County,  he  opened  a 
large  boarding  house,  and  February  4, 1866,  he  came 


to  this  place  and  kept  a  boarding  house  at  the  Mt. 
Carbon  depot.  Later  he  bought  the  Laclede  Hotel, 
which  he  carried  on  until  October,  1892,  and  then 
sold  out.  At  different  times  he  purchased  land, 
which  he  afterward  sold.  He  was  married  Decem- 
ber 5.  1854,  to  Margaret  Humphrey,  who  was  born 
in  North  Wales.  Her  famil}'  were  farming  people, 
and  her  father  died  in  the  Old  Country  in  1889. 
Mrs.  Herbert  had  six  children,  two  of  whom  are 
yet  living,  John  M.,  of  this  sketch;  and  Philip  D., 
a  leading  jeweler  of  Murphysboro. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  Glamorganshire,  Wales, 
February  1,  1864,  but  was  reared  in  this  locality 
and  was  educated  in  its  public  schools.  He  also 
attended  the  normal  school  at  Carbondale  for 
eighteen  months,  after  which  he  entered  the  fie«h- 
man  class  in  Christian  Brothers  College  of  St. 
Louis,  from  which  he  was  gr.iduated  in  1886, 
with  the  degree  of  A.  B.  He  was  valedictorian  of 
his  class  of  ten  pupils.  In  the  succeeding  autumn, 
he  entered  the  law  department  of  the  University 
of  Michigan,  and  was  graduated  with  the  degree  of 
LL.  B.  He  was  here  honored  with  being  elected 
Vice-President  of  his  class.  In  1892  the  degree  of 
A.  M.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Christian  Broth- 
ers College. 

In  1888,  Mr.  Herbert  formed  the  partnership 
with  Mr.  Smith,  and  in  1889  Mr.  McElvain  became 
a  member  of  the  firm.  They  conduct  a  general 
law  practice  and  have  justl}'  won  a  place  among 
the  leading  law  firms  of  southern  Illinois,  being 
men  of  marked  ability.  Mr.  Herbert  is  also  inter- 
ested in  the  Jackson  County  Abstract  and  Title 
Guarantee  Company,  aided  in  its  organization,  and 
has  since  been  Vice-President.  He  aided  in  or- 
ganizing the  Cit}-  National  Bank,  of  which  he  is 
now  a  Director  and  Vice-President.  He  is  attor- 
nej'  for  the  Southern  Illinois  Building  and  Loan 
Association,  and  in  1892  was  elected  State's  Attor- 
ney on  the  Republican  ticket  by  a  majority  of 
nearly  four  hundred.  This  was  the  largest  ma- 
jority given  a  Republican  candidate,  a  fact  which 
indicates  his  personal  popularity  and  the  high  re- 
gard in  which  he  is  held. 

The  lady  who  bears  the  name  of  Mrs.  Herbert  was 
formerly  Miss  Tillie  Bross,  and  was  born  In  Cairo, 
111.     She  was  educated  in  a  convent  in  St.  Louis 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


573 


and  is  a  fine  musician.  She  is  a  daughter  of  Judge 
F".  Bross,  the  President  of  the  National  Bank  of 
Cairo,  and  one  of  the  best  known  men  of  tlie  state. 
Tlie  marriage  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Herbert  was  cele- 
brated in  Cairo,  September  28,  189.3.  "Socially, 
our  subject  is  a  Knight  Templar  Mason  and  is  the 
present  Master  of  Murph3'sboro  Lodge  No.  498, 
A.  F.  &.  A.  M.  He  served  as  representative  to  tiie 
Grand  Lodge  in  1893.  He  also  belongs  to  tlie 
Knights  of  l^thias  and  the  uniformed  rank,  and 
is  a  member  of  the  Illinois  Bar  Association.  He  is 
a  young  man  whose  talents  have  rapidly  won  for 
him  a  place  of  i)roniinence  and  will  continue  to 
win  for  him  promotion  and  success. 


ICHAEL  STUMPF  stands  foremost  among 
the  successful  farmers  of  Monroe  County, 
who  have  contributed  so  greatly  to  its  de- 
velopment. His  interests  are  centered  in 
towushi[)  1  south,  ranges  9  and  10  west,  where  he 
has  one  of  the  largest  and  best  managed  farms  in 
this  part  of  the  state.  For  many  years  he  had  to 
struggle  against  a  seemingly  adverse  fate,  iiaving 
but  fifty  cents  when  he  came  here.  Notwithstand- 
ing discouragements  he  pushed  ahead,  and  the  re- 
sult proves  the  wisdom  of  his  course. 

Our  subject  is  a  native  of  Hessen,  German}', 
and  was  born  in  1-828  to  Peter  and  Cliristina 
(Bridenbauh)  Stumpf.  Peter  was  a  son  of  Henry 
and  Mary  Stumpf,  who  were  also  natives  of  the 
Fatherland,  wliere  tlie  father  was  a  farmer  by  occu- 
pation and  also  followed  the  trade  of  a  black- 
smith. 

The  father  of  our  subject  was  born  in  1795  and 
learned  of  his  father  the  trade  of  a  blacksmith, 
which  he  followed  in  his  native  land.  He  was 
married  to  the  mother  of  our  subject  when  about 
twenty-eight  years  old,  and  her  people  were  well- 
to-do  farmers  in  Germany.  To  them  were  born 
eight  children:  Ilenr}',  a  blacksmith  in  Germany; 
Mary  and  Katie,  who  died  when  young  in  years; 
Michael,  our  subject;  Christina,  who  died  in  the 
United  States;  George,  who  also  died  in  this  coun- 
try; Catherine,  who  is  the  wife  of  John  Ilerringer 
and  lives  iu  Belleville;  and  John,  a  school  teacher 


in  the  Fatherland.  The  parents  of  this  family 
died  in  1871  and  1841,  respectively. 

Young  Michael  received  his  education  in  the 
model  schools  of  his  native  countiy,  completing  it 
when  but  fourteen  years  old.  He  also  learned  the 
trade  of  his  father,  in  connection  with  which  lie 
worked  on  a  farm.  In  1848  he  deci-ded  to  see 
what  America  held  in  store  for  him  and  accord- 
ingly set  sail,  making  the  journey  alone.  He  at 
once  came  to  this  state  and  made  his  home  for  a 
time  with  an  uncle,  who  lived  in  this  county,  near 
Waterloo.  For  a  period  of  seven  years  he  was 
engaged  in  working  out  b}'  the  month  on  farms  in 
that  neighborhood,  but  in  1855,  at  the  time  of  his 
marriage,  commenced  farming  on  his  own  account. 
At  the  time  of  his  coming  here,  Mr.  Stumpf  had 
but  fifty  cents  left  with  which  to  start  in  life,  but 
by  economical  habits  and  hard  work  he  was  soon 
enabled  to  buy  a  tract  of  eight}'  acres,  and  this  is 
still  in  his  possession.  But  being  of  an  ambitious 
turn  of  mind,  he  was  not  satisfied  with  this  small 
piece  of  property,  and  at  once  set  about  to  add 
more  to  his  original  purchase.  This  he  did  from 
time  to  time,  and  is  now  the  deserving  owner  of 
seven  hundred  and  sixty-two  splendid  acres.  The 
farm  is  stocked  with  all  that  goes  to  make  up  a 
good  estate,  and  the  family  occup}'  a  comfortable 
and  commodious  residence.  Mr.  Stumjjf  has  al- 
wa3's  been  keenl}'  alive  to  the  interests  of  the 
township  and  county,  and  has  been  an  important 
factor  in  promoting  them.  He  is  known  through- 
out the  county,  and  is  one  of  its  leading  and  most 
prosperous  agriculturists. 

The  maiden  name  of  the  lady  who  became  the 
wife  of  our  subject  was  Rebecca  Iluch,  a  daughter 
of  Gottleib  and  Caroline  (Holzhaus)  Huch.  She 
has  borne  her  husband  nine  children,  of  whom 
one  died  in  infancy.  The  living  are,  Louis,  who 
married  Rosetta  Taake;  Herman,  who  is  mar- 
ried to  Mary  Mummert;  Fritz,  who  married  Mar- 
garet Mehrtens;  Henry,  who  married  Margaret 
Klohr;  Caroline,  who  is  the  wife  of  George  Klohr; 
Margaret,  vvho  married  William  Taake;  Christina, 
the  wife  of  Christ  Gummershimer;  and  Kate,  who  is 
single  and  at  home.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Stumpf  have 
twenty-one  grandchildren.  They  are  devoted 
members  of  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church,  to- 


574 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


wards  the  support  of  which  they  are  liberal  and 
constant  contributors.  Politically  our  subject  is 
conservative  and  prefers  to  cast  liis  vote  for  the 
best  man,  irrespective  of  party  principles.  He  is  a 
raan  of  good  liabits,  and  unlimited  i)raise  is  right- 
fully bestowed  upon  liini  for  the  noble  manner  in 
which  he  has  battled  with  the  trials  and  privations 
that  the  poor  are  compelled  to  endure. 


G 


^  KORGE  W.  CLARK,  the  efficient  and  popu- 
i_—  lar  Sheriff  of  Perry  County,  living  in 
^1  Pinekney  ville,  was  born  eight  miles  west  of 
this  place,  on  what  is  known  as  Lost  Prairie,  Sep- 
tember 5,  1835.  His  father,  Alexander  Clark,  was 
born  in  South  Carolina  in  1804.  The  grandfather 
also  bore  the  name  of  Alexander,  and  was  of  Irish 
lineage.  The  familj'  located  in  Perry  Count3'  long 
before  the  state  was  admitted  to  the  Union, and  its 
members  are  numbered  among  the  honored  pio- 
neers. Alexander,  Jr.,  was  the  eldest  of  three 
brothers.  He  married  Ruth  Teague,  a  native  of 
Kentucky,  whose  parents  were  also  pioneers  of 
Perry  County.  The  marriage  license  granted  to 
Mr.  Clark  and  Miss  Teague  was  the  first  one  issued 
in  this  countj'.  The  lady  died  in  1856,  and  Mr. 
Clark  died  in  Missouri  in  1862,  having  removed 
to  that  state  just  prior  to  the  breaking  out  of  the 
late  war.  His  brother  John  was  a  soldier  in  the 
Black  Hawk  War,  and  his  brother  William  (now 
deceased),  was  a  prosperous  and  prominent  mer- 
chant in  Old  Liberty,  Jackson  Count}-,  III. 

Our  subject  had  three  brothers.  The  eldest, 
Capt.  John  J.  Clark,  was  a  soldier  in  the  Sixth 
Illinois  Cavalry  and  served  throughout  the  late 
war.  He  is  now  engaged  in  carpenter  work  in 
Danville,  Worth  County,  Mo.  S.  R.  is  also  a  resi- 
dent of  that  county,  where  he  has  served  as  Justice 
of  the  Peace  for  the  p.ist  twentj'  years.  Isaac  M., 
the  youngest  brother,  died  in  Missouri,  at  the  age 
of  twent}--two. 

Ui^on  his  father's  farm  George  W.  Clark  was 
reared,  and  his  education  was  acquired  in  the  old 
time  log  schoolhouse.  He  began  farming  on  his 
own  account  when  he  had  reached  man's  estate, 
and  was  thus  employed  until  1862,  when  he  joined 


the  boys  in  blue  of  Company  F,  Eightieth  Illinois 
Infantry.  He  was  made  a  Sergeant,  later  became 
Orderly-Sergeant,  afterward  was  promoted  to  First 
Lieutenant,  and  as  such  commanded  his  company 
for  some  time.  He  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Stone 
River,  and  was  then  detached  with  a  party  under 
Colonel  Straight,  of  Ohio,  to  make  a  reconnoitre  in 
the  south.  This  party  was  surprised  and  captured 
at  Sand  Mountains,  not  far  from  Rome,  Ga.,  and 
was  confined  in  Libby  Prison,  but  after  a  short  time 
was  parolled  and  sent  to  Annapolis,  and  later  to 
St.  Louis. 

In  July,  1863,  Mr.  Clark  was  detailed  to  take 
parolled  rebel  soldiers  to  Nashville  and  deliver 
them  to  the  authorities  of  the  Confederate  Govern- 
ment, after  which  he  joined  the  main  army  and 
was  placed  in  charge  of  bridges  in  Georgia.  Sub- 
sequently he  look  part  in  the  battles  of  Lookout 
Mountain,  Missionary  Ridge,  Buzzard's  Roost  and 
Atlanta,  and  started  with  Sherman  to  the  sea,  but 
at  Kenesaw  Mountain  was  sent  with  a  detachment 
to  intercept  Hood  at  Pulaski,  Tenn.  He  took  part 
in  the  battles  c'  Franklin  and  Nashville,  and  was 
engaged  in  detached  duty  at  Huntsville,  Ala., 
where  he  remained  until  honorably  discharged 
June  27,  1865. 

Mr.  Clark  had  contracted  rheumatism  during  his 
service,  and  on  his  return  was  no  longer  able  to 
engage  in  farming,  so  sold  his  land  and  began 
merchandising  in  Pinckneyville.  Later  he  engaged 
in  the  milling  business.  In  1876,  he  served  as 
Deputy  Sheriff,  and  in  1890  was  elected  Sheriff  of 
Perr}'  County,  which  position  he  is  now  credita- 
bly and  .acceptably  filling.  Like  his  family  for 
generations  past,  he  supports  the  Democratic  party, 
and  is  the  first  Democrat  that  ever  filled  the  office 
of  Sheriff,  to  which  position  he  was  elected  by  a 
majority  of  four  hundred,  a  fact  which  indicates 
his  great  popularity.  Socially,  he  is  a  Royal  Arch 
Mason  and  .an  Odd  Fellow,  and  has  filled  all  the 
offices  in  the  latter  order. 

In  1855,  Mr.  Clark  married  Miss  Margaret  M. 
Killingsworth,  who  was  born  in  North  Carolina, 
but  spent  her  early  life  in  Tennessee,  and  came  to 
Illinois  wiien  a  young  lady  of  eighteen.  Her  fa- 
ther, AVilliam  Killingsworth,  died  in  Tennessee 
during  her   early  childhood.     To   Mr.   and  Mrs. 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


575 


Clark  were  born  seven  children.  Sarah  J.  is  now 
the  wife  of  E.  J.  Harriss,  Deputy  County  Clerk  of 
Perry  County,  by  whom  she  has  three  children, 
Turner,  Ilersiiei  and  Herbert;  Clara  J.  is  the  wife 
of  Joseph  Curtis,  .lailer  of  Perry  County,  who  is 
also  engaged  in  the  livery  business,  and  they  have 
three  children,  George,  Bertha  and  Viva;  Mar- 
guerite is  the  wife  of  Marshal  Marlow,  and  has  a 
son,  Clarence;  William  K.  is  engaged  in  the  insur- 
ance business;  fieorgc  E.  is  attending  school,  and 
one  son  and  one  daughter  died  in  childhood.  Mr. 
Clark  is  a  worthy  representative  of  an  honored 
pioneer  family,  and  is  a  prominent  and  progressive 
citizen,  who  has  many  warm  friends  throughout 
the  community. 

fl^  ENRY  R.  WINTHROP,  who  resides  on  see- 
llTjl^,  tion  36,  Tamaroa  Precinct,  Perry  County, 
/^^'  was  born  on  the  30th  of  August,  1852,  in 
(^J  the  community  which  is  still  his  home.  His 
father,  Charles  Edward  Roger  Winthrop,  was  born 
in  Stamford,  Conn.,  October  8,  1816,  and  there  ac- 
quired his  education.  When  a  young  man  he  was 
employed  in  a  drug  store,  but  not  liking  that  work 
he  engaged  with  an  engineering  corps  in  the  state 
of  Michigan,  and  also  upon  the  route  of  tlie  Erie 
Railroad.  At  lengtli  he  determined  to  turn  his 
face  westward  and  seek  a  home  in  the  Mississippi 
Valley.  He  located  in  Paradise  Prairie,  Perry 
County,  in  the  winter  of  1839,  and  here  resided 
for  nearl3'  half  a  century.  He  was  known  through- 
out the  count}',  and  left  a  record  which  entitles 
his  memory  to  the  highest  respect  and  regard  of 
his  fellow-citizens.  When  he  first  came  to  the 
county  he  lived  in  a  log  cabin.  He  purchased 
eighty  acres  of  land,  and  at  once  began  plowing 
and  planting  it.  In  the  course  of  time  it  was 
made  to  yield  him  abundant  harvests,  and  his  farm 
became  one  of  the  best  in  the  neighborhood.  He 
extended  its  boundaries  from  time  to  time  until 
he  became  one  of  the  extensive  land  owners  of  the 
county,  as  well  as  one  of  its  prominent  and  in- 
tluential  citizens. 

Mr.  Winthrop  began  liis  official  career  in    1852, 
being  appointed  by  the  County  Court  as  Drainage 


Commissioner,  in  which  position  he  served  until 
December  4,  1854.  During  this  time  he  sold  the 
large  tracts  of  land  in  Perry  County,  designated 
as  swamp  lands,  under  which  sale  the  school  debt 
of  over  14,000  was  paid.  He  next  served  as  School 
Commissioner  of  Perry  County,  and  in  1861  was 
elected  County  Judge,  in  which  capacity  he  served 
four  years.  During  that  time  the  County  Jail  was 
erected,  and  the  Cairo  Short  Line  Railroad  was 
completed  and  put  in  oi)eration,  as  was  also  the 
Chester  &  Tamaroa  Railroad.  Mr.  AVinthrop  was 
also  Township  Treasurer  for  over  twentj'-five  years. 
He  was  appointed  administrator  of  various  estates, 
and  in  all  public  duties  was  ever  found  faithful 
and  true.  Jn  politics  he  was  a  stalwart  Republican, 
and  socially  was  a  member  of  the  Masonic  and  Odd 
Eellows'  societies,  in  wliicii  he  held  every  office. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  Missionary  Baptist  Cluirch, 
and  died  in  that  faith  June  26,  1888. 

On  the  24th  of  February,  1842,  Mr.  Wintiiiop 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Delilah  Lipe, 
daughter  of  Jonas  and  Esther  IJpe.  They  became 
the  parents  of  nine  children,  three  of  whom  are  3'et 
living.  John  S.,  the  eldest,  who  was  born  October 
21,  1844,  in  Tamaroa  Precinct,  was  reared  on  the 
old  homestead.  He  attended  school  and  aided  in 
the  labors  of  the  farm  until  twenty-four  years  of 
age,  when  his  father  gave  him  his  start  in  life  bj' 
buying  him  a  farm  of  eighty  acres.  To  this  he  has 
added  until  he  now  owns  five  hundred  and  fifty- 
six  acres,  being  one  of  the  Largest  land  owners  of 
the  count}'.  He  now  makes  a  specialty  of  sheep- 
raising.  He  was  married  October  22,  1868,  to 
Mary  A.,  daugliter  of  Isaac  Padrick,  a  farmer  of 
Tamaroa  Precinct.  They  have  nine  children: 
Charles  O.,  who  married  Maggie  E.,  daughter  of 
John  A.  Gee,  a  farmer  of  Tamaroa  Precinct;  Effle 
M.,  wife  of  Solomon  T.  Walker,  a  farmer  of  Du 
Quoin  Precinct;  John  C,  Elsie  E.,  Katie  L.,  Ellen 
G.,  Oracle  v.,  Zella  P.  and  Ilah  B.  The  father  of 
this  family  is  a  member  of  the  Grand  Army  of  the 
Republic,  and  in  politics  is  a  Republican.  He  and 
his  wife  are  members  of  the  Missionary  Baptist 
Church. 

Henry  R.  Winthrop,  whose  name  heads  this 
sketch,  is  the  second  of  the  family,  and  the  sister, 
Susan  R.,  is  the  wife  of  William  D.  Eaton,  a  school 


576 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


teacher  residing  in  Tamaroa  Precinct.  Our  sub- 
ject was  reared  upon  the  old  homestead,  and  ac- 
quired his  education  in  the  common  schools.  At 
the  age  of  twenty-five  he  received  from  his  father 
seventy-five  acres  of  land  with  which  to  begin  life 
on  his  own  account.  As  his  financial  resources  in- 
creased, he  made  other  purchases,  until  he  now  has 
three  hundred  and  sixty  acres — a  valuable  and 
productive  tract.  He  is  successfully  carrying  on 
general  farming  and  stock-raising. 

On  the  18th  of  October,  1876,  was  celebrated 
the  marriage  of  II.  R.  Winthrop  and  Martha  Hut- 
son,  daugliter  of  Chamberlain  Hutson,  a  farmer  of 
Tamaroa  precinct.  Five  children  grace  this  union, 
Carrie  E.,  Denipsey,  Hanlan  H.,  Elsie  E.  and  Sylva 
L.  They  also  lost  two  children,  Daphne  B.  and 
Stella  M.  Mr.  Winthrop  is  a  man  of  domestic 
tastes  and  habits  and  does  not  seek  official  honors. 
He  votes  with  the  Republican  party.  Those  who 
know  him  esteem  him  highly,  for  he  is  a  man  of 
sterling  worth  and  strict  integrity — a  worthy  rep- 
resentative of  one  of  the  honored  pioneer  families 
of  the  count}'. 

The  family  of  which  our  subject  is  an  honored 
representative  has  been  identified  with  the  history 
of  this  country  from  a  very  early  period,  and  has 
furnished  nian^'  distinguished  men.  both  in  civic 
and  military  life.  The  line  of  descent  is  as  fol- 
lows: Adam,  Ad.im,  Adam,  .John  (Governor  of 
Massachusetts),  John  (Governor  of  Connecticut), 
Wait  Still  (who  was  Chief  Justice  of  Massa- 
chusetts), John,  John  S.,  Francis  B.,  John  S., 
Charles  E.  R.,  and  Henry  R.,  of  this  sketch.  Adam 
Winthrop  was  lord  of  the  manor  of  Groton,  Suf- 
folk, England,  and  his  grandson,  John,  was  the 
first  Governor  of  Massachusetts.  The  next  in 
direct  descent  was  John  Winthrop,  who  was  the 
first  Governor  of  Connecticut,  and  who  founded 
New  London. 

In  that  city  the  family  lived  until  shortly  be- 
fore the  Revolutionary  War,  when  Francis  B.  came 
to  New  York.  He  married  Alice  Marston,  and 
their  eldest  son  was  John  S.,  our  subject's  grand- 
father. The  latter  chose  as  his  wife  Harriet  Rog- 
ers, and  at  his  demise  left  four  sons,  Henry  R., 
John  S.,  Charles  and  Francis  B.  (dece.ised.)  Of 
his  daughters  only  one  now  survives,  Susan.     A 


younger  brother  of  Francis  B.  removed  to  Boston 

after  the  Revolution, and  from  him  the  Winthrops 
of  that  city  are  descended.  William,  a  younger 
brother  of  our  subject's  grandfather,  went  back  to 
New  London,  where  some  of  his  children  still  re- 
side. Francis  B.,  another  brothc'-,  settled  in  New 
j  Haven,  and  at  his  death  left  two  sons,  Theodore, 
who  was  killed  in  the  late  war;  and  Colonel  Will- 
iam Winthrop,  U.  S.  A.  Tliomas  Charles,  the 
j'oungest  brother  of  Grandfather  Winthrop,  lived 
in  New  York  and  had  a  large  family  of  children, 
among  whom  w.ts  Major-General  Frederick  Win- 
throp, who  was  killed  at  Five  Forks.  Still  another 
branch  of  the  family  in  New  York  is  descended 
from  another  brother  of  Francis  B.,  of  Revolution- 
ary times,  who  married  a  Miss  Stuyvcsant. 


\Yl  O  H  N  FLEMING,  deceased,  was  a  well 
known  citizen  of  Randolph  Count\\  Among 
the  several  countries  which  have  contributed 
from  time  to  time  to  this  land,  Scotland 
stands  conspicuous.  From  her  shores  we  have  re- 
ceived some  of  our  best  citizens.  From  a  promi- 
nent and  honored  family  of  that  country  came  the 
subject  of  this  sketch.  In  1840,  his  father's  family 
crossed  the  broad  Atlantic,  and  besides  the  parents, 
James  and  Elizabeth  (Patten)  Fleming,  there 
were  three  sonsand  two  daughters:  William;  Chris- 
tina, who  afterward  became  the  wife  of  Amos  Tag- 
gart;  James;  John,  and  Elizabeth,  who  married 
James  H.  Conant.  James  and  Christina  both  died 
in  this  count}-.  AVilliam  and  Elizabeth  are  still 
living  here,  and  are  prominent  and  highly  re- 
spected people  of  the  eommunit\-. 

When  the  family  arrived  in  this  country  the  fa- 
ttier made  his  way  to  Randolph  Count}-,  111.,  and 
purchased  a  farm  of  two  hundred  acres  near  the 
old  town  of  Randolph.  There  he  carried  on  agri- 
cultural pursuits  until  his  death  in  1857.  John 
Fleming,  the  subject  of  this  sketch,  was  born  in 
Scotland,  April  5,  1830,  and  his  childhood  home 
was  near  Glasgow.  He  was  a  lad  of  ten  summers 
at  the  time  of  the  emigration  of  the  family  to 
America.  From  that  time  until  his  death  he  re- 
sided continuously  in  Randolph  County.     He  was 


PORTRAIT  AND  B1<3GRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


579 


reared  in  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads,  and  the 
public  schools  afforded  him  his  educational  privi- 
leges. On  the  31st  of  March,  1851),  he  was  married 
to  Miss  Mar3'  Craig,  daughter  of  John  and  Sarah 
(Curry)  Craig. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Fleming  began  their  domestic 
life  upon  a  farm,  the  same  on  which  tlje  lady  yet 
resides.  It  is  now  a  valuable  estate  and  includes 
several  hundred  acres  of  very  productive  land, 
which  is  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation.  It  is 
supplied  with  never  failing  springs,  and  is  fur- 
nished with  all  the  conveniences  and  accessories  of 
a  model  farm.  The  home  is  a  palatial  one,  and 
stands  on  one  of  the  most  romantic  and  beautiful 
sites  in  this  locality.  Tradition  says  that  an  Indian 
village  once  occupied  the  hill  on  which  it  is  built, 
and  the  arrowheads,  stone  hatchets  and  other  uten- 
sils and  implements  give  credence  to  this  story. 

Mrs.  Fleming  also  came  of  an  old  Scotch  fam- 
ily, and  was  about  three  \-ears  old  when,  in  1840, 
her  parents  crossed  the  briny  deep  to  America. 
Her  father  was  in  good  circumstances,  but  he 
wished  to  live  in  a  land  of  liberty.  Taking  up  his 
residence  in  Randolph  County,  he  turned  his  at- 
tention to  farming,  which  he  followed  throughout 
his  remaining  days.  The  members  of  his  family 
who  still  survive  are,  William  .J  ,  a  prominent  citi- 
zen; Eliza,  wife  of  Andrew  Douglas;  .Jane,  wife  of 
William  McAdam;  .Sarah,  wife  of  Arthur  McKinny; 
Janet,  wife  of  Martin  Kirkwood,  and  Mrs.  Flem- 
ing. All  are  wealthy  people  and  are  well  known 
throughout  the  county-.  Robert  Craig,  an  uncle 
of  Mrs.  Fleming,  left  Scotland  when  a  young  man 
and  went  to  Russia.  He  built  up  a  large  manu- 
facturing business  near  .St.  Petersburg,  and  became 
one  of  the  wealthiest  merchants  of  that  region. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Fleming  were  born  eiglit 
children.  M.iry,  wife  of  Hon.  H.  Clay  Horner,  a 
leading  attorne3-  of  Chester,  died  in  1890;  Anges 
became  the  wife  of  William  Allison,  of  Chester,  and 
died  in  1885;  James  F'ranklin  died  at  the  age  of 
two  yeai-s;  Elizabeth  is  the  wife  of  E.  J.  Allison,  a 
prominent  merchant  of  Chester;  John  married  Ella 
Grannaraan  and  resides  in  Randolph  Countj-; 
Sarah  Virginia,  Arthur  Gordon  and  Maud  are  still 
with  their  mother.  The  members  of  the  family  all 
belong  to  the  Presbyterian  Church,  and  in  the 
20 


communit}'  where  they  lived  are  highly  respected 
citizens,  holding  enviable  positions  in  social  cir- 
cles. Mr.  Fleming  was  a  man  of  sterling  worth 
and  strict  integrity,  who  won  the  confidence  and 
high  regard  of  all  with  whom  he  came  in  contact. 
He  possessed  the  best  characteristics  of  his  Scotch 
ancestors,  and  the  sturdy  independence  and  fidelity 
to  duty  which  mark  his  race  were  strongly  mani- 
fested in  him. 


5-1= 


\I]„,  ON.  G.  II.  C.  BODEKER  is  the  Mayor  of 
[r)l'  Murpiiysboro.  This  hislorv  would  be  in- 
^yfjy'  complete  without  his  sketch,  for  in  social, 
^^  political  and  business  circles  he  occupies  a 
very  prominent  and  influential  position.  He  is  a 
wholesale  and  retail  dealer  in  ice,  is  agent  for  the 
Excelsior  Brewing  Compan}-  of  .St.  Louis,  and  is  a 
stockholder.  Treasurer  and  Director  in  the  Big 
Muddy  Coal  and  Coke  Comi)any  of  De  Soto,  III. 
Through  the  legitimate  channels  of  business  he  has 
won  success  and  gained  a  comfortable  competence. 
Mr.  Bodeker  was  born  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  near 
where  Forest  Park  is  now  situated,  July  3,  1843. 
His  father,  John  Bodeker,  was  born  in  Germany 
and  there  engaged  in  merchandising.  Coming  to 
America,  he  carried  on  a  boarding  house  near  St. 
Louis,  and  openeda  coal  mine  near  Shaw's  Garden. 
In  1873,  he  came  to  Murphj'sboro,  where  he  lived 
retired  until  his  de:ith,  at  the  age  of  seventj'-six. 
He  wedded  Marguerita  K.  Teuken,  a  native  of  Ger- 
man3',and  thev  became  the  pa  rentsof  three  sons  and 
three  daughters,  who  grew  to  manhood  and  woman- 
hood. The  paternal  grandfather  of  our  subject  was 
quite  wealth^-,  and  owned  a  line  of  steamers  plying 
between  Germany  and  Austria. 

At  a  very  early  age,  Mr.  Bodeker  of  this  sketch 
began  earning  his  own  livelihood,  and  worked  at 
coal  mining  for  some  \'ears.  In  1861  he  enlisted 
in  Company  B,  F^ifteenth  Missouri  Militia  of  Coal 
Miners,  but  after  thirty  days  the  company  was 
honorably  discharged,  for  the  gun-boats  could  not 
move  on  account  of  needing  coal.  In  1862,  our 
subject  located  in  Belleville,  St.  Clair  County,  111., 
where  he  worked  fur  three  years,  and  then  leased 


580 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


and  opened  up  a  mine  at  Fniitland,  Calhoun 
County.  In  the  fall  of  1868  he  went  to  Alma,  and 
in  January,  1869,  came  to  Murphysboro. 

For  a  very  short  time  Mr.  Bodeker  worked  in 
the  mines,  and  then  aided  in  the  organization  of 
the  Miners'  Union,  of  which  he  was  Treasurer,  but 
during  the  strike  of  1870,  he  severed  his  connec- 
tion with  it  and  embarked  in  the  ice  business.  Not 
long  afterward  he  became  agent  for  the  brewing 
com  pan  J-.  His  trade  in  ice  gradually  increased, 
and  he  is  now  doing  a  large  wholesale  and  retail 
business.  In  the  southern  part  of  the  city  he  owns 
fortj'  acres  of  land,  including  Bodeker's  Lake, 
where  he  has  three  ice  houses,  100x40,  30x40  and 
40x60  feet  respectively.  He  has  steam  power  and 
an  elevator,  and  an  endless  chain,  and  for  conven- 
ience in  sliipping  has  built  a  switch  track  from  the 
Mobile  <fc  Ohio  Railroad.  In  1880  he  bought  and 
opened  mines  at  De  Soto,  which  are  now  owned 
b3'  a  stock  company,  of  which  he  is  Treasurer. 
They  have  two  hundred  acres  of  coal  land,  and 
employment  is  furnished  to  one  hundred  and  fif- 
teen men.  In  addition  to  the  interests  above 
mentioned  he  owns  a  handsome  residence  and 
Bodeker's  Hall,  besides  other  valuable  property. 

In  1869  Mr.  Bodeker  was  married  to  Margaret 
Wilson,  a  native  of  Chester,  111.,  and  a  daughter 
of  George  Wilson,  who  was  born  in  Scotland.  In 
early  life  the  father  was  a  shoemaker,  but  after 
coming  to  this  country  engaged  in  raining,  and 
operated  the  Dorchester  Mine  at  Mt.  Carbon  until 
his  death.  His  wife,  who  bore  the  maiden  name 
of  Jane  Wallace,  was  also  born  in  Scotland.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Bodeker  have  a  family  of  five  children: 
Henry,  Chailes,  Martha,  Nellie  and  Nora. 

Mr.  Bodeker  takes  a  very  prominent  part  in 
local  politics,  and  is  a  stalwart  advocate  of  the 
principles  of  the  Republican  party.  In  1871  he 
was  elected  Alderman,  and  from  1876  until  1880 
again  filled  that  office.  In  1883  he  was  once  more 
elected  to  that  position,  which  he  then  filled  until 
1889.  His  frequent  re-election  to  that  office  indi- 
cates his  fidelity-  to  duty,  his  popularity  and  the 
confidence  reposed  in  him.  In  April,  lb93,  he  was 
elected  !Mayor  on  the  Republican  ticket  and  is  now 
acceptably  filling  the  position.  Socially  he  is  iden- 
tified with  the  Independent  Order  of  Odd  Fellows, 


the  Ancient  Order  of  United   Workmen  and  the 
Knights  of  Honor. 

Mr.  Bodeker  is  also  the  owner  of  forty  acres, 
half  of  which  is  laid  out  as  a  park.  In  1890  he 
built  a  dam  and  made  an  artificial  lake  covering 
six  acres,  which  is  well  stocked  with  fish,  and  thus 
boating  and  fishing  are  supplied.  He  lias  also 
been  instrumental  in  organizing  and  establishing 
various  other  enterprises  of  the  city,  and  has  ever 
borne  a  prominent  part  in  those  interests  which 
are  calculated  to  prove  of  public  benefit.  He  is 
indeed  a  valued  citizen  and  one  worthy  the  high 
regard  in  which  he  is  held. 


W  OHN  STOELZLE.one  of  the  self-made  men. 
who  through  industry,  enterprise  and  per- 
severance has  worked  his  iray  upward  from 
an  humble  position  to  one  of  influence,  is 
now  a  dealer  in  hardware  in  Murphysboro.  He  was 
born  in  Belleville,  111.,  December  17,  1857,  and  is  a 
son  of  John  Stoelzle,  a  native  of  Germany,  who  on 
emigrating  to  America  located  in  Columbia,  III., 
where  he  located  a  brewerj'  and  carried  on  busi- 
ness until  his  death.  He  married  Apolonia  Kechn, 
who  was  also  born  in  the  Fatherland, and  after  tlie 
death  of  Mr.  Stoelzle,  she  became  the  wife  of 
Ilenrv  Kraus,  who  carried  on  a  machine  shop  in 
Evansville,  III.  In  1871  the3-  came  to  Murphys- 
boro, and  Mr.  Kraus  is  now  the  oldest  man  in  the 
Mt.  Carbon  shops  of  the  Grand  Tower  A-  Cairo 
Railroad. 

Our  subject  was  the  only  child  of  the  first  mar- 
riage, but  by  the  second  union  were  born  five  chil- 
dren, all  of  whom  are  yet  living.  At  the  age  of 
five  he  accompanied  his  mother  to  Evansville,  and 
when  a  youth  of  thirteen  came  to  Murphysboro. 
He  began  work  in  the  shops  of  the  Mt.  Carbon 
Coal  &  Mining  Company,  and  continued  as  a  la- 
borer until  eighteen  years  of  age,  when  he  was 
made  weighmaster  and  timekeeper,  holding  these 
positions  nntil  1881.  He  then  returned  and  em- 
barked in  business  for  himself  as  proprietor  of  a 
meat  market  on  Chestnut  Street,  where  he  carried 
on  operations  for  two  years.  In  1883  he  estab- 
lished a  hardware  store  on  Chestnut  Street  on  a 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


581 


small  scale.  His  business,  however,  constantly  in- 
creased, and  in  1892  he  bought  out  tlie  firm  of 
Huthmacher  &  Co.,  dealers  in  hardware.  The  same 
year  he  admitted  to  partnersliip  his  brother,  Henry 
Kraus,  and  they  now  carry  on  business  under  tlie 
firm  name  of  Stoelzle  &  Brother.  They  occupy  the 
two  floors  and  basement  of  a  double  store,  35x60 
feet.  In  the  basement  they  have  oils  and  paints, 
on  the  first  floor  is  their  shelf  and  heavy  hard- 
ware, stoves  and  tinware,  and  the  second  floor  is 
used  as  a  storeroom  for  plows  and  stoves.  They 
have  the  largest  hardware  business  in  tlie  city. 

In  1883,  in  Miirphysboro,  was  celebrated  the 
marriage  of  Mr.  Stoelzle  and  Miss  Christina  Daniel, 
a  native  of  Belleville,  111.,  and  a  daughter  of  Se- 
bastian Daniel,  who  was  formerly  a  baker  of  Mur- 
physboro,  but  is  now  deceased.  They  have  tliree 
children,  a  son  and  tvvo  daughters,  ,Iohn,  Lizzie 
and  Irene. 

Mr.  Stoelzle  owns  his  own  home,  which  is  a 
])leasant  residence  in  the  Second  Ward.  He  has 
served  as  School  Director  one  term,  and  in  poli- 
tics is  a  sui)porter  of  the  Republican  party.  He 
holds  membership  with  St.  Andrew's  Catiiolic 
Church.  His  honesty  and  integrity  are  unques- 
tioned,and  good  business  ability  and  well  directed 
efforts  have  won  him  a  merited  success  and  placed 
him  at  the  head  of  one  of  the  leading  mercantile 
concerns  of  Jlurphysboro. 


EDWARD  R.  NEILL,  Pn.  G.,  is  the  owner  of 
the  Neill  Block, of  Murphysboro,and  the  fine 
drug  store  therein,  an  establishment  which 
would  be  an  ornament  to  a  citj'  of  greater  size 
tlian  the  thriving  one  in  which  it  is  located.  Mr. 
Neill  was  born  in  Ruslivi lie,  Schuyler  County,  111., 
May  24,  1870,  and  is  a  son  of  John  and  Lyde 
(Jones)  Neill.  The  grandfather,  Charles  Neill,  of 
Scotch  descent,  was  one  of  the  early  settlers  of  this 
state,  and  served  as  Sheriff  and  County  Clerk  of 
Schuyler  County.     His  wife  is  still  living. 

The  father  of  our  subject  was  born  and  reared 
in  Schu^yler  County,  where  he  still  makes  his  home. 
In  former  years  he  was  a  wholesale  dealer  in 
broom  corn.     For  eight  years  he  served  .as  Sheriff 


of  his  native  county,  and  has  been  Deputy  .Sheriff 
for  twelve  years,  which  position  he  still  fills.  He 
is  a  higlily  ies|)ected  citizen,  widely  known.  In 
politics  he  is  a  Democrat,  and  in  religious  belief 
he  is  a  IMethodist.  Edward  R.  is  their  only  child. 
He  was  reared  in  Rushville  and  was  educated  in  the 
high  school  and  the  Rushville  Normal  and  Business 
College,  completing  the  course  in  that  institution. 
During  his  boyhood  he  began  clerking  in  a  drug 
store,  and  in  1889  entered  the  pharmacy  depart- 
ment of  the  Northwestern  University  of  Evanston, 
from  which  he  was  graduated  February  24,  1890, 
with  the  degree  of  Ph.  G.  When  his  college  course 
was  completed,  he  accepted  a  position  as  salesman 
with  the  firm  of  Buck  &  Raynor,  of  Chicago,  and 
later  became  city  bu3'er  for  that  establishment, 
with  which  he  continued  until  the  24th  of  Decem- 
ber, 1892.  He  then  gave  notice  to  the  firm  tiiat 
he  expected  to  leave,  and  as  he  had  been  a  valua- 
ble employe,  it  was  with  great  reluctance  that  they 
saw  him  depart. 

Mr.  Neill  was  married  on  the  21st  of  Januarj', 

1891,  to  Miss  Minnie  M.  Smith,  a  native  of  Cape 
Girardeau,  Mo.,  and  a  daugliter  of  C.  C.  and  Mary 
E.  Smith.  She  was  educated  in  St.  Louis,  and  is 
a  lady  of  culture  and  refinement.  Unto  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Neill  has  been  born  one  son,  P^ioyd  S. 

The  death  of  Mr.  Smith  occurred  in  November, 

1892,  and  our  subject  came  to  this  place  to  help 
settle  up  his  business.  He  tiien  decided  to  locate 
here,  and  purchased  the  two  lots  at  the  corner  of 
Walnut  and   Blanchard   Streets  in   the  spring   of 

1893,  immediately  beginning  the  erection  of  the 
fine  block,  48x65  feet.  It  is  two  stories  in  height, 
with  a  basement,  and  Mr.  Neill  occupies  the  fine 
corner  store,  which  is  25x65  feet.  It  is  finished 
in  quarter-sawed  oak,  and  is  furnished  with  fine 
show  cases,  combination  counters,  a  handsome 
Arctic  soda  fountain,  etc.  The  place  is  indeed 
complete  in  all  its  appointments, and  the  drugstore 
is  the  best  equipped  in  the  county.  Mr.  Neill  is  a 
competent  pharmacist,  and  although  he  lias  been 
in  business  here  but  a  few  months,  he  is  already 
securing  from  the  public  a  liberal  patrtmage. 

In  his  political  views  Mr.  Neill  is  a  Democrat, 
but  has  never  been  an  office  seeker.  lie  belongs 
to  the  State  Pharmaceutical  Association,  is  Prelate 


582 


rOKTRAlT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


of  the  Knights  of  Pythias  lodge,  and  Master  of 
Finance  of  the  K.  M.  K.  C.  His  wife  liolds  mem- 
bership Willi  the  Lutlieran  Church. 


=^: 


'•{••»"5"i-^ 


^^^  'rEPHEN  NASH  owns  and  operates  one 
^^^4  hundred  and  seventy  acres  of  laud  on  sec- 
lliff  J9)  *'''°  '^'  township  5,  range  1  west,  Perrj' 
County.  His  farm  is  one  of  the  best  in 
the  neighborho6d,  being  under  a  high  state  of  cul- 
tivation and  well  improved.  Its  owner  ranks 
among  the  leading  agriculturists  of  the  community 
and  well  deserves  to  be  thus  classed. 

Mr.  Nash  was  born  on  the  30tli  of  August,  1818, 
in  New  York,  and  is  a  son  of  Stephen  and  Bathshua 
(Belknap)  Nash.  The  father  was  a  son  of  Lieut. 
Moses  Nash,  of  Stockbridgc,  Mass.,  an  officer  in  the 
Colonial  army.  Stephen  Nash,  Sr.,  grew  to  man- 
hood and  ac<iuired  his  education  in  his  native  town, 
where  he  learned  the  trade  of  a  tanner  and  currier. 
The  year  1822  witnessed  his  en^igration  to  Illinois 
and  saw  him  located  in  Morgan  County,  where  he 
engaged  in  tanning  and  farming.  He  afterward 
removed  to  Henneinn,  Putnam  Count}',  there  mak- 
ing his  home  until  his  death,  which  occurred  Sep- 
tember 19,  1878.  His  wife  was  a  native  of  Brattle- 
boro,  Vt.,  and  accompanied  her  parents  to  New 
York,  where  she  was  married. 

The  marriage  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Nash  was  cele- 
brated Januarj'  18,  1816,  and  was  blessed  with 
seven  children,  Mary  A.,  Stephen;  Elizabeth,  wife 
of  Africa  H.  Turner,  a  farmer  of  Putnam  Count}', 
111.;  Asenath  B.,  who  married  Samuel  A.  Dixon,  of 
Greenwood  County,  Kan.;  Daniel  B.,  a  prominent 
lawyer,  who  for  more  than  thirty  3'ears  has  success- 
fully engaged  in  practice  in  Davenport,  Iowa; 
Martin,  a  well-to-do  citizen,  who  is  now  living  re- 
tired in  Putnam  Count}',  and  Lucy  J.,  deceased. 

Mr.  Nash  whose  name  heads  this  record  spent 
his  earlier  life  in  work  upon  his  father's  farm  and 
in  a  tannery.  He  acquired  such  education  as  the 
limited  facilities  of  the  time  afforded.  With  the 
proceeds  derived  from  his  wages  while  working 
for  his  father  he  made  his  first  purchase  of  land,  a 
tract  of  eighty  acres,  and  began  farming  on  his 
own  account.     In   1866  he  came  to  Perry  County 


and  purchased  seventy  acres  of  his  present  farm, 
the  boundaries  of  which  lie  has  since  extended  un- 
til now  one  hundred  and  seventy  acres  of  rich  land 
yield  to  him  a  golden  tribute  in  return  for  the 
care  and  cultivation  he  bestows  upon  it. 

On  the  10th  of  March,  1853,  Mr.  Nash  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Louisa  .1.,  daughter  of 
Nathan  Skeel.  Unto  them  were  born  thiee  chil- 
dren, all  of  whom  are  yet  living,  Linus  H.;  Edward, 
who  resides  in  Wiiiteside  County.  111.,  and  Lucy, 
wife  of  Zebede  Hampleman,  a  farmer  of  Paradise 
Prairie,  Perry  County. 

While  residing  in  Putnam  County,  Mr.  Nash 
held  the  office  of  School  Director,  and  the  same 
position  was  tendered  him  in  this  county,  but  he 
declined  it.  He  votes  with  the  Republican  party, 
but  has  never  sought  or  desired  political  prefer- 
ment. He  and  his  wife  are  members  of  the  Pres- 
byterian Church.  He  is  regarded  as  a  man  of 
sterling  worth  and  is  very  popular  with  his  neigh- 
bors. The  name  Nash  is  of  Saxon  origin,  and  our 
subject  is  descended  from  a  long  line  of  illustrious 
ancestors,  many  of  whom  fought  in  the  Revolu- 
tionary War.  Although  seventy-five  years  of  age. 
he  is  yet  hale  and  hearty,  and  is  sltll  actively  en- 
gaged in  looking  after  his  farm. 


^^^  AMUEL  AV.  WARD,  who  is  engaged  in 
the  clothing  business,  is  Superintendent 
of  the  Murphysboro  Street  Railway  Com- 
pany. He  IS  manager  of  Logan  Park,  and  is 
one  of  the  most  enterprising  and  progressive  citi- 
zens of  Jackson  County,  and  the  prosperity  and 
advancement  of  the  community  is  due  in  no 
small  measure  to  his  efforts.  He  was  born  Febru- 
ary 23,  1862,  in  Cartersville,  111.,  and  is  a  son  of 
Henry  and  Lucy  A.  (Todd)  Ward,  the  former  a 
native  of  Litchfield  County,  Conn.,  while  the  lat- 
ter was  also  born  in  that  state.  In  the  family 
were  six  children,  four  of  whom  are  yet  living. 
The  grandfather  of  our  subject  came  of  the  old 
Plymouth  Rock  stock,  and  was  a  native  of  Massa- 
chusetts. 

Henry  Ward  was  reared  as  a  farmer  on  the  Con- 
necticut River,  and  when  he  reached  man's  estate 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


583 


was  there  married.  In  1858  he  came  west  to  Illi- 
nois, locating  at  Carbondnle,  wliere  he  secured  a 
tract  of  timber  land,  cleared  it,  and  developed  a 
fine  farm  of  two  hundred  and  sixty  acres.  On  the 
30th  of  September,  1893,  was  celebrated  the  golden 
wedding  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ward,  who  are  now  liv- 
ing retired  in  Du  Quoin,  III. 

The  early  boyhood  days  of  our  subject  were 
spent  upon  the  home  farm,  and  at  the  age  of  eight 
he  began  attending  school  in  Carbondale.  He  was 
a  student  in  the  high  school  at  that  place,  and 
afterward  in  the  Southern  Illinois  Normal  School, 
where  he  pursued  a  business  course.  At  the  age 
of  eighteen  he  began  clerking  in  a  clothing  store, 
and  thus  obtained  a  practical  business  knowledge. 
In  1881,  in  company  with  his  brother,  he  pur- 
chased a  slock  of  goods,  and  they  began  business 
under  the  firm  name  of  Ward  Brothers.  This  con- 
nection .was  continued  until  1883,  when  the  part- 
nership was  dissolved.  The  previous  year  Samuel 
W.  had  come  to  Murphysboro  and  established  a 
store  under  the  name  of  Ward  &  Solomon,  and  in 
1883  he  removed  thither.  He  then  purchased  the 
interest  of  his  partner,  and  has  since  been  alone 
in  business,  carrying  on  a  fine  store,  stocked  with 
clothing,  men's  furnishing  goods,  hats  and  caps, 
boots  and  shoes,  and  trunks  and  valises.  This 
store  is  located  at  No.  6  East  Walnut  Street,  and 
the  building  is  20x65  feet. 

Mr.  Ward  has  been  twice  married.  In  Carbon- 
dale  he  married  Alice  A.,  daughter  of  the  late 
Vincent  Hinchcliff,  who  was  killed  in  the  William- 
son County  vendetta.  The  lady  was  born  in  Will- 
iamson County,  and  was  reared  in  the  convent  in 
St.  Louis.  Shfe  died  in  Murphysboro,  leaving  a 
daughter,  Elmina,  and  Mr.  Ward  has  since  wedded 
Miss  .lulia  Wagner,  one  of  Illinois'  daughters. 

In  the  fall  of  1891,  our  subject  aided  in  the 
organization  of  the  Murphysboro  Street  Railway 
Company,  and  has  since  been  one  of  its  Directors. 
The  road  was  completed  May  18,  1892,  and  he  has 
since  been  Superintendent.  He  was  also  one  of 
ten  men  who  established  Logan  Park.  The  car 
line  runs  from  the  park  to  the  depot,  and  in  the 
spring  of  1894  the  company  expects  to  greatly  ex- 
tend its  lines  and  put  in  electric  power.  Mr. 
Ward  is  also  a   chaiter    member  of    the    Board  of 


Trade.  He  served  on  the  School  Board  for  three 
3'ears,  and  during  the  entire  period  was  its  Secre- 
tary. He  belongs  to  Mt.  Carbon  Lodge  No.  434, 
I.  O.  O.  F.,  of  which  he  is  Past  Noble  Grand.  He 
is  a  charter  member  of  the  Knights  of  Pythias, 
and  belongs  to  the  Uniformed  Rank.  In  politics  he 
is  a  stanch  Democrat,  and  has  been  delegate  to  the 
state  conventions.-  He  was  a  member  of  the  County 
Central  Committee,  and  Chairman  of  the  City 
Committee.  He  takes  a  commendable  interest  in 
everything  pertaining  to  the  welfare  of  the  com- 
munity, and  has  been  prominent  in  manj'  of  its 
public  enterprises. 

p^  QUIRE  GEORGE  KENNEDY  has  since 
'^^  May,  1851,  made  Ins  home  in  Murphys- 
'^  boro,  and  is  numbered  among  its  honored 
pioneers.  It  is  said  that  the  history  of  a 
community  is  best  told  in  the  lives  of  its  citizens, 
and  this  is  certainly  true  of  the  records  of  the 
pioneers.  Our  subject  was  born  in  County  Armagh, 
Ireland,  on  the  24th  of  February  1822.  His  grand- 
father, George  Kennedy,  was  a  farmer  and  linen 
weaver  of  that  country.  The  family,  however, 
is  of  Scotch  descent.  George  Kennedy,  the  father 
of  our  subject,  followed  the  same  pursuits  as  the 
grandfather.  He  emigrated  to  America,  but  on 
account  of  ill  health  returned  to  the  Emerald  Isle, 
and  later  went  to  Scotland,  where  he  spent  his  last 
days.  He  married  Jane,  daughter  of  John  Cun- 
ningham, who  was  also  an  extensive  linen  weaver. 
Mrs.  Kennedy  emigrated  to  America,  locating  first 
in  Massachusetts,  and  thence  came  to  this  place, 
making  her  home  with  our  subject.  She  was  a 
faithful  member  of  the  Episcopal  Church, and  died 
at  the  age  of  eighty-four.  The  history  of  the  Cun- 
ningham family  can  be  traced  back  to  an  early  daj'. 
The  grandfather  of  the  Squire's  grandfather  estab- 
lished the  first  foundry  in  Belfast,  Ireland. 

George  Kenned}',  whose  name  heads  this  record, 
is  the  only  survivor  in  a  family  of  eight  children. 
He  was  reared  in  Ireland  and  educated  in  the  na- 
tional schools.  From  the  age  of  eleven  he  lived 
with  an  aunt.  Her  husband  was  a  weaver,  and 
with  him  George  learned  the  trade.     He  became  a 


584 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


manufacturer  of  damask  linen  and  did  very  fine 
work.  In  1842  he  sailed  from  Belfast  to  Liver- 
pool and  then  crossed  the  Atlantic.  He  made  liis 
nay  from  New  York  City  to  Boston,  and  began 
workiiig.it  the  bench  for  an  uncle,  making  shuttles, 
molds,  etc.  He  afterwards  entered  a  cabinet  shop 
and  subsequently-  removed  to  Jersey  City.  N.  J.> 
thence  going  to  Pittsbuig. 

In  18/)  1  Jlr.  Kennedy'  went  down  the  Ohio  and 
up  the  Mississippi  Rivers  and  worked  near  Rock- 
wood  for  a  short  time,  but  after  a  few  weeks  came 
to  this  place.  In  connection  with  his  brother  he 
built  a  house  for  Dr.  Logan,  and  continued  as  a 
builder  for  some  time.  He  also  erected  a  cabinet 
shop,  and  for  a  few  years  engaged  in  the  manufac- 
ture of  furniture  and  coffins.  The  brothers  put  up 
the  counters  and  shelves  for  the  first  store  in  Car- 
bondale  and  did  considerable  work  there.  For  a 
long  time  he  carried  on  a  store  in  Murphysboro, 
dealing  in  hardware,  stoves  and  agricultural  im- 
plements, but  at  length  he  sold  out  to  his  son.  He 
had  formerly  been  associated  .with  M.  H.  Ross  un- 
der the  firm  name  of  Kennedy  &  Ross. 

In  1854  Mr.  Kenned3'  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Ellen  Ross,  a  native  of  Vermont.  She 
died  in  1885.  Nine  children  were  born  unto  them, 
six  of  whom  grew  to  mature  years:  Amelia,  widow 
of  F.  Smith;  Lizzie,  wife  of  James  H.  Martin; 
Anna,  at  home;  George,  who  is  agent  for  the 
Adams  Express  Company  and  is  also  engaged  in 
the  livery  business;  Leonard,  wlio  is  in  the  employ 
of  the  .Southern  Express  Company  at  Memphis, 
Tenn.;  and  John,  who  is  employed  in  the  Counts- 
Clerk's  oflice. 

Few  men  are  more  familiar  with  the  history  of 
this  community  than  Squire  Kennedy.  He  served 
from  1856  until  May,  1893,  as  Justice  of  the  Peace. 
It  was  Mr.  Kennedy  who  bought  the  first  car  load 
of  wagons  ever  sent  to  this  count}'.  He  also  had 
some  of  the  first  buggies  and  farm  machinery.  He 
has  erected  a  fine  brick  business  block,  and  laid  out 
Kennedy's  Addition  to  the  town.  His  home  i.c- 
cupies  a  tract  of  twenty  acres,  and  he  also  owns 
eighty  acres  of  highly  improved  land  in  Somerset 
Township.  He  is  a  stockholder  and  director  in 
the  First  National  Bank,  and  w.as  one  of  the  organ- 
izers  and    is  a  stockholder  and    director  in    the 


Southern  Illinois  Mill.  He  is  the  only  surviving 
charier  member  of  Amity  Lodge  No.  132, 1.  O.  O.  F., 
and  has  several  times  represented  it  in  the  Grand 
Lodge.  He  was  a  charter  member  of  the  first  Lu- 
theran Church,  and  is  still  serving  as  Trustee.  In 
politics  he  has  been  a  stalwart  Republican  since  the 
war.  Highl}'  respected  by  all  wlio  know  him,  he 
well  deserves  representation  in  this  volume,  for  he 
has  been  prominently  identified  with  the  historj- 
of  the  county  and  has  ever  borne  his  part  in  the 
work  of  upbuilding  and  advancement. 


'J-i-i"i"H  = 

UDGE  LEWIS  HAMMACK,  a  prominent 
and  well  known  attorney  of  southern  Illi- 
nois, now  living  in    Pinckneyville,  claims 

Tennessee  as  the  state  of  his  nativity.     He 

was  born  June  25,  1825,  and  is  a  son  of  Benjamin 
Hammack,  a  native  of  Virginia.  The  grandfather, 
Lewis  Hammack,  Sr.,  was  also  born  in  the  Old  Do- 
minion, and  came  of  an  old  family  that  was 
founded  in  J,hat  state  at  an  early  da}-.  He  was  a 
farmer  and  local  Methodist  minister,  and  his  last 
da^'S  were  spent  in  Tennessee.  He  had  one  son 
who  served  in  the  War  of  1812. 

Benjamin  Hammack  was  the  \oungest  in  his 
father's  famil}-.  After  his  marriage,  he  removed 
with  his  family  to  Missouri,  in  the  latter  part  of 
the  j-ear  1825,  when  the  Judge  was  a  child  of  six 
months.  B}-  trade  he  was  a  wheelwright,  and  in 
his  shop  on  his  farm  he  not  only  repaired  wagons, 
but  made  t.ables,  chairs,  spinning  wheels  and  looms. 
In  fact  he  was  handy  at  all  kinds  of  mechanical 
work.  After  two  years  spent  in  Missouri,  he  re- 
moved to  Jackson  County,  111.,  and  in  1829  came 
to  Perry  County,  settling  two  and  a-half  miles 
northwest  of  the  place  where  the  town  of  Tamaroa 
now  stands.  In  1838,  he  removed  to  Holt's  Prai- 
rie, where  he  lived  for  a  number  of  years,  and 
then  went  to  Coon  Hill,  where  he  died  in  1873,  at 
the  age  of  seventy-three  years.  He  had  been  hon- 
ored with  the  office  of  County  Commissioner,  As- 
sessor, Justice  of  the  Peace  and  County  Treasurer, 
and  was  a  man  of  more  than  ordinary  ability, 
being  highly  respected  by  all. 

The  mother  of  our  subject,  who  was  formerly 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


585 


Sarah  Hull,  was  born  In  Kentucky.  She  was  a 
daughter  of  Richard  Hull,  a  native  of  New  .Jersey, 
wiio  when  a  young  man  went  to  Noitli  Carolina, 
thence  to  Tennessee,  and  later  to  Kentucky.  He 
served  as  a  soldier  in  the  War  of  1812,  and  his 
father  was  a  Rcvolutionar3'  soldier.  Mrs.  Ham- 
mack  died  in  Januarj',  1891,  at  the  age  of  eighty- 
two  3'ears.  The  .ludge  was  tlie  second  in  the  fam- 
ily of  nine  children,  six  sons  and  three  daughters, 
all  of  whom  grew  to  mature  jears.  Four  brothers 
are  now  living,  William,  Thomas,  Benjamin  and 
Lewis.  The  first  went  to  California  in  1849,  but 
returned  with  impaired  health,  and  now  lives  in 
this  count}'.  Richard  also  went  west  during  the 
gold  excitement  and  died  in  California.  Zebede, 
a  lawyer,  entered  the  army  as  a  member  of 
Company  C,  Eighty-first  Illinois  lufantr}^  was 
wounded  at  Vicksburg,  and  died  from  the  effects 
of  iiis  injur^.  Thomas  is  a  farmer  and  local  min- 
ister of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  residing 
in  Union  County,  111.  Benjamin  is  a  farmer  and 
local  minister  of  Franklin  County. 

On  tlie  old  home  farm  Judge  Hamniack  was 
reared,  wliile  in  the  common  schools  he  was  edu- 
cated. He  entered  the  army  for  service  in  the 
Mexican  War,  and  on  iiis  return  in  1848  he  was 
elected  Circuit  Clerk,  holding  tlie  position  four 
3'ears,  during  which  time  he  read  law.  Having 
made  a  fight  against  the  open  saloon,  he  was  on 
this  account  defeated  for  a  second  term  as  Circuit 
Clerk.  Soon  after  leaving  office  he  was  admitted 
to  the  Bar,  and  has  since  been  successfully  engaged 
in  practice,  winning  an  enviable  reputation  as  a 
lawj-er.  In  1863,  he  was  nominated  as  Circuit 
Judge,  but  lost  the  election  by  twenty-six  votes. 

In  1851,  Mr.  Hamniack  wedded  Cordelia  M.  Ed- 
wards, a  sister  of  Captain  Edwards,  the  present  law 
partner  of  Judge  Lewis  Hamniack,  and  a  representa- 
tive of  one  of  the  lionored  pioneer  families  of 
soutliern  Illinois.  To  tiiem  were  born  three  chil- 
dren, Elizabeth  .1.,  wife  of  Benjamin  Wood,  of 
Pinckneyville;  AVilliam,  who  is  engaged  in  the 
stock  and  dairy  l)usiness  near  Pinckneyville;  and 
Charles  Lewis,  a  traveling  salesman  of  St.  Louis. 
The  mother  of  this  family  died  in  1872,  and  the 
present  wife  of  Judge  Haramack  was  Maria  J. 
(Rigg)  Guthrie,  daughter  of  Alexander  Rigg.    He 


is  a  member  of  the  Methodist  Church,  and  socially 
is  a  demitted  Mason.  From  the  beginning  he  ii.as 
had  a  good  practice,  and  his  high  reputation  as  a 
lawyer  is  well  deserved. 


^^  APT.  MORTIMER  CLAY  EUWARUS,  tlie 
(l(  _  junior  member  of  the  law  firm  of  llam- 
^^^  mack  &,  Edwards,  was  born  in  Pinckney- 
ville, on  the  14th  of  March,  1838.  His  father, 
William  Edwards,  was  a  native  of  Vermont,  and 
in  early  life  removed  to  Ohio,  whence  he  emigrated 
to  Shawneetown,  111.,  coming  to  Pinckneyville  in 
1832.  The  grandfather,  Calvin  Edwards,  came  to 
this  state,and  here  died  in  1861,  at  the  age  of  sev- 
enty-nine. William  Edwards  was  an  attorney  by 
profession.  He  married  .Juliet  M.  Brown,  a  native  of 
Virginia,  who  died  in  September,  1893,  at  the  age 
of  seventy -nine.  His  death  occurred  in  1854,  at 
the  age  of  forty-nine.  Of  their  family  three  are 
now  living.  Cordelia  M.  became  the  wife  of  Judge 
Hammack,  and  died  some  years  ago.  Gilbert  H. 
was  a  soldier  of  Company  A,  Eighteenth  Illinois 
Infantry,  and  died  during  the  service  in  Cairo,  111., 
in  1862.  Eliza  was  the  wife  of  C.C.  Irwin,  of 
Wayne  County,  III.,  and  died  in  1873.  Rowena 
J.  IS  the  wife  of  Judge  J.  D.  Hamilton,  of  Geneva, 
Neb.  W.  W.  is  dean  of  the  law  department  of 
McKendree  College  of  Lebanon. 

No  event  of  special  importance  occurred  during 
the  boyhood  and  youth  of  Captain  Edwards,  which 
were  passed  in  his  native  town.  His  earl}-  educa- 
tion was  acquired  in  the  local  schools,  but  later  he 
spent  two  years  in  the  Masonic  College  of  Lexing- 
ton, '^^o.  Wishing  to  enter  the  legal  profession, 
he  began  reading  law  with  Judge  Hammack,  and 
was  admitted  to  the  Bar  in  1859.  He  then  engaged 
in  practice  until  August,  1862,  when  he  entered 
the  army  as  a  member  of  Company  C,  Eighty- 
first  Illinois  Infantry.  He  was  made  First  Lieu- 
tenant, and  in  June,  1864,  for  bravery  and  meri- 
torious conduct  on  the  field  of  battle  was  promoted 
to  the  rank  of  Captain.  He  took  part  in  eighteen 
engagements,  serving  until  tlie  close  of  the  war, 
and  was  slightly  vvounded  at  Champion  Hills. 

Ere  leaving  home,  the  Captain  was  married,  in 
1861,  to  Miss  H.  M.  Edwards,  and   to  them  were 


586 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


born  two  children,  Emma  A.,  wife  of  J.  A.  Bihj', 
of  Pinckneyville;  and  W.  O.,  who  graduated  from 
MeKendiee  College,  and  is  now  engaged  in  teach- 
ing. After  the  war.  Captain  Edwards  resumed  law 
practice  in  Pinckney  ville,  and  has  since  devoted 
his  energies  to  the  prosecution  of  his  profession. 
In  1880,  he  was  elected  County  Attorney,  and 
served  four  years.  In  1885,  he  went  to  Haskell 
County,  Kan.,  and  on  the  organization  of  that 
county  was  appointed  County  Attorney',  a  posi- 
tion he  held  for  two  \-ears.  He  was  again  elected 
to  that  office,  but  after  a  year  resigned  and  re- 
moved to  Geneva,  Neb.  A  year  later,  in  1891, 
he  returned  to  Pinckneyville,  and  since  that  time 
has  been  engaged  in  the  practice  of  law  in  connec- 
tion with  Judge  Hammack. 

Mr.  Edwards  is  a  Royal  Arch  Mason,  and  has 
served  as  Master  of  the  blue  lodge.  In  politics,  he 
is  a  Republican,  and  is  a  warm  advocate  of  the 
principles  of  that  party.  He  holds  membcrsuip 
with  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  in  which  he 
is  Trustee,  and  is  a  charitable  and  benevolent  gen- 
tleman, whose  manj' excellencies  of  character  have 
gained  for  him  high  regard.  The  law  firm  of 
Hammack  &  Edwards  is  now  enjoying  a  liberal 
patronage  and  is  ranked  among  the  leading  busi- 
ness firms  of  the  citj'. 


\l^_^^AMOR  H.  HAN.SOX,  who  devotes  his  time 
ij)|)  and  attention  to  agricultural  pursuits  on 
Is^^  section  17,  Murphysboro  Township,  Jack- 
^p  son  County,  was  born  on  a  farm  near  Car- 
bondale,  October  10,  1847.  His  fatlier,  Abuam  M. 
Hanson,  was  a  native  of  England,  born  March  19, 
1815.  He  married  Catherine  Hiller,  daughter  of 
Simon  Hiller,  who  was  a  soldier  of  the  Revolu- 
tionary War.  In  1829,  he  emigrated  to  Illinois, 
and  settled  two  miles  southwest  of  Carboudale, 
where  he  made  a  permanent  location.  Through- 
out his  remaining  days  he  followed  preaching  and 
farming. 

Abram  M.  Hanson  came  to  this  state  the  same 
year  and  opened  up  a  new  farm  in  Carbondale 
Township.  He  there  continued  to  reside  until 
18G0,  when  he  removed  to  another  farm  that  com- 


prised two  hundred  and  fifteen  acres  of  good  land. 
To  its  further  development  and  cultivation  he  de- 
voted his  energies  throughout  his  remaining  days. 
He  lost  his  first  wife  October  20,  1847.  They  were 
the  parents  of  five  children,  three  of  whom  are  now 
living.  After  her  death  he  was  three  times  mar- 
ried, and  now  has  nine  living  children.  Two  of 
his  sons  were  soldiers  in  the  late  war.  Mr.  Hanson 
was  a  member  of  the  Episcopal  Church.  His  death 
occurred  July  23,  1886,  and  his  loss  was  mourned 
throughout  the  eommunitj'. 

H.  H.  Hanson  spent  the  days  of  his  boyhood 
and  youth  upon  his  father's  farnv,  and  October  11, 
1864,  he  responded  to  the  country's  call  for 
troops,  becoming  a  member  of  the  Eighty-first 
Illinois  Infantry.  He  was  then  only  seventeen 
years  of  age.  He  joined  the  regiment  at  Jefferson 
Barracks,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  with  it  was  assigned 
to  the  command  of  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith.  After  partici- 
pating in  the  battle  of  Nashville,  the  troops  fol- 
lowed Hood  to  Eastport,  Tenn.,  and  later  took 
part  in  the  battles  of  Mobile,  Spanish  Fort  and 
ISIontgomery,  Ala.  When  the  war  was  over,  Mr. 
Hanson  received  an  honorable  discharge,  and  was 
mustered  out  October  11,  1865. 

On  September  16,  1866,  occurred  another  im- 
portant event  in  the  life  of  our  subject,  his  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Margaret  Josephine  Crowell,  a 
daughter  of  Evin  A.  and  Catherine  (Long)  Cro- 
well. The  former  was  born  in  North  Carolina, 
January  10,  1813,  and  the  latter  in  the  same  state, 
August  11,  1814.  In  1844  they  removed  to  Ten- 
nessee, and  in  1860  came  to  Illinois,  locating  in 
Carbondale  Township,  where  the  mother  died 
April  19,  1874.  The  father  departed  this  life  Feb- 
ruary 2,  1891.  They  were  the  parents  of  eleven 
children,  nine  of  whom  are  still  living.  The\' 
held  membership  witli  llie  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church,  and  were  higlil.v  respected  citizens. 

Mrs.  Hanson  was  born  in  North  Carolina,  De- 
cember 22,  1843,  and  was  educated  in  the  common 
schools.  Upon  their  marriage  they  located  upon 
their  present  farm,  and  their  home  has  been  bless- 
ed by  the  presence  of  seven  children,  four  of  whom 
are  yet  living.  Abram  A.,  who  was  born  June  16, 
1867,  married  April  4,  1889,  Minnie  Etherton,  by 
whom  he  has  two  children;  they  reside  upon   the 


.,u 


v'»'4i 


*'l! 


'B?^  - 


X 


I 


^^^^^.j^^' 


RESIDENCE  OF    E.  B.  HUNTER,  SEC.  ^T.,  SOMERSET  1  P^JAlKJjN   CU,,  ILL 


RESIDENCE  OF    H.    H.  HANSOM,   5FC.ir.^  MURPHr^BORO  TP  .JACKSON  CO., I  LL. 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


589 


home  farm.  James  .Sylvester,  who  was  born  No- 
vember 17,  1869,  and  is  still  living  on  the  old 
iiomestead,  wedded  July  14, 1889,  Hattie  Etherton, 
b}'  whom  he  has  three  children;  Hattie  C.  was  born 
August  30,  1871,  and  Maggie  Nora  was  born  Jan- 
uary 18,  1879. 

The  parents  of  this  family  are  both  meml)ers  of 
the  United  Brethren  Ciuirch,  taking  an  active  part 
in  church  work.  They  contribute  liberally  to  its 
support,  and  Mr.  Hanson  is  now  serving  as  Trustee. 
He  has  been  a  member  of  the  .School  Board  for 
twenty  3'ears  and  labors  untiringly  in  its  inter- 
est. He  is  also  a  prominent  member  of  Worthen 
Post  No.  128,G.  A.  R.,  of  Murphysboro.  He  takes 
an  active  interest  in  politics  and  is  a  stanch  sup- 
porter of  the  Republican  party  and  its  principles. 
Tlie  community  recognizes  in  him  a  valued  citizen, 
who  gives  his  support  and  co-operation  to  every 
enterprise  calculated  to  prove  of  public  benefit. 
Recently  he  visited  the  old  family  grave3ard, 
where  lie  the  remains  of  his  grandfather,  Abram 
Hanson,  and  great-grandfather,  Sylvester  Hanson, 
it  being  worthy  of  note  that  so  many  generations 
are  buried  in  the  .same  cemetery. 


ERMANN  DECKER,  a  well  known  citizen 
of  Randolph  County,  who  is  engaged  in 
general  fanning  and  stock-raising  on  sec- 
tion 3,  township  7,  range  7,  claims  Germany 
as  the  land  of  his  birth,  which  occurred  in  Olden- 
burg, November  16,  1822.  His  parents,  Frank 
and  Elizabeth  Decker,  were  both  born  and  reared 
in  Oldenburg,  and  there  made  their  home  until 
1842,  which  year  witnessed  their  emigration  to 
America.  They  located  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  where 
both  died  nine  years  later. 

Our  subject  was  the  youngest  in  their  family  of 
six  children.  He  acquired  his  education  in  his  na- 
tive land,  and  tliere  worked  in  a  mill  until  seven- 
teen years  of  age,  when  he  crossed  the  briny  deep 
to  tiie  New  World.  He  landed  in  New  Orleans, 
then  went  to  Cincinnati,  and  thence  to  Preble 
County,  Ohio,  where  he  was  employed  as  a  farm 
laborer.     For  a  time  he  attended  .school  in  order 


to  learn  the  English  language.  After  being  em- 
ployed as  a  farm  hand  for  a  year  and  a-half  he 
went  to  Mississippi,  where  he  engaged  as  a  stage 
driver  and  in  taking  care  of  horses  about  two 
years.  We  next  find  him  in  Florida,  where  he 
worked  in  the  cedar  woods,  hewing  and  preparing 
tiie  lumber  to  be  shipped  to  England.  Four  years 
of  his  life  were  passed  in  tiiat  way,  and  on  its  ex- 
piration he  engaged  as  a  teamster  to  go  to  Mexico. 
He  enlisted  in  the  service  of  his  country  for  six 
months,  but  continued  therein  for  ten  months,  af- 
ter which  he  returned  to  New  Orleans  and  drove 
an  omnibus.  In  the  succeeding  autumn  he  again 
went  to  Mexico  as  a  teamster,  but  on  arriving  in 
that  country  he  obtained  a  substitute  to  serve  in 
that  capacity  and  enlisted  in  the  Texas  Cavalry, 
in  which  he  continued  throughout  the  remainder 
of  the  war. 

After  receiving  his  discharge,  Mr.  Decker  went 
to  New  Orleans,  engaging  in  draying  for  a  short 
time,  but  owing  to  a  dread  of  the  yellow  fever  he 
made  his  way  northward,  and  on  the  18th  of  July, 
1849,  reached  Chester.  Here  he  at  once  began  work, 
following  any  honest  employment  whereby  he 
might  secure  a  livelihood.  In  1850,  the  court 
house  was  built,  and  he  carried  brick  used  in 
the  erection  of  that  structure.  For  fifteen  years 
he  engaged  in  teaming  and  in  other  pursuits  in 
Chester.  He  then,  in  1863,  removed  to  the  farm 
whicli  has  since  been  his  home,  and  is  now 
numbered  among  the  leading  agriculturists  of 
the  county.  His  home  is  pleasantly  located  with- 
in three  miles  of  Chester,  and  there  he  carries  on 
general  farming  and  stock-raising,  making  a  spe- 
cialty of  the  breeding  of  Jersey  cattle. 

tJn  the  28tb  of  December,  1848,  Mr.  Decker  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Eliza  Lanemann,  a 
native  of  Hanover,  German}-,  who  at  that  time 
had  lived  in  New  Orleans  only  one  month  and 
four  days.  Her  death  occurred  January  17,  1892. 
B3'  their  marriage  were  born  nine  children,  Her- 
man, who  married  Christina  Hupferand  lives  near 
the  home  farm;  Frank,  who  married  Lena  All- 
myer  and  resides  near  Chester;  Henry,  who  died 
at  the  age  of  twenty-tliree;  Adeline;  Frederick, 
who  died  at  the  agt  of  three;  Charles,  who  mar- 
ried   Hannah    Alman,   of   Missouri,   and    is    now 


590 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


teaching  scliool   in  Chicago;  Lizzie,  wife  of  Fritz 
Burger;  and  Mena  and  Fredericit.  at  home. 

Mr.  Deelier  and  all  of  his  children  are  members 
of  the  Lutheran  Church.  In  politics  he  is  a  Demo- 
crat, and  h.as  strongly  supported  that  partj'  since 
attaining  his  majority'.  He  started  out  in  life 
emptj'-handed,  and  for  manj'  years  worked  very 
hard  at  anything  which  he  could  find  to  do,  but 
his  industry  and  enterprise  at  length  triumphed 
over  the  difficulties  in  his  path  and  achieved  for 
him  a  success  which  has  numbered  him  among  the 
substantial  farmers  of  the  community. 


-i-^m-i' 


•?:^*= 


^  ji,  U-  HULL  has  been  prominently  identified 
\rJ//  with  the  interests  of  Murphysboro  for 
\^^  many  3^ears.  He  is  now  engaged  in  general 
merchandising.  He  was  for  some  time  editor  of  the 
Daily  Era,  but  is  now  chief  of  the  fire  department. 
He  is  also  at  the  head  of  the  Murph^'sboro  tele- 
phone system,  which  has  lately  been  organized, 
but  will  soon  be  in  active  operation.  He  is  enter- 
prising and  industrious  and  carries  forward  to  a 
successful  completion  whatever  he  undertakes. 
His  career  as  a  mercliant  will  undoubtedly  be  a 
prosperous  one. 

Mr.  Hull  was  born  in  Morristown,  N.  J., Novem- 
ber 28,  1848.  His  grandfather,  Samuel  P.  Hull, 
was  a  newspaper  man  of  western  New  York.  About 
1826,  he  established  a  paper  in  Morristown,  N.  J., 
which  he  edited  until  1853.  He  then  sold  out  and 
removed  to  Jersey  City,  where  he  made  his  home 
while  publishing  a  paper  in  New  York  City.  His 
death  occurred  in  1855.  The  familj'  is  of  English 
descen  t. 

John  A.  Hull,  father  of  our  subject,  was  born 
in  New  York,  and  was  also  a  journalist.  At  the 
time  of  the  gold  excitement  in  California,  he  went 
to  that  state  and  established  a  newspaper.  Later 
he  returned,  but  again  crossed  the  plains  in  1852.  In 
1855  he  went  to  Chicago,  and  thence  to  Springfield, 
where  he  carried  on  newspaper  work.  During  the 
Presidential  campaign  of  1856,  he  edited  a  paper 
in  De  Soto,  and  then  removed  to  Carbondale, 
where  he  established  the  Carbondale  Times.  After 
a  short  period  he  sold  out,  spent  a  few  months  in 


Cairo,  and  then  edited  a  paper  in  Evansville,  Ind. 
Subsequently  he  again  engaged  in  the  newspaper 
business  in  Carbondale.  In  1862  he  aided  in  rais- 
ing the  Eight^'-flrst  Illinois  Regiment,  and  joined 
Compan}'  K  as  a  priv.ate,  but  at  length  was  dis- 
charged on  account  of  phj-sical  disability. 

Becoming  a  reporter  for  the  New  York  Herald, 
John  A.  Hull  was  sent  to  Mexico  at  the  time  of 
the  trouble  concerning  Prince  Maximilian,  but  as 
he  was  a  prominent  Mason  he  was  forced  to  leave 
that  country-,  but  continued  with  the  Herald  for 
some  years  longer.  He  afterward  edited  a  paper 
at  Coldwater,  Mich.,  and  later  in  Healdsburg,  Cal. 
In  1881,  he  came  to  Murphysboro  and  made  his 
home  with  our  subject.  He  died  at  Creal  Springs 
in  1889,  at  the  age  of  sixtj'-seven.  He  was  a  Doug- 
las Democrat,  a  member  of  the  Episcopal  Church, 
and  a  very  prominent  and  influential  citizen,  who 
through  his  journalistic  work  did  much  in  molding 
public  opinion.  He  married  Eliza  B.ache,  who  was 
born  near  Morristown,  N.  J.,  and  was  of  Irish  de- 
scent. She  died  in  Springfield,  111.  In  the  family 
were  three  children,  but  Mrs.  W.S.  Murphy  died  in 
1867,  and  Andrew  J.  in  1887. 

Our  subject,  the  only  survivor,  went  to  Carbon- 
dale at  the  age  of  seven,  attended  the  high  school, 
and  from  an  earl^'  age  worked  in  a  printing  office. 
It  seemed  but  natural  as  his  father  and  grandfa- 
ther had  been  newspapermen  that  he  should  follow 
in  the  same  line.  He  made  his  first  venture  in 
1870,  establishing  a  newspaper  in  Cairo,  the  Cairo 
Sun,  but  after  six  months  he  sold  out  and  spent 
some  time  traveling  in  the  east.  He  visited  Wash- 
ington, Philadelphia  and  New  York.  He  afterward 
joined  his  father  in  the  publication  of  the  Coldwa- 
ter Enterprise,  of  Coldwater,  Mich.,  where  he  con- 
tinued two  years.  After  a  visit  to  the  Rock\' 
Mountains  we  find  him  in  the  Government  print- 
ing office  in  Washington.  In  1879  he  came  to 
Murphysboro  from  St.  Louis,  and  began  working 
in  the  Era  office,  which  he  afterward  purchased  in 
company  with  G.  J.  Burr.  His  partner  died,  and 
in  1881  Mr.  Hull  purchased  the  business,  continu- 
ing as  sole  proprietor  until  Januaiy,  1892.  In 
May,  1891,  he  established  the  Daily  Era,  and  soon 
the  paper  had  a  good  circulation. 

In   1892  Mr.  Hull  turned  his  attention  to  mer- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


591 


cliandising,  and  as  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Kent 
&  Hull  carried  on  business  until  October  25,  1893, 
when  he  bougiit  out  liis  partner,  W.  C.  Kent.  He 
carries  a  stock  of  dry  goods  and  groceries,  having 
a  fine  double  store  on  Walnut  Street.  In  the  sum- 
mer of  1893  he  also  established  the  telephone 
company.  He  aided  in  tlie  organization  of  the 
Jackson  County  Homestead  and  Loan  Association, 
of  which  he  has  always  been  a  Director,  and  he  has 
also  been  a  Director  of  the  Southern  Illinois  Build- 
ing and  Loan  Association  since  its  formation. 

In  October,  1879,  Mr.  Hull  wedded  Ella  M. 
Stearns,  a  native  of  Jackson  County,  and  a  daugh- 
ter (if  Z.  K.  Stearns,  an  early  settler  of  this  com- 
munity. They  have  a  daughter,  Jeunie  M.  By 
his  first  marriage,  Mr.  Hull  had  a  son,  Charles  L., 
who  is  now  cashier  for  a  street  rail  way  company 
of  Cliicago. 

In  1876,  the  fire  department  of  Murph3'sboro 
was  organized  and  a  hand  engine  purchased.  Later, 
through  the  instrumentality  of  Mr.  Hull,  a  steam 
fire  engine  was  secured.  He  has  been  Chief  of  the 
department  since  1888,  and  was  formerly  its  Secre- 
tary. Mr.  Hull  IS  Captain  of  Jackson  Camp  No.  113, 
S.  V.  In  politics,  he  is  a  stalwart  Republican,  was 
a  member  of  the  Central  Committee,  and  has  been 
its  Secretary  for  some  years.  He  was  formerly  an 
active  member  of  the  State  Newspaper  Association 
and  the  Southern  Illinois  Newspaper  Association. 
He  was  a,  ready  writer,  an  able  journalist,  and  his 
work  in  that  direction  will  prove  of  immense  bene- 
fit to  him  in  his  mercantile  experience. 


^AVID  L.  DAVIS  is  storekeeper  for  the 
Mobile  &  Ohio  Railroad  at  Murphysboro, 
and  is  a  man  of  prominence  in  this 
community,  higbly  respected  by  all  who 
know  liun.  A  native  of  Wales,  he  was  born  Au- 
gust 23,  1832,  and  is  the  second  in  a  family  of 
twelve  children  whose  parents  were  William  L.  and 
Phoebe  (Lewis)  Davis.  The  father  was  a  native  of 
Wales,  but  the  mother  was  born  in  Scotland.  He 
became  foreman  of  the  3'ards  of  extensive  iron 
works  in  that  country,  where  he  made  iiis  home 
until  1844,  when  he  emigrated  to  America.     Lo- 


cating in  Carbondale,  Pa.,  he  was  there  employed 
in  the  mines  until  1860,  when  he  removed  to  Mon- 
roe Count}^  Iowa,  and  turned  his  attention  to 
farming.  Both  parents  tliere  spent  their  remain- 
ing days.  Only  two  of  their  children  are  now 
living. 

]).  L.  Davis  was  a  lad  of  eleven  summers  when 
he  bade  adieu  to  liis  native  land  and  with  his  par- 
ents sailed  from  Liverpool  on  the  "Embassador"  to 
New  York.  For  several  3'ears  he  attended  school 
in  Carbondale,  Pa.,  and  then  engaged  in  mining. 
He  was  afterwards  engaged  in  contracting  and 
mining  in  Scranton,  Pa.  He  was  married  in 
Providence,  that  state,  in  1857,  the  lady  of  his 
choice  being  Miss  Ann  David,  a  native  of  Rumne}-, 
Wales,  who  came  with  iier  parents  to  the  New 
World,  the  family-  locating  in  Pottsville,  Pa. 
Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Davis  were  born  the  following 
children:  Phoebe,  now  Mrs.  Mills,  of  Murph3'sboro; 
John,  deceased;  Mrs.  Celia  Sullivan;  Mrs.  Addie 
(lillooly;  Sadie;  William,  who  is  employed  in  the 
railroad  shops;  Albert  and  Etta. 

The  year  1863  witnessed  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Davis 
in  Illinois,  when, accompanied  b3'  his  family,  he  lo- 
cated in  Rock  Island,  where  he  engaged  in  mining 
on  contract.  .Subsequently  he  removed  to  OsTt.a- 
loosa,  Iowa,  and  was  there  connected  with  a  large 
company  which  extensively  engaged  in  mining. 
In  1866,  he  came  to  Murpli3sboro,  and  for  a  short 
time  followed  the  same  pursuit.  He  then  became 
ticket  agent  for  the  Mt.  Carbon  Railroad  Company, 
a  3'ear  later  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  store  at 
Mt.  Carbon,  and  subsequently  was  given  charge  of 
the  general  supplies  of  the  company. 

Forming  a  partnership  with  A.  C.  Brydan,  our 
subject  afterwards  engaged  in  the  commission 
grocery  business  in  Carbondale  for  a  3'ear,  and  wiien 
the  connection  was  dissolved  he  returned  to  Mur- 
ph3'sboro.  where  he  carried  on  the  grocery  trade 
for  some  3'ears  in  connection  with  James  Alexan- 
der. His  health  failing,  he  left  the  store  and  spent 
some  time  in  traveling,  hoping  to  be  benefited 
thereby.  In  1887,  he  entered  the  empl03'  of  the 
Mobile  &  Ohio  Railroad  as  a  ditcher,  but  the 
same  year  he  was  made  timekeeper  in  the  car 
shops,  and  in  1888  was  appointed  storekeeper,  a 
position  which  was  given  him  in  recognition  of 


592 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


his  ahililj' and  Irustwortliiiiess.  It  is  needless  to 
saj'  that  liis  duties  are  ever  faithfully  performed 
and  that  he  has  the  entire  confidence  of  the  com- 
pany. 

Mr.  Davis  is  a  member  of  the  Masonic  and  Odd 
Fellows'  societies  and  in  politics  belongs  to  the 
Labor  party.  For  four  years  he  served  as  Alder- 
man from  the  First  Ward,  and  for  three  years  he 
was  the  efticient  City  Clerk.  He  had  formerly 
been  ordained  an  Elder  of  the  Congregational 
Church,  but  for  a  long  time  has  been  a  member  of 
the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  He  is  untiring 
in  his  labors  in  behalf  of  the  church,  and  other  be- 
nevolent and  charitable  interests  find  in  him  a  true 
friend. 

[d),    ^M^  ,@j 

(®^ ^^^  ^ 

.EWTO^'  W.  STOLT,who  resides  on  section 
22,  Ora  Township,  .Jackson  County,  where 
he  successfully  carries  on  general  farming, 
is  a  native  of  Union  Count}',  111.,  born  February 
8,  1842,  and  is  a  son  of  Henry  C.  and  Cynthia  A. 
(Roberts)  Stout.  His  father  was  born  in  1798,  on 
a  farm  where  now  stands  the  town  of  Belleville, 
St.  Clair  County.  There  he  grew  to  manhood,  and 
after  arriving  at  mature  years  married  Miss  Rob- 
erts, who  lived  in  the  same  neighborhood.  For 
five  years  the}^  lived  on  a  farm  near  Springfield, 
111., and  then  sold  out.  removing  to  Union  Count}', 
where  they  continued  to  make  their  home  for 
man}'  j'ears.  The  father  there  died  at  the  age  of 
seventy-two.  He  was  a  prominent  member  of  the 
Hillerite  Church  and  held  many  offices  in  the 
same.  In  politics  he  was  a  stanch  Democrat  and  a 
great  admirer  of  Andrew  Jackson,  whom  he  saw  at 
his  home,  the  "  Hermitage,"  in  Tennessee. 

Mrs.  Stout  was  born  in  Virginia,  was  reared  in 
East  Tennessee,  and  when  a  young  lady  of  seven- 
teen emigrated  with  her  family  to  Illinois.  She 
reached  the  advanced  age  of  ninet)'-one  years  and 
died  at  the  home  of  her  son-in-law,  Peter  Clutts, 
in  Union  County,  March  14,  1893.  For  some  time 
prior  to  her  death  she  attended  the  Old  Settlers' 
meetings   in   Jonesboro,  and  for  several  years  was 


the  oldest  person  there  seen.  Fourteen  days  before 
her  death  she  was  present  at  a  dinner  where  five 
generations  of  her  descendants  were  gathered. 
Siie  retained  her  faculties  to  the  last  to  a  remarka- 
ble degree. 

George  Stout,  the  paternal  grandfather  of  our 
subject,  was  born  in  Virginia  in  the  early  part  of 
the  eighteenth  century  and  lived  as  a  pioneer 
through  much  of  his  life,  moving  to  the  west  again 
and  again.  He  finall}'  located  on  the  present  site 
of  Belleville,  111.,  where  he  accumulated  about  six 
hundred  acres  of  land.  He  served  in  the  Revolu- 
tionary War,  and  at  one  time,  while  he  was  home 
on  a  furlough,  the  British  soldiers  burned  his  barn, 
and  he  was  concealed  so  near  the  building  that  tlie 
fire  scorched  him.  His  death  occurred  at  the  home 
of  his  son,  Henry  C  in  Union  Count}'. 

Our  subject  was  one  of  the  following  children: 
Rachel  Ann,  wife  of  Lewis  Holland,  of  Jackson 
County;  Jane,  who  became  the  wife  of  Matthew 
Pratt,  and  died  at  her  home  in  Pocahontas.  Ark., 
in  1892;  W.  J.,  of  Union  County;  Catherine,  who 
became  the  wife  of  Peter  Clutts,  of  Union  County, 
and  there  died  twenty-two  years  ago;  Lorenzo, 
of  Union  County;  Wesley,  who  died  at  the  age  of 
eleven;  Elizabeth,  wife  of  John  F.  Kerr,  of  Mur- 
physboro,  and  N.  W. 

Newton  W.  Stout  remained  upon  the  home  farm 
in  his  native  county  until  after  attaining  his  ma- 
jority. On  the  5th  of  December,  1867,  he  married 
Susan  J.  Doty,  and  then  purchased  a  part  of  the 
farm  on  which  he  now  lives.  Three  children  came 
to  bless  their  home:  Mary  J.,  who  was  born  Septem- 
ber 10,  1869,  and  became  the  wife  of  Enos  Perry, 
by  whom  she  has  one  child,  Clyde;  Mattie,  who 
was  born  November  9,  1871,  and  is  now  engaged 
in  teaching  in  the  public  schools;  and  Henry  C, 
born  September  9,  1873.  Mrs.  Stout  is  a  daughter 
of  Ephraim  and  Martha  (Williamson)  Doty.  Her 
father  was  born  in  Somerset  Township,  Jackson 
County,  May  8,  1829,  and  throughout  life  followed 
farming.  He  married  Miss  AVilliamson  September 
18,  1849.  He  held  membership  with  the  Free 
Will  Baptist  Church,  in  which  he  served  as  Deacon, 
and  in  politics  took  an  active  part,  supporting  the 
Democracy.  He  served  as  Deputy  Sheiifif  fur  many 
years,  and  was  Coroner  of  the  county  at  the  time 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


593 


of  his  death,  which  occurred  in  tlie  house  in  wliich 
he  was  born. 

Socially,  Mr.  Stout  is  connected  with  the 
Knights  of  Pythias  and  Odd  Fellows'  fraternities, 
in  wiiich  he  is  a  prominent  member.  He,  too, 
voles  with  the  Democratic  party,  and  does  all  in 
his  power  to  insure  its  success.  For  several  years 
he  has  served  as  Constable.  A  public-spirited  and 
progressive  citizen,  he  takes  an  active  interest  in 
all  tiiat  pertains  to  the  welfare  of  the  community. 


AMES  C.  CLARKE  is  the  President  and 
general  manager  of  the  Mobile  &  Ohio 
Railroad,  his  office  located   at  Mobile,  Ala. 


(fr 


y^fJ  A  native  of  Maryland,  he  was  born  in  Mont 
gomer}'  County  in  1824,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty 
years  entered  the  railroad  service,  with  which  he 
has  been  connected  continuously  since.  From 
1844  until  September,  1854,  he  was  with  the  Balti- 
more &  Ohio  Railroad.  For  eighteen  raontlis  he 
was  engaged  on  repairs  of  tracks  and  in  the  ma- 
chine shops,  and  for  two  and  a-half  years  was  fire- 
man, and  for  five  years  was  road  engineer.  The 
two  succeeding  years  of  his  life  were  passed  as 
station  agent  and  conductor,  and  for  three  years 
he  occupied  the  position  of  trainmaster.  In  1855 
he  was  Superintendent  of  the  Central  Ohio  Rail- 
road, and  in  1856  was  made  Superintendent  of  the 
Northern  Division  of  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad. 

As  the  result  of  his  capability  and  faithfulness, 
Mr.  Clarke  continually  won  i)romotion,  and  from 
1856  until  1859  served  as  General  Superintendent 
of  the  Illinois  Central.  From  that  year  until  1862 
he  was  Superintendent  of  the  Northern  Central 
Railroad,  and  in  that  year  he  embarked  in  the  iron 
business,  with  which  he  continued  his  connection 
until  1870.  During  the  two  succeeding  years  of 
his  life  he  was  President  of  the  Chesapeake  6c  Ohio 
Canal  Company,  and  from  1872  until  1874  was 
Vice-President  and  general  manager  of  the  Erie 
Railroad. 

In  September  of  the  latter  year,  Mr.  Clarke  was 
made  Superintendent  of  the  Northern  Division  of 
the  Illinois  Central  Railroad,  and  so  acted  until 
1876,  when  he  became  General   Superintendent  of 


the  same  road,  filling  that  position  until  1879.  He 
then  again  took  a  step  upw.ard,  and  from  that  time 
until  August,  1883.  filled  the  responsible  position 
of  Vice-President  and  general  manager  of  the  Illi- 
nois Central  and  tlie  Chicago,  St.  Louis  ik  New 
Orleans  Railroads.  I^rom  the  last  date  until  May, 
1887,  he  was  Presidentof  the  Illinois  Central  Rail- 
road, and  from  January,  1888,  until  April,  1889, 
he  was  Vice-President  and  general  manager  of  the 
road  with  which  he  is  now  connected.  He  was 
then  made  its  President,  and  is  still  at  its  head, 
serving  also  as  general  manager. 

Mr.  Clarke  has  also  been  interested  to  some  ex- 
tent in  other  business  affairs,  and  is  connected  with 
the  Clarke  S;  Logan  Addition  to  Murphysboro.  He 
also  owns  stock  in  the  (^ity  National  Bank  of  this 
place.  He  began  at  the  lowest  round  of  the  lad- 
der, and  has  steadily  worked  his  way  upward. 
From  the  machine  shops  he  has  steadily  arisen 
until  he  is  now  at  the  head  of  one  of  the  leading 
roads  in  the  Mississippi  Valley.  Those  who  facili- 
tate transportation  should  receive  the  unbounded 
gratitude  of  the  public,  for  it  is  well  known  that 
the  introduction  of  better  modes  of  travel  has 
done  more  to  promote  civilization,  advance  com- 
mercial interests  and  secure  prosperity  than  an3' 
other  means  known  to  the  nineteenth  century. 


lASDAL  MARLOW  was  a  man  of  untiring 
^>  energy,  and  his  success  in  worldly  affairs  is 
proved  by  the  fact  that  although  he  started 
without  money  or  land  he  accumulated  over 
a  half-section,  upon  which  he  was  engaged  in  gen- 
eral farming  and  stock-raising.  He  was  born  in 
Georgia,  and  when  ready  to  establish  a  home  of 
his  own  he  was  married,  in  Wilson  Count}\  Tenn., 
to  Miss  Nancy  Marlow. 

With  a  family  of  eight  children,  Mr.  Marlow 
came  to  Perry  County  in  1830,  and  after  locating 
here  two  children  were  added  to  his  household,  ' 
He  settled  on  Holt's  Prairie  at  a  time  when  there 
were  very  few  inhabitants  in  this  section.  He  en- 
tered from  the  (TOvernment  eighty  acres  of  land. 


594 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


which  lie  ciillivated  in  such  a  way  as  to  bring  him 
handsome  returns. 

Of  the  children  born  to  our  subject  and  his  wife 
we  maiie  tlie  following  mention:  Matthew  died  in 
Perr}' Countj',  leaving  a  family  of  five  children; 
Samuel  is  also  a  resident  of  this  county,  where  he 
ranks  among  its  law-abiding  and  well-to-do  citi- 
zens; he  is  married  and  has  a  family  of  eight  chil- 
dren. Louisa,  the  next  child  of  our  subject,  mar- 
ried Andrew  Robinson,  and  they  died  leaving  a 
family  of  six  children.  Sterling  C.  and  Stithe  met 
their  deaths  at  Buena  Vista  during  the  Mexican 
War.  Alexander,  who  was  a  soldier  in  the  Civil 
War,  died  at  Pine  Bluff,  Ark.  He  was  the  father 
of  four  children,  who  are  now  residing  in  the 
Cherokee  Nation.  Milas  M.  is  the  next  in  order  of 
birth.  Burtley  is  residing  on  the  old  home  farm 
in  this  county.  Mary  J.  married  Benjamin  Aber- 
nathy,  and  both  are  now  deceased.  Angeline,  who 
married  William  Marlovv,  makes  her  home  in  this 
county. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  George  Marlow,  was 
born  in  North  Carolina  and  was  a  patriot  in  the 
War  of  1812.  His  father,  who  was  an  P^nglishman 
by  birth,  came  to  America  during  the  Revolution- 
ary War  and  entered  the  arm3-  on  the  side  of  the 
Colonists.  Milas  M.  Marlow,  the  sixth  son  of  our 
subject,  was  born  in  Wilson  County,  Tenn.,  in 
1828,  but  grew  to  mature  years  in  this  county, 
where  he  was  given  a  good  common-school  edu- 
cation. His  marriage,  which  occurred  in  1847, 
united  him  with  Miss  Mary  C,  daughter  of  Thomas 
and  Elizabeth  Metcalf,  old  settlers  of  this  county. 
Their  union  resulted  in  the  birth  of  six  children, 
namely:  AVilliam  C,  who  is  one  of  the  leading 
young  farmers  of  Perry  County;  Marion;  Melissa 
J.,  who  became  the  wife  of  FA  House;  James  C, 
who  resides  with  his  father  and  assists  him  in  con- 
ducting the  farm;  A.  Sherman,  County  Superin- 
tendent of  Schools;  and  Miss  Louella,  who  is  a 
successful  teacher.  Sherman  was  elected  to  his 
present  position  when  only  twenty-two  years  of 
age. 

Milas  M.  Marlow  is  engaged  in  general  farming 
and  possesses  the  shrewdness,  forethought  and  ac- 
tivity' necessary  to  success  in  life.  With  his  fam- 
ily he  is  a  devoted    member   of   the    Missionary 


Baptist  Church  at  Holt's  Prairie,  to  which  he  is  a 
liberal  contributor.  He  has  always  been  greatly 
interested  in  the  advancement  of  education  in  this 
part  of  the  county  and  has  aided  very  materially 
in  raising  the  standard  of  teachers.  In  politics  he 
is  a  stanch  Democrat. 


jf7  AWRENCE  M.  SlIAXER,  a  wide-awake 
I  (^  and  enterprising  young  business  man  of 
Jt-AV  Murphysboio,  is  a  member  of  the  firm  of 
Shaner  &  Lawbaugh,  dealers  in  hardware,  queens- 
ware  and  tinware.  He  was  born  near  Altenburg, 
Perry  County,  Mo.,  March  l(i,  1871,  and  is  a  rep- 
resentative of  one  of  the  pioneer  families  of  that 
county,  where  his  grandfather,  Jacob  S.  Shaner, 
settled  at  an  early  da}-.  Tie  probably  removed 
thither  from  Kentucky',  and  there  the  remainder 
of  his  life  was  passed. 

George  Shaner,  father  of  our  suliject,  was  born 
in  Brazeau,  Perry  Count\-,  became  an  extensive 
stock-raiser,  and  was  the  first  man  to  introduce 
fine  blooded  stock  into  that  locality.  Lie  raised 
Shorthorn  cattle,  Berkshire  hogs  and  Cotswold 
sheep,  and  was  very  successful  in  his  undertakings. 
His  farm  comprised  almost  a  section  of  land,  and 
its  richlj'  cultivated  fields  indicated  the  thrift  and 
enterprise  of  the  owner.  Mis  business  ability  made 
him  prosperous,  and  he  became  well  known  as  a 
farmer  and  stock-raiser.  He  wedded  Miss  Rowena 
McCombs,  a  native  of  Jackson,  Cape  Girardeau 
County,  Mo.  Her  father  was  one  of  the  pioneer 
settlers  of  that  county.  Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Shaner 
was  born  a  family  of  six  children,  three  sons  and 
three  daughters.  The  mother  was  called  to  her 
final  rest  in  1873,  and  the  father  was  killed  by  a 
runaway  team  in  1883. 

Oursubject  was  the  fifth  in  order  of  birth  in  their 
family.  In  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads  the 
days  of  his  boyhood  and  youth  were  passed, and  the 
district  schools  afforded  him  his  educational  privi- 
leges in  early  life.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  left 
home  and  spent  two  years  as  a  student  in  the 
Southeastern  Missouri  Normal  School,  at  Cape  Gir- 
ardeau, after  which  he  engaged  in  teaching  one 
year.     He  then  again  entered   the  normal    school, 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


595 


and  on  completing  the  course  was  graduated  in 
llie  Class  of  '91,  with  the  degree  of  B.  S.  D.  On 
the  exi)iration  of  tliat  period,  Mr.  Slianer  accepted 
the  position  of  Princii)al  of  the  public  schools  of 
St.  Mary's,  Mo.,  and  during  his  two  j'ears'  service 
there  won  many  friends  and  the  high  commenda- 
tion of  the  public. 

In  June,  1M!).S,  our  subject  arrived  in  Murphys- 
boro,  and  in  partnership  with  E.  S.  Lawbaugh, 
purchased  the  hardware  stock  formerly  owned  by 
Fager  ife  Kirchner.  They  at  once  enlarged  their 
facilities,  and  now  carr^^  a  fine  line  of  hardware, 
queensware,  tinware,  heating  and  cooking  stoves, 
paints,  oils,  etc.  Although  they  have  been  here 
but  a  short  time,  Murphysboro  recognizes  in  the 
firm  enterprising  joung  men  who  will  make  good 
citizens,  and  from  the  public  they  are  securing  a 
fair  trade,  which  no  doubt  will  constantly  increase. 


> 


<|  lyi  L  L  1  A  M  R  Li  R  Y  .  The  name  of  Rury 
\V/ w  '*'  ^^^"  '^"own  and  highly  honored  through- 
W^  t)i't  Handolph  County,  as  members  of  the 
family'  have  been  closely  connected  with  the  de- 
velopment of  this  section  of  Illinois.  That  this 
has  been  the  case  in  the  life  of  William  Rury  it 
needs  but  a  mention  of  his  name  to  his  acquaint- 
ances to  prove.  He  is  numbered  among  the  well- 
to-do  and  prominent  farmers  and  stockmen  of 
township  6,  range  5,  and  has  a  high  reputation  as 
a  man  of  thoroughly  upright  character. 

The  parents  of  our  subject,  Frederick  and  Mary 
(Braithaupt)  Rurj",  emigrated  to  America  in 
1839,  and  settled  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  but  soon 
afterward  came  to  Illinois  and  settled  near  Steele- 
ville,  Randoli)h  County,  where  they  spent  the  re- 
mainder of  their  days  upon  a  farm.  William  was 
born  in  Germany  September  7,  1837,  and  was  the 
next  to  the  youngest  among  seven  children.  He 
was  only  three  years  old  when  his  parents  came  to 
Randolph  County,  and  here  he  has  since  lived. 
His  educational  advantages  were  limited  to  such 
training  as  was  offered  by  the  subscription  schools 
of  that  early  period.    He  worked  upon  his  father's 


farm  until  the  death  of  the  latter,  in  1865.  From 
that  time  he  assumed  the  charge  of  the  old  home- 
stead, which  he  has  since  conducted. 

.Septembei  15,  1859,  Mr.  Rury  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Louisa,  daughter  of  Frede- 
rick and  Katherine  (Hogenzuler)  Rosenthal.  Her 
parents  were  natives  of  Hanover,  Germany, 
whence  they  emigrated  to  America,  and  settled  in 
Randolph  County,  where  the  father  died.  Mrs. 
Rosenthal  is  still  living.  Eight  children  were 
born  to  the  union  of  William  and  Louisa  Rury, 
one  of  whom  died  at  the  age  of  six  years.  The 
others  are:  George;  William,  who  married  Nancy 
Hatcher,  and  lives  near  Steeleville;  Frederick  J.; 
Margaret,  Ada,  Nettie  and  Eddie,  who  reside  with 
their  parents. 

In  politics  Mr.  Rury  is  a  supporter  of  Repub- 
lican principles,  and  keeps  himself  well  informed 
on  the  issues  of  the  day,  hut  has  never  been  an 
office  seeker,  although  he  has  served  as  .School  Di- 
rector and  in  other  positions  of  trust.  He  and  his 
entire  family  are  members  of  the  German  Metiiod- 
ist  Flpiscopal  Church,  and  he  is  one  of  its  Trus- 
tees. When  he  entered  upon  his  career  as  a  farmer 
he  had  but  a  limited  amount  of  this  world's  goods, 
but  by  economy  and  a  judicious  investment  of  his 
means  he  accumulated  property,  and  now  occupies 
a  position  among  the  most  substantial  men  of  the 
county. 


ILLIAM  A.  GORDON,  M.  D.  The  profes- 
f/  sion  of  the  physician  perhaps  is  the  most 
™  trying  on  brain  and  bod^^  of  any  in  the 
field  of  science,  for  it  absorbs  the  attention  of 
him  who  practices  it  conscientiously  both  day  and 
night.  From  a  hoy  Dr.  Gordon  desired  to  become 
a  ph3'sician,  and  ever  since  devoting  his  attention 
to  the  healing  art  has  received  a  portion  of  his  re- 
ward in  tills  world,  for  he  has  the  confidence,  re- 
spect and  esteem  of  his  fellow-men. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  Ross,  Ohio,  .January  22, 
1820,  and  is  the  son  of  Alexander  and  Margery 
(Boggs)  Gordon.  The  father  was  born  in  Penn- 
sylvania in  1789,  and  departed  this  life  in  Des 
Moines,  Iowa,  in    1859.     His  good  wife   preceded 


596 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


him  to  the   better  land  by  many  years,  dying  in 
Ohio  in  1833. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  one  in  a  fami- 
ly of  five  children.  He  and  his  brother,  John, 
wlio  resides  in  Des  Moines,  Iowa,  are  the  only 
ones  living.  William  received  his  primary  educa- 
tion in  the  sciiools  of  iiis  native  place,  and  later 
attended  the  Ohio  University  at  Athens.  After 
completing  his  studies  he  taught  school  until  the 
year  1842,  when  he  came  west  to  Robibaux  Point, 
now  St.  Joseph,  Mo  ,  where  he  was  ill  for  ten 
months.  Upon  recovering  from  his  sickness  he 
taught  school  until  he  had  savtd  money  enough 
to  leave  the  place,  when  he  came  to  this  county. 
Here  he  found  an  opportunity  to  carry  out  his 
long  cherished  plan  of  becoming  a  physician,  and 
read  medicine  in  the  office  of  James  C.  Junk.  Later 
entering  the  Louisville  Medical  College  in  Ken- 
tucky, Mr.  Gordon  took  a  full  course  in  that  institu- 
tion. In  1845  he  formed  a  partnership  with  Dr. 
Ashby  Jones,  of  Steeleville,  this  state.  In  1854  he 
graduated  from  the  St.  Louis  Medical  College. 

In  1848,  Dr.  Gordon  came  to  this  citj',  where  he 
was  engaged  in  practice  on  the  outbreak  of  the 
Civil  War  in  1861,  joining  the  ranks  of  the  Union 
army,  and  becoming  a  surgeon  in  the  Thirtieth  Illi- 
nois Infantry.  He  remained  in  the  service  until 
September  27,  .1864,  and  during  that  time  was 
a  iirisoner  seven  months,  being  captured  at  the 
battle  of  Belmont,  Mo.,  November  7,  V861. 

After  the  establishment  of  peace.  Dr.  Gordon 
returned  to  Chester,  where  he  has  since  been  en- 
gaged practicing  medicine.  In  1884,  he  was  ap- 
pointed Medical  Examiner  on  the  Pension  Board, 
holding  this  vintil  1888,  and  in  1894,  he  was 
re-appointed  to  the  same  position.  The  lady  to 
whom  our  subject  was  married  October  26,1845, 
was  Miss  Adeline  S.,  only  daughter  of  Dr.  Ashby 
Jones,  of  Steeleville.  To  tliem  were  born  four  sous 
and  six  daughters,  of  whom  seven  are  living, 
namel}':  Nellie,  Mrs.  William  R.  McKenzie;  Octa- 
via,  Mrs.  David  More;  Adeline  B.,  Mrs.  Charles  II. 
Grimes;  John  Arthur;  Harry;  Frankie  W.,  Mrs. 
S.  D.  Lindsey;  and  Jessie  B.,  Mrs.  A.  S.  Bower,  of 
Salt  Lake  Cit^*. 

In  his  political  relations  our  subject  is  an  active 
worker  in  the  ranks  of  the  Democratic  part3',  and 


has  served  as  a  member  of  the  School  Board  for 
the  past  twenty-two  years.  He  is  President  of  the 
Southern  Illinois  Stock  and  Agricultural  Associa- 
tion, and  also  holds  membership  with  the  Southern 
Illinois  Medical  Association.  Socially  he  is  a 
member  of  Kaskaskia  Lodge  No.  86,  A.  F.  6;  A.  M., 
in  which  order  he  takes  great  interest.  He  has  a 
beautiful  residence  located  on  Sparta  Street,  and 
is  a  man  who  commands  the  respect  of  all  who 
know  him. 

• 0^P • 


\It_  ON.  BENJAMIN  W.  POPE  is- one  of  the 
if)j  most  prominent  citizens  of  Du  Quoin,  and 
'Jt^^  is  also  widel3'  and  favorably  known  in 
'(^  southern  Illinois.  He  is  now  serving  as 
County  Judge  of  Perry  Countj',  and  is  the  efli- 
cient  Postmaster  of  the  city  in  which  he  resides. 
His  life  record  is  as  follows:  He  was  born  in  Frank- 
lin County,  111.,  October  20,  1853,  and  is  a  son  of 
Dr.  Benjamin  F.  Pope,  who  was  born  in  William- 
son County,  Tenn.,  May  24,  1825.  The  grandfa- 
ther. Dr.  Wiufleld  Pope,  was  a  native  of  North 
Carolina,  born  in  1792.  When  six  years  old  he 
went  to  Tennessee  with  his  father.  Hardy  Pope, 
who  was  also  a  native  of  North  Carolinfl.  The 
ancestors  of  the  familj'  were  Scotch  and  English, 
but  the  date  of  their  emigration  to  America  is  un- 
known. Hardy  Pope  was  at  one  time  a  large  slave 
holder,  and  had  extensive  property  interests.  He 
died  in  1833,  when  the  father  of  our  subject  was 
a  child  of  eight  years. 

Dr.  Winfield  Pope  was  a  prominent  physician 
in  his  day,  and  died  in  Williamson  County,  Tenn., 
in  January,  1840.  He  had  four  sons,  two  of  whom 
were  physicians,  Benjamin  F.  and  Hill  B.  The  lat- 
ter died  in  Dexter,  Mo.  The  other  sons  were 
farmers,  and  died  in  Texas.  Dr.  Benjamin  F. 
Pope  is  the  onl^-  one  of  the  familj-  now  living,  al- 
though the  descendants  of  Hardy  Pope  are  num- 
erous in  this  locality.  His  mother,  who  in  her 
maidenhood  was  Elizabeth  Arnold,  was  a  native 
of  Tennessee,  .as  was  her  mother,  who  lived  to  the 
age  of  ninety  years.  Mrs.  Pope  died  January  5, 
1839. 

The  Doctor  w.as  a  youth  in  his  teens  when  his 
parents  died,   and    for  three  years  thereafter   he 


w 


"«!»>' 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


599 


worked  on  a  farm.  He  then  began  clerking  in  a 
store,  and  during  that  time  studied  medicine  with 
Dr.  James  S.  Ta^vlor.  Becoming  competent  to 
practice,  he  was  granted  a  license  and  practiced 
one  year  in  Carroll  Countj,  Tenn.  In  December, 
1848,  he  came  to  Illinois,  locating  in  Franklin 
County,  where  he  practiced  for  sixteen  j'ears,  se- 
curing an  extensive  patronage,  and  by  good  in- 
vestments, coupled  with  good  judgment,  laid  the 
foundation  of  his  fortune.  On  the  2d  of  Januarj', 
I860,  he  removed  to  Du  Quoin,  where  he  had 
previously  purchased  property,  a  portion  of  it  be- 
ing the  location  of  his  present  pleasant  home. 
After  coming  to  Du  Quoin,  he  engaged  in  mer- 
chandising; for  twenty-three  3ears  was  engaged  in 
the  lumber  business,  and  for  seven  years  was  in 
the  dry-goods  business.  At  length  he  turned  over 
the  latter  to  his  son.  Pleasant  V.,  who  still  carries 
on  operations  along  that  line  under  the  name  of 
Pope  ife  Co.,  being  associated  with  H.  F.  Pope,  Jr., 
a  cousin  of  Dr.  Pope. 

Jn  1849  the  Doctor  married  Enieline,  daughter 
of  Dr.  Benjamin  Ward  Pope,  and  to  them  were 
born  five  children,  three  of  whom  are  yet  living. 
Byron  J.  was  eduoiited  in  McKendree  College  of 
Lebanon,  and  was  in  business  with  his  father  at 
the  time  of  his  death,  which  occurred  at  the  age  of 
twenty-three  years;  Ada  I.  died  at  the  age  of  thir- 
teen;  Pleasant  V.  is  engaged  in  merchandising; 
Benjamin  W.  is  the  next  jounger;  Sarah  E.  is  the 
wife  of  George  F.  M.  Ward,  who  is  extensively 
engaged  in  business  as  a  clothing  merchant  in  Mt. 
Vernon.  Dr.  Pope,  father  of  this  family,  is  one  of 
the  large  stockholders  in  the  First  National  Bank, 
and  is  the  owner  of  much  valuable  property  in  Du 
Quoin.  He  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  leading  citi- 
zens of  the  place,  and  was  three  times  honored 
with  the  office  of  Mayor  of  the  city. 

Judge  Pope  was  a  lad  of  eleven  j'ears  when  his 
father  came  to  Du  Quoin.  He  was  educated  in  its 
public  schools,  and  in  the  .State  University  of 
Champaign,  after  which  he  taught  school  for  sev- 
eral years,  being  Superintendent  of  the  city  schools 
of  Du  Quoin  and  Tamaroa.  He  then  read  law  in 
the  office  of  R.  W.  S.  Wheatley  and  Judge  AVall, 
and  further  continued  his  studies  in  the  law  de- 
partment of  the  Universitj'  of  St.  Louis,  and  'Vfis 
21 


graduated  from  the  law  department  of  the  North- 
western University  of  Chicago  in  1878.  After 
again  teaching  school  for  one  term,  he  commenced 
the  practice  of  his  chosen  profession  in  Du  Quoin^ 
in    1889. 

Mr.  Pope  has  been  honored  with  a  number  of 
public  offices.  He  was  elected  City  Attorney,  and 
wrote  the  present  city  ordinances.  In  November, 
1890,  he  was  elected  Judge  of  Perrj'  County,  be- 
ing the  first  Democrat  ever  chosen  to  that  office  in 
the  county.  He  overcame  the  Republican  major- 
ity of  two  hundred,  and  carried  the  county  h}' 
over  four  hundred,  which  f.ict  indicated  his  popu- 
larity and  the  high  regard  in  which  he  is  held.  In 
1892  he  was  the  candidate  for  Congress  in  the 
Twentieth  District.  He  spoke  throughout  the  dis- 
trict, and  his  well  known  oratory  and  honesty  of 
purpose  won  for  him  many  friends.  On  the  25lh 
of  October,  189.3,  Judge  Pope  was  appointed  by 
President  Cleveland  as  Postmaster  at  Du  Quoin, 
and  at  this  writing  is  serving  both  on  the  Bench 
and  in  the  postoffice.  The  promptness  and  fidel- 
ity with  which  he  discharges  his  public  duties  are 
well  known,  and  his  faithfulness  and  honesty  of 
purpose  are  unquestioned.  He  is  a  member  of  the 
Knights  of  Pythias,  and  is  a  genial,  honored  gen- 
tleman, whose  histor3-  deserves  a  prominent  place 
in  this  volume. 


ON.  GEORGE  W.  HILL,  of  Illinois,  is  the 
senior  member  of  the  firm  of  Hill  A'  Martin, 
the  most  prominent  and  widel3' known  law 
firm  of  southern  Illinois.  Their  office  is 
located  at  Murphjsboro,  but  their  business  extends 
over  a  wide  range  of  territory.  Jlr.  Hill  is  rec- 
ognized as  the  most  induential  citizen  of  Jackson 
Count3^.  As  a  law3er,  he  is  logical,  a  quick  reason- 
er,  a  man  of  keen  perceptions  and  an  able  advocate. 
Born  near  Benton,  Franklin  County,  111.,  Oc- 
tober 31,  1847,  Mr.  Hill  has  been  throughout  his 
life  identified  with  the  histoi^y  of  this  state.  His 
grandfather,  Richard  Hill,  was  one  of  the  leading 
men  of  Virginia.  In  an  earl3-  day  he  moved  to 
Illinois,  and  by  team  and  wagon  went  to  what  is 
now  Franklin  County,  111.    In  a  log  cabin  he  began 


600 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


life  in  true  pioneer  style,  and  there  made  his 
liouic  until  his  death.  He  served  in  the  State 
Legislature  of  Virginia  as  a  man  of  considerable 
prominence. 

Judge  John  W.  Hill,  father  of  our  subject,  was 
born  and  reared  in  Franklin  County,  and  was  a 
self-made  man.  He  followed  farming  through- 
out the  greater  part  of  his  life  and  became  the 
owner  of  six  hundred  acres  of  land,  of  which  five 
hundred  are  under  cultivation.  A  great  lover  of 
hunting,  in  the  early  days  he  shot  manj'  deer,  bears, 
wolves,  etc.  One  of  his  most  prominent  traits  was 
liospitalitv,  and  visitors  to  his  home  always  re- 
ceived a  hearty  welcome.  He  served  both  as  Treas- 
urer and  Judge  of  Franklin  County,  and  was  a 
prominent  worker  in  the  ranks  of  the  Democratic 
party.  He  was  a  stockholder  in,  and  one  of  the 
Trustees  of  Ewing  College,  and  served  as  its  Treas- 
urer from  its  foundation  until  his  death.  In  relig- 
ous  belief  hewas  a  Baptist,  and  served  as  Deacon  of 
the  church.  He  died  July  21,  1876,  at  the  age  of 
fifty-four.  His  wife,  who  bore  the  maiden  name 
of  Margaret  Bealtie,  was  born  in  Alabama,  and  was 
of  Irish  descent.  Her  father  became  one  of  the 
pioneers  of  Franklin  County,  111.  Her  death  oc- 
curred at  the  home  of  her  sou,  Richard,  near  Mt. 
Vernon,  111.,  in  1892,  at  the  .age  of  seventy  years. 

In  the  Hill  faraity  were  eight  sons  and  two 
daughters:  Richard,  a  farmer  of  Mt.  Vernon; 
James,  who  served  in  the  late  war,  and  now  fol- 
lows farming  near  Benton;  Isaac,  an  agriculturist 
of  Jefferson  County,  111.;  George  W.,  of  this 
sketch;  John  W.,  a  farmer  of  Franklin  County; 
Charles  M.,  who  follows  the  same  pursuit  in  Union 
County;  Robert,  a  farmer  of  Franklin  Count3-; 
Andrew  J.,  a  farmer,  who  is  living  on  the  old 
homestead;  Mrs.  Nancy  Gourle3'and  Mrs.  Margaret 
Gourle}',  both  of  whom  live  in  Union  Count3^ 

Mr.  Hill  whose  name  heads  this  record  attended 
the  common  schools  and  the  Ewing  High  School, 
and  in  1809  entered  McKendree  College,  at  Leba- 
non, 111.,  from  which  institution  he  was  graduated 
in  1872.  He  afterward  received  the  degree  of  A. 
M.,  and  subsequently  that  of  LL.  B.  was  conferred 
upon  him.  After  Ewing  High  School  became 
Ewing  College,  he  was  elected  Professor  of 
Sciences  and   Latin,  and  held   the  chair  for  one  , 


year.  He  then  came  to  Murphysboro  to  practice 
law,  but  upon  the  solicitation  of  the  old  Superin- 
tendent and  others  at  this  place,  he  served  as 
Principal  of  the  public  schools  for  one  year.  On 
the  expiration  of  that  period,  he  entered  upon  the 
work  of  the  legal  profession,  and  was  alone  until 
1881,  when  the  firm  of  Hill  &  Martin  was  formed. 
He  has  an  extensive  iibraiy  and  is  well  vei>ed 
upon  matters  generally. 

On  the  27th  of  October,  187.5,  :\Ir.  Hill  wedded 
Fannie,  eldest  daughter  of  Col.  W.  T.  Ingram, 
M.  D.,  a  native  of  Tennessee,  and  now  a  leading 
physician  of  Murphysboro,  III.  They  are  the  par- 
ents of  five  living  children:  Margaret,  William  C, 
Fannie,  Helen  and  Ruth.  The  mother  is  a  member 
of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  and  takes  a 
very  active  part  in  religious  and  charitable  work, 
.as  well  as  a  deep  interest  in  her  intelligent  family 
and  beautiful  home. 

The  political  record  of  Mr.  Hill  lias  also  brought 
him  honor  and  won  him  prominence.  In  the  fall 
of  1884  he  was  elected  State  Senator  from  the 
Fiftieth  District,  and  served  for  four  years  in  the 
Thirty-seventh  and  Thirty-eighth  General  Assem- 
blies. He  introduced  several  imiiortant  bills  and 
was  a  member  of  a  number  of  leading  committees. 
His  bill  providing  fire  escapes  for  all  tall  public 
buildings  in  Illinois  was  passed,  also  the  one  to 
protect  the  claims  of  laborers.  His  bill  concern- 
ing receivers  was  also  passed,  as  was  that  for  re- 
building the  Southern  Illinois  Normal  School  at 
Carbondale,  and  others  of  importance.  Mr.  Hill 
always  labored  in  the  interest  of  his  constituents, 
and  proved  a  leading  and  influential  member  of 
the  Senate.  When  his  term  had  expired,  he  re- 
fused a  re-nomination.  He  has  never  sought  of- 
fice, jireferring  to  follow  his  law  practice  and  be 
at  home  with  his  family'. 

Various  interests  have  occupied  the  attention 
of  our  subject.  He  was  one  of  the  organizers 
and  is  a  stockholder  in  the  City  National  Bank. 
He  was  Vice-President  of  the  water  works  and  elec- 
tric light  company,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the 
incorporators,  and  is  President  of  the  Jackson 
County  Abstract  and  Title  (Juarantee  Company. 
He  is  also  a  stockliolder  in  the  building  and  loan 
association.      His  work  along  business   lines  has 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


601 


materially  advanced  the  interests  of  the  city  and 
county  and  promoted  their  growth  and  upbuild- 
ing. His  time  and  attention  have  been  largely 
given  to  the  interests  thai  were  calculated  to  ad- 
vance the  general  welfare  of  the  town,  county 
and  state,  and  the  community  could  ill  afford  to 
lose  so  valuable  a  citizen.  He  has  long  been 
Chairman  of  the  County  Central  Committee  of  the 
Democratic  part3%  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  na- 
tional convention  which  met  in  St.  Louis  in  1888 
and  nominated  Grover  Cleveland  for  the  Presi- 
dency. Socially,  he  is  a  prominent  Mason,  and  is 
Past  Grand  jMuster  Workman  of  the  Illinois  An- 
cient Order  of  United  Workmen.  lie  is  also  con- 
nected with  the  Odd  Fellows. 


(^ 


*^-<5?\' 


Ltr 


'P^ 


\m^ 


^ 


\t§p^ 


=r) 


'r_  ON.  W.  C.  DEAN,  one  of  the  prominent 
ij  )j'  citizens  of  Jackson  County,  now  living  in 
J^i^'  Ava,  has  the  honor  of  being  a  native  of 
f^)  Illinois,  for  his  birth  occuried  in  Rock- 
wood,  Randolph  County,  December  10, 1838.  His 
father,  .Tames  Dean,  was  born  in  Chelsea,  Mass., 
January  22,  1810,  and  in  1836  emigrated  to  Illi- 
nois, locating  in  Rockwood,  then  called  Old  Lib- 
erty, where  he  engaged  in  the  wood  business.  He 
was  married  December  14,  1837,  to  Ann  Eliza 
Charles,  who  was  born  November  7,  1819,  and  was 
a  daughter  of  Capt.  William  B.  Charles,  a  native 
of  Kentucky,  who  came  to  Illinois  about  1835. 
Her  father  was  a  steamboat  captain  on  the  Mis- 
sissippi River.  Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Dean  were 
born  the  following  children :  Mary  E.,  born 
July  28,  184-t,  was  married  October  26,  1858,  to 
Dr.  W.  W.  Jones,  by  whom  she  has  a  son,  W. 
E.,  who  is  now  Deputy  Circuit  Clerk.  She  was 
again  married  April  15,  1875,  to  Whitney  Gil- 
breath,  a  Drainage  Commissioner  of  the  Big  Lake 
District;  they  have  three  children,  Lee,  Nellie  and 
Matie.  Murray  M.  is  represented  elsewhere  iu 
this  work.  Ellen  Elvira,  born  March  12,  1851, 
was  married  November  1,  1871,  to  Henry  L.Jones, 
a  druggist  of  Jackson.  Mo.,  and  they  have  five 
children:  Duree,  a  graduate  of  Bryant  and  Strat- 
ton's  Business   College   of    St.  Louis;  Winnie,   a 


sophomore  in  Ward's  Seminary  of  Nashville, 
Tenn.;  Nellie,  Murray  and  George  O. 

The  father  of  this  family  made  a  failure  of  the 
wood  business.  He  then  began  building  flat-boats, 
and  later  embarked  in  merchandising,  becomings 
one  of  the  prominent  and  prosperous  merchants  of 
southern  Illinois.  He  also  dealt  quite  extensively 
in  real  estate.  His  wife,  who  was  a  member  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church,  died  November  3,  1860,  and 
he  was  again  married  February  2, 1863,  his  second 
union  being  with  Esther  C.  La  Puff,  who  was  born 
in  Orange  County,  N.Y.,  August  12,  1824.  They 
were  married  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  and  the  lady 
died  October  3,  1875.  The  death  of  Mr.  Dean  oc- 
curred October  17,  1881.  He  too  was  a  member 
of  the  Presbyterian  Church.  In  politics  he  was  a 
Democrat,  and  in  an  early  day  served  as  Postmas- 
ter of  Rockwood. 

Under  the  parental  roof  our  subject  was  reared, 
and  his  education  was  acquired  in  the  common 
schools  and  in  an  academy'  in  St.  Louis,  together 
with  one  j'ear's  attendance  at  Shurtleff  College. 
His  business  training  was  received  in  his  father's 
store,  and  in  1865  he  went  to  Shiloh  Hill, 
where  he  embarked  in  merchandising  for  him- 
self, building  up  an  extensive  trade,  which  re- 
warded his  efforts  during  his  thirteen  years'  resi- 
dence at  that  place.  He  first  formed  a  partner- 
ship with  G.  W.  Young,  but  a  year  later  sold  out. 
He  also  made  some  judicious  investments  in  real 
estate,  which  yielded  him  a  good  income. 

April  7,  1869,  Mr.  Dean  was  joined  in  wedlock 
with  Miss  Clare  Josei)hine,  daughter  of  J.  K.  and 
Elizabeth  (Gillespie)  Burke,  the  former  a  native 
of  North  Carolina.  Mrs.  Dean  was  born  near 
Shiloh  October  9,  1850,  and  was  there  educated. 
Three  children  graced  this  union,  of  whom  two  are 
yet  living,  Carrie,  wife  of  Will  Bowers;  and  Bes- 
sie. The  eldest  daughter  was  educated  at  Monti- 
cello  Seminary  and  in  Ward  Seminary,  of  Nash- 
ville, Tenn.,  and  is  an  expert  musician. 

In  1878  Mr.  Dean  came  with  his  family  to  Ava 
and  purchased  a  mill.  He  made  extensive  ship- 
ments of  flour  to  the  south,  and  for  some  years  he 
also  did  a  large  merchandising  business.  His 
brother  Murray  is  now  connected  with  him  in  the 
milling  business.     On  the  1st  of  January,  1890,  he 


602 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


established  the  bank  wliich  he  still  conducts,  and 
also  opened  a  cooper  sliop  and  lumber  yard,  which 
he  yet  carries  on.  These  enterprises  have  also 
been  successful..  He  now  owns  four  thousand 
acres  of  the  finest  land  of  Illinois,  and  is  one  of 
tlie  wealthiest  citizens  of  Jackson  County.  He  and 
his  wife  hold  membership  witli  the  Presbyterian 
Church,  in  wiiicli  he  serves  as  Elder.  He  belongs 
to  the  Kniglits  of  Pytliias,  and  for  thirty  years  has 
been  a  member  of  the  Masonic  fraternit}^  and  is 
now  Senior  Warden,  lie  takes  an  active  part  in 
politics,  and  is  a  stanch  Democrat.  He  served  as 
Supervisor  of  liis  township,  and  is  now  represent- 
ing his  district  in  the  State  Legislature,  in  which 
he  serves  on  the  committees  on  agriculture,  roads 
and  bridges, state  institutions,  visiting  educational 
institutions  and  horticulture.  He  is  an  able  leader 
of  the  people,  for  he  is  a  man  of  intelligence,  and 
he  studies  the  interests  of  his  constituents.  Alike 
true  to  every  public  and  private  trust,  he  was  won 
the  high  regard  of  all  with  whom  business  or  so- 
cial relations  have  brought  him  in  cont.act. 

yF.  JOHNSON  is  a  well  known  farmer  of 
Jackson  County,  and  carries  on  agricultu- 
ral pursuits  on  section  11,  Ora  Township. 
He  was  born  upon  the  farm  which  is  now  his  home 
on  the  7th  of  Jul}',  1857,  and  is  a  wortlij-  repre- 
sentative of  an  honored  pioneer  family  of  the 
county.  His  father,  George  W.  Johnson,  was  born 
in  Ken  tuck}',  February  12,  1828,  and  when  a  lad 
of  eight  summers  became  a  resident  of  Perry 
County,  III.,  where  he  grew  to  manhood.  At  the 
age  of  twenty-five  he  removed  to  Jackson  County, 
locating  in  Vergennes  Township,  where  he  pur- 
chased a  farm.  A  short  time  afterwards,  however, 
he  took  up  his  residence  upon  the  farm  which  is 
now  the  home  of  our  subject,  and  there  continued 
-to  live  until  called  to  his  final  rest,  December  27, 
1890.  Through  much  of  his  life  he  also  followed 
carpentering  in  connection  with  agricultural  pur- 
suits. In  April,  1861,  he  enlisted  in  the  service  of 
his  country  as  a  member  of  Company  I,  Second 
Illinois  Infantry,  hut,  owing  to  sickness,  whereby 
Ue  was  disabled,  he  received  his  discharge  in  July 


of  the  same  year.  In  politics  he  was  a  Democrat, 
and  held  the  ollices  of  School  Director,  Road  Com- 
missioner and  Justice  of  the  Peace,  discharging 
the  duties  of  the  same  with  a  promptness  and 
fidelity  that  won  him  high  commendation. 

The  mother  of  our  subject,  who  bore  the 
maiden  name  of  Nancy  J.  Brown,  was  born  and 
reared  in  Ora  Township.  Her  paients  were  John 
and  Sarah  A.  (Milligan)  Brown.  Her  father  was 
a  native  of  A'irginia,  and  during  his  youth  removed 
with  his  parents  to  Tennessee,  whence  he  came  to 
Perry  County,  III.,  in  which  county  llicy  were 
married.  Mr.  Brown  died  in  1872,"  and  his  wife 
passed  away  in  J.ackson  County  in  1885.  The 
marriage  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Johnson  was  celebrated 
in  Ora  Township  October  19,  1854,  and  they  be- 
came the  parents  of  two  children,  the  sister  being 
Vilena,  who  was  born  October  9,  1855.  She  was 
married  November  22,  1877,  to  Ashby  Crane,  and 
they  have  six  children:  AVilliani,  Pearl,  Duia, 
Nola,  P^tna  and  George. 

Upon  his  father's  farm  W.  F.  Johnson  spent  the 
days  of  his  boyhood  and  youth  in  the  usual  man- 
ner of  farmer  lads,  and  in  the  public  schools  he 
acquired  a  good  English  education.  Later  he  en- 
g.aged  in  teaching  for  two  terms,  and  since  that 
time  has  devoted  his  energies  largely  to  his  farm- 
ing, but  in  connection  with  agricultural  pursuits 
is  also  engaged  in  buying,  selling  and  shipping 
stock.  He  possesses  good  business  abilit}',  and  in 
his  undertakings  has  met  with  a  well  merited  suc- 
cess. 

On  the  1st  of  November,  1884,  Mr.  Johnson 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Jennie  M.  East- 
erl}',  a  daughter  of  Philip  Easterl}',  who  w.as  born 
near  Carbondale,  Jackson  County,  III.  Their 
union  has  been  blessed  with  four  children:  Noah 
born  October  1,  1885;  Walter,  September  2,  1887; 
Uriah,  March  28,  1889;  and  Edna,  August  5.  1893. 

In  his  political  views  Mr.  Johnson  is  a  stanch 
Democrat  and  takes  an  active  interest  in  every- 
thing pertaining  to  the  success  of  his  party.  He 
has  served  as  Supervisor  of  his  township  one  term, 
was  Collector  two  terms.  Town  Clerk  two  terms, 
and  is  now  serving  his  second  term  as  Treasurer  of 
the  Highway  Commissioners.  By  his  studious 
habits  and  constant  reading   Ue   has  acquired  an 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


603 


education  much  aboye  the  average,  and  is  one  of 
the  best  informed  men  of  the  township.  His 
home  contains  a  fine  and  well  selected  library'.  Mr. 
Johnson  is  recognized  as  one  of  the  prominent 
citizens  of  the  community,  and  it  is  with  pleasure 
that  we  present  to  our  readers  tliis  record  of  a  well 


spent  life. 


:^#(^ 


f(j_^  ERMAX  C.  MANSKER,  a  thrifty  and  ener- 
\,  getic  agriculturist  of  Randolph  County,  is 
making  his  home  in  township  8,  range  6. 
He  is  a  native  of  this  county,  and  was  born 
on  the  place  he  now  occupies,  two  anda-half  miles 
west  of  Rockwood,  August  30,  1863.  His  parents, 
Samuel  and  Nancy  (Nelson)  Mansker,  were  both 
natives  of  Kentuck}',  the  former  was  born  Decem- 
ber 16,  1795,  and  died  January  9,  1884.  Grand- 
fatlier  John  Mansker  was  a  nephew  of  Jasper,  a 
wealthy  and  prominent  citizen  of  Tennessee,  liv- 
ing near  Nashville.  The  grandfather  married 
Margaret  Robinson  and  afterward  settled  on  Bear 
Gap  Creek,  a  few  miles  from  Louisville,  Ky.  He 
served  under  Generals  St.  Clair  and  Wayne  against 
the  Indians. 

The  father  of  our  subject  was  the  third  child  and 
the  eldest  son  of  his  parents'  familv  and  was  born 
near  Louisville  about  four  j-ears  before  his  fathers' 
removal  to  Tennessee.  In  1804  the  family  re- 
moved to  .Ste.  Genevieve  (now  Perr}-)  Count}',  Mo. 
In  1807  they  came  to  Illinois  and  located  at  Liberty 
Island,  opi)osite  Rockwood.  This  continued  to  be 
their  home  for  about  five  years,  when  a  final  move 
was  made  to  section  10,  township  8,  range  6.  To 
the  small  original  purchase  was  added  adjacent 
property  until  the  estate  aggregated  at  one  time 
two  thousand  acres.  The  rising  of  the  river  obliged 
him  to  move  his  residence  further  from  the  stream, 
and  in  1844  he  built  the  home  where  his  widow 
and  son  now  live. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  is  a  daughter  of  Basil 
and  Elizabeth  (Chattan)  Nelson,  natives  of  Vir- 
ginia, who  moved  to  Kentuck}'  in  an  early  day. 
When  Nancy  was  but  a  small  child  her  parents 
moved  to  Illinois,  locating  in  Marion  County-, 
where  she  grew  to  womanhood.  In  Randolph  Coun- 
ty she  met  and  married  Samuel  Mansker,  and  they 


became  the  parents  of  five  children,  four  of  whom 
yet  survive.  Thej'  are:  Ann  Eliza,  the  wife  of 
Stephen  Kirk;  Nelson  C,  who  resides  with  his 
mother;  Elveretta,  the  wife  of  John  Woods,  of 
this  township;  and  Herman  C,  our  subject.  By 
three  previous  marriages  Samuel  Mansker  became 
the  father  of  seventeen  children. 

February  1,  1889,  the  subject  of  this  sketch  mar- 
ried Marj-  C,  daughter  of  Stephen  Kinuison,  a  na- 
tive of  Missouri.  Unto  them  have  been  born  four 
children,  all  of  whom  are  living  and  residing  at 
home,  Lottie,  Genevieve  May,  Raymond  and  Ber- 
nard C.  Mr.  JIansker  is  the  possessor  of  a  splen- 
did tract  of  land  comprising  four  hundred  and 
twent3-five  acres  of  hill  and  bottom  land,  on  which 
are  raised  large  quantities  of  wheat,  besides  the 
various  other  grains.  He  is  a  Trustee  of  Schools 
of  his  township,  and  politically-  votes  the  Demo- 
cratic ticket  in  national  affairs,  but  in  local  elec- 
tions chooses  to  cast  his  ballot  for  the  man  and 
not  the  part}-. 


JORDAN  HARRISS,  who  for  many  years  was 
I  one  of  the  prominent  agriculturists  of 
^^1  i  township  5,  range  2,  Perry  Count}',  en- 
^^Jy  tered  into  rest  in  April,  1874,  mourned  by 
a  host  of  old-time  friends.  His  name  will  live  for 
3'ears  in  the  memory  of  his  associates  and  the  affec- 
tion of  his  descendants.  Mr.  Harriss  was  born  in 
South  Carolina  in  1800,and  his  parents  soon  after- 
ward removing  to  Tennessee,  he  accompanied  them 
thither  and  lived  many  years  in  Bedford  County. 
In  his  3'outh  he  was  given  a  fair  education. 

Accompanied  b}'  his  wife,  whose  maiden  name 
was  Lucinda  Casey,  Mr.  Harriss  came  to  Perry 
County  in  1829,  and  located  on  Holt's  Prairie, 
where  the}'  reared  a  family  of  eight  children. 
Jane,  who  married  Robert  Teague,  died  leaving 
one  son,  Marion,  who  is  a  Baptist  minister  at  Du 
Quoin;  Johnson  C.  was  also  for  many  j'ears  a  min- 
ister in  that  church,  but  is  now  deceased;  Nancy, 
who  married  Edmund  Dry,  resides  in  this  count}-, 
and  has  a  family  of  eight  children;  John  H.,  the 
next  in  order  of  birth,  will  be  mentioned  furtiier 
on  in  this  sketch;  Hiram  M.  is  a  merchant  at  Du 


604 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Quoin;  Marion  is  also  a  resident  of  tliat  place, 
where  he  is  one  of  the  leading  business  men;  Julia 
A.  is  deceased;  J.  Carroll,  a  missionary  for  the 
Nine  Mile  Missionary  IJaptist  Church,  makes  his 
home  in  Du  Quoin. 

Tlie  paternal  grandfather  of  our  subject,  John- 
son llarriss,  was  a  resident  of  Virginia  prior  to  his 
emigration  to  the  Prairie  State  in  1829.  He  ac- 
companied the  fatlier  of  our  subject  hither,  and 
died  in  this  county  at  the  age  of  ninety-eight 
\-ears.  John  H.  Harriss,  the  fourth  child  of  our 
subject,  was  born  in  this  county  in  1830,  and  has 
resided  here  for  sixty-four  years.  He  was  given 
a  common-school  education,  and  later  aided  his 
father  in  the  care  of  his  farm.  Energetically  per- 
forming his  share  of  the  work,  he  gained  a  thor- 
oughly practical  knowledge  of  the  pursuit  of  agri- 
culture, and  was  well  fitted  at  an  early  age  to 
begin  the  battle  of  life. 

In  1850  Mr.  Harris  married  Miss  Adeline  Wilks, 
who  died  in  1867.  To  them  were  born  tiiree  chil- 
dren who  grew  to  mature  years,  as  follows:  Julia, 
now  Mrs.  John  D.  Strait,  who  makes  her  home  in 
Piucknej'ville;  William  W.,  a  farmer  of  township 
5,  range  2;  and  Jennie,  now  Mrs.  "VV.  B.  King, 
also  of  the  above  township.  In  1868  Mr.  Harriss 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Luaeine,  daugii- 
ter  of  Carroll  Turner,  one  of  the  early  residents 
of  Perry  County.  Mr.  Harriss  and  his  family  aie 
conscientious  members  of  the  Baptist  Church.  Al- 
though he  i>a3's  little  attention  to  politics,  he  al- 
wa}'s  votes  the  straiglit  Republican  ticket. 


-^ 


> 


EDWARD  MUSSELMAN,  junior  partner  of 
the  firm  of  S.  B.Eaton  &  Co.,  the  extensive 
coal  operators  and  merchants  of  Du  Quoin, 
was  born  in  Chillicothe,  Ro.ss  County,  Oiiio,  Octo- 
ber 4,  1853.  The  great-grandfather  of  our  sub- 
ject was  one  of  the  earliest  settlers  of  that  county 
and  built  the  first  flouring  mill  within  its  bor- 
ders. Michael  Musselman,  the  grandfather,  was 
a  native  of  Penns3ivania  and  served  as  a  soldier 
in  the  War  of  1812,  and  also  in  the  war  witli  Mex- 


ico. His  death  occurred  in  the  Buckeye  State  at 
the  age  of  seventy-six  years,  and  his  wife  passed 
away  at  the  advanced  age  of  eighty-one.  The  fam- 
il}'  have  all  been  millers.  As  before  stated,  the 
great-grandfather  established  the  business  in  Ross 
County,  Ohio,  and  it  was  followed  by  the  grand- 
father, father  and  our  subject. 

•John  Musselman,  tiie  fatiier,  was  born  in  Ohio, 
and  there  engaged  in  milling  for  some  years,  but 
later  in  life  he  removed  to  ^Minneapolis,  Kan., 
where  he  is  now  engaged  in  farming.  He  married 
Elizabeth  Angeline  Hanson,  who  was  born  in  the 
Buckeye  State  and  died  when  our  subject  was  only 
six  years  of  age.  He  was  the  eldest  in  a  family 
of  five  children,  three  sons  and  two  daugliters. 
Chauncy  W.  is  now  clerking  in  Du  Quoin;  Charles 
is  with  his  father  in  Kansas;  Zoe  is  the  wife  of 
Eugene  Sankes,  of  Minneapolis,  Kan.;  and  Minnie 
M.  resides  with  an  uncle  in  Oliio. 

Mr.  Musselman  of  lliis  sketch  acquu'ed  a  good 
education,  and,  like  his  family  through  the  four 
previous  generations,  he  became  a  miller.  July  6, 
1876,  was  the  date  of  Ids  arrival  in  Du  Quoin. 
Here  lie  formed  a  connection  with  the  Star  Milling 
Compan}-,  with  which  he  continued  for  a  period 
of  ten  years,  when  he  severed  his  connection  with 
that  enterprise  and  became  a  member  of  tlie  firm 
of  S.  B.  Eaton  &  Co.,  his  partner  being  his  brother- 
in-law,  Mr.  Musselman  having  married  Miss  Mary 
E.  Eaton  on  the  I'Jth  of  May,  1881. 

Our  subject  started  out  in  life  with  no  means 
save  a  young  man's  bright  liope  of  the  future  and 
a  determination  to  succeed,  but  by  strict  attention 
to  business  and  well  directed  efforts  he  has  become 
one  of  the  wealth)'  young  men  of  Du  Quoin.  He 
is  sagacious,  practical  and  progressive,  and  his 
success  is  certainly  well  deserved.  He  is  now  half- 
owner  in  the  Jupiter  Coal  Mines,  as  well  as  in  the 
large  store  of  P^laton  &  Co.,  and  is  one  of  tlie  stock- 
holders in  the  First  National  Bank. 

In  politics  Mr.  Musselman  is  a  Prohibitionist, 
for  he  warmly  believes  in  temperance.  He  is  a 
prominent  Mason,  belonging  to  the  blue  lodge, 
chai)ter  and  council,  and  for  two  j'ears  was  Master 
of  the  blue  lodge  of  Du  Quoin.  His  wife,  a  most 
estimable  lady,  is  a  member  of  the  Methodist 
Church.     Mr.    Musselman    is    now    preiiaring    to 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


605 


build  one  of  the  finest  residences  ru  the  beautiful 
and  thriving  city  of  Du  Quoin.  It  will  be  a  mon- 
ument to  his  success  in  life  and  will  tell  of  a  pros- 
perous business  career. 


,I/U^ON.  MARTIN  A.  ROSS,  ex-Sheriff  and  ex- 
jf)\^  Mayor  of  Murphysboro,  and  one  of  its 
^}^  most  highly  respected  citizens,  claims  New 
(^i  Hampshire  as  the  state  of  his  nativity.  He 
was  born  in  Fitzwilliam,  June  16,  1829,  and  is  one 
of  five  children  born  unto  Arad  L.  and  Cynthia 
B.  (Burpee)  Ross,  both  of  whom  were  natives  of 
Massachusetts.  For  some  j'ears  the  father  followed 
farming  near  Fitzwilliam,  but  in  1830  went  to 
Vermont,  and  in  1834  came  with  his  family  to  Illi- 
nois, accompanied  by  T.  L.  Ross  and  Isham  Purdy 
and  their  families.  He  located  at  Vergennes,  and 
afterward  entered  and  bought  land^,  improving  a 
fine  farm.  Subsequent!}-  he  removed  across  the 
lii.e  into  Perry  County.  He  died  near  Du  Quoin, 
at  the  age  of  sevouty-three,  and  his  wife  reached 
the  age  of  eighty.  He  was  a  Whig  in  politics,  and 
in  religious  belief  she  was  a  Methodist.  Their 
children  were,  Mrs.  Philena  A.  Hinckley,  of  Du 
Quoin;  Martin  A.;  Ellen  C,  deceased  wife  of 
George  Kennedy;  Leonard  T.,  of  Sand  Ridge;  and 
Orren  A.,  a  farmer  of  Du  Quoin.  The  last  two 
served  in  the  Eighty-first  Illinois  Infantry,  and 
Leonard,  who  was  Corporal,  had  his  leg  shot  off  at 
Vicksburg. 

Since  the  age  of  five  years,  Martin  A.  Ross  has 
resided  in  Jackson  and  Perry  Counties.  He  re- 
members seeing  deer,  wolves  and  other  wild  game 
in  this  region,  and  is  familiar  with  all  the  hard- 
ships and  experiences  of  frontier  life.  He  was  edu- 
cated in  the  old-time  schoolhouse,  with  its  slab 
seats,  puncheon  floor  and  huge  fireplace.  He  wrote 
with  a  quill  pen,  and  studied  from  the  Testament 
and  Elementary  Spelling  Book.  At  the  age  of 
eighteen  he  left  home  and  engaged  in  lumbering 
on  the  river  for  about  seven  years,  working  for 
Colonel  Brush,  who  operated  a  sawmill.  Mr.  Ross 
served  as  head  sawyer  for  five  jears,  and  received 
the  largest  wages  paid  for  that  work  in  the  county. 
Ill  health,  however,  forced  him   to  abandon  this. 


and  in  Du  Quoin  he  opened  a  store  in  partnership 
with  G.  M.  Hinckley,  under  the  firm  name  of 
Hinckley  &  Co.  After  about  six  years,  he  sold 
out  and  turned  his  attention  to  the  development 
of  his  farm  of  one  hundred  acres  in  Perry  Countj'. 
This  he  disposed  of  in  1868,  and  embarked  in 
business  in  Murphysboro,  in  connection  with 
George  Kennedy.  Under  the  firm  name  of  Ken- 
nedy &  Ross,  for  fifteen  years  he  dealt  in  hard- 
ware, furniture,  agricultural  implements  and  gro- 
ceries, doing  a  successful  business,  but  again  he  was 
forced  to  sell  out,  in  1882,  on  account  of  ill  health. 

On  the  10th  of  May,  1864,  Mr.  Ross  was  united 
in  marriage  with  Emma  L.,  daughter  of  Calvin  L. 
Casterlinc.  Mer  father,  who  was  born  in  Elizabeth- 
town,  N.  J.,  was  a  shoe  merchant,  and  in  1838  emi- 
grated b}'  wagon  to  St.  Louis,  where  he  engaged  in 
the  grocerj'  business  for  many  years.  He  died  while 
visiting  in  St.  Louis  in  1870,  at  the  age  of  sixty- 
five.  In  politics,  he  was  first  a  Whig  and  after- 
ward a  Republican.  He  married  Sarah  Woodruff, 
a  native  of  New  Jersey,  who  died  in  1878,  at  the 
age  of  seventy-three.  They  had  a  family  of  five 
children,  four  of  whom  reached  mature  years: 
Mrs.  Eliza  Greer,  of  Los  Angeles,  Cal.;  Cornelia, 
wife  of  E.  E.  Souther,  of  St.  Louis;  Edward  P.,  of 
Colorado;  and  Mrs.  Ross.  The  last-named  was 
born  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  August  4,  1839,  and  was 
reared  in  St.  Louis,  received  an  excellent  musical 
education,  and  taught  in  that  city  and  in  the  mu- 
sical department  of  the  old  Du  Quoin  Seminary. 
To  our  subject  and  his  wife  was  born  one  child, 
now  Mrs.  Hattie  L.  Poindexter,  who  was  grad- 
uated in  Carbondale,  and  is  living  in  Murphj'S- 
boro. 

In  1882  Mr.  Ross  was  elected  County  Sheriff  for 
a  term  of  four  years,  and  his  duties  often  called 
forth  great  bravery  and  fearlessness.  He  was  also 
ex-offlcio  Collector  for  three  years,  and  after  the 
law  was  changed  served  as  Township  Collector 
until  December,  1888.  In  1871  he  was  elected 
Mayor,  and  in  1875  was  again  chosen  to  that  office. 
He  also  served  one  term  as  Alderman,  and  two 
terms  as  School  Director.  He  has  always  been  a 
stalwart  supporter  of  Republican  principles. 

After  retiring  fiora  office,  Mr.  Ross  gave  his  at- 
tention   solely   to  his  farm  in   Sand  Ridge,  com- 


606 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


prising  six  hundred  and  eighty-six  acres  of  highly 
improved  land.  He  also  raises  fine  horses,  having 
"Quartermaster,"  sired  by  "Cleveland  Bay;"  "Can- 
ton," sired  by  "George  Sprague,"  and  some  fine 
standard  bred  Bay  stallions.  lie  is  a  man  of  good 
business  ability,  and  has  been  very  successful  in  his 
business  dealings.  He  belongs  to  Amity  Lodge,  I. 
O.  O.  F.,  and  to  the  encampment,  and  also  to  the 
Knights  of  Honor,  of  wliicli  he  was  Treasurer  for 
several  years.  The  Presbyterian  Ciiurch  finds  in 
him  a  faithful  and  consistent  member.  He  is  pleas- 
ant and  affable  in  manner,  and  has  the  high  re- 
gard of  all.  His  wife  is  an  intelligent  and  highly 
cultured  lady,  who  presides  with  grace  over  their 
comfortable  home.  It  is  with  pleasure  that  we  pre- 
sent to  our  readers  the  sketch  of  tliis  worthy  couple. 

JIT^/REDERICK  WILLIAM  BRINKMAN,  of 
I^HJgf  the  firm  of  S.  &  W.  Brinkman,  carpenters, 
/li  builders   and    contractors    of  Chester,  was 

born  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  September  3,  1856.  He  is 
the  son  of  William  Brinkman,  a  native  of  Ger- 
many, who  came  to  the  United  States  when  a  sin- 
gle man  in  1845.  The  mother  of  our  subject,  who 
prior  to  her  marriage  was  known  as  Louisa  Brink- 
man,  was  born  in  Germany.  Tlie  parents  are  still 
living,  and  make  their  home  in  this  city,  of  which 
they  are  worthy  and  honored  residents. 

In  a  family  of  five  children,  the  sul)ject  of  this 
sketch  is  the  second  in  order  of  birth.  He  acquired 
a  good  education  in  the  public  schools  of  this  city. 
When  his  school  days  were  over,  he  chose  the  trade 
of  a  carpenter  for  his  life  work,  and  learned  the 
business  with  his  uncle,  Frederick  Brinkman.  Af- 
ter acquiring  a  thorough  knowledge  of  materials 
and  the  modes  of  usage  best  adapted  to  various 
kinds  of  buildings,  he  formed  a  partnership  with 
Sigmund  Brinkman,  his  cousin,  the  firm  title  being 
S.  &  W.  Brinkman.  They  have  the  reputation  of 
being  the  most  responsible  contractors  and  build- 
ers in  the  city,  and  have  erected  many  fine  dwell- 
ings and  business  blocks.  The  Grand  View  Hotel 
stands  as  a  specimen  of  their  workmanship,  and  In 
Steeleville  and  many  other  towns  in  the  surround- 
ing counties  they  have  given  entire  satisfaction 
in  their  line  of  work. 

October  28,  1881,  F.  William  Brinkman  and  Miss 


Wilhelmina  Meyer  were  united  in  marriage.  The 
lady  was  a  daughter  of  Louis  Meyer,  and  was  born 
in  Randolph  Count3-.  They  were  blessed  by  the  birth 
of  six  children,  who  bear  the  respective  names  of 
Olga,  Dora,  Walter,  Arthur,  Clement  and  Edna.  - 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Brinkman  are  consistent  members  of 
the  St.  John's  Lutheran  Church,  and  are  people  of 
true  religious  principles.  Our  subject  is  a  man  of 
solid  worth,  possessing  in  an  eminent  degree  those 
traits  that  command  respect  in  the  business  world 
and  gain  esteem  among  his  neighbors  and  asso- 
ciates.    Politically,  he  is  a  Democrat. 

^^- ^^^^•^i"i^^^*^^♦♦^=  =-^> 

iiHOMAS  L.  BEAN  belongs  to  that  class  of 
agriculturists  whose  efforts  make  of  Ran- 
dolph County  the  garden  spot  of  Illinois. 
He  is  a  comparatively  }'Oung  man,  having  been 
born  October  4,  1854,  in  this  county,  and  has  spent 
his  life  here.  He  worked  on  his  father's  farm  un- 
til 1878,  when- he  established  a  home  of  his  own 
on  section  25,- township  6,  range  7,  where  he  has 
one  hundred  and  sixty  acres  of  fine  land,  im- 
proved with  good  buildings,  fences,  orchards,  etc. 
His  land  is  thoroughly  tilled,  and  produces  abun- 
dant harvests  of  the  various  cereals. 

The  attractive  home  of  our  subject  is  presided 
over  by  his  capable  wife,  formerlj'  known  as  Miss 
Lizzie  Leming.  She  is  a  daughter  of  William  and 
Lizzie  (Fleming)  Leming,  a  biography  of  whom 
will  be  found  elsewhere  in  this  volume.  In  her 
girlhood  she  received  a  good  education,  and  was 
carefully  trained  in  housewifery,  so  that  she  was 
admirably  fitted  to  superintend  a  home  of  her 
own.  Her  father  was  killed  during  the  war.  Mrs. 
Bean  became  the  wife  of  our  subject  April  10, 
1878,  and  has  borne  her  husband  five  children: 
Immanuel,  who  died  in  infancy;  Everett  C,  Liz- 
zie M.,  Clarence  A.  and  Eva  Irene.  The  handsome 
residence  of  the  family  was  erected  in  1893,  and 
is  among  the  finest  in  the  county,  while  the  large 
and  spacious  liarn  is  a  model  of  its  kind. 

Mr.  Bean  is  a  believer  in, and  a  supporter  of,  the 
principles  of  th(!  Republican  partj'.  Well  informed 
regarding  topics  of  general  interest,  enterprising 
in  business,  and  honorable  in  his  dealings  with  his 
fellow-citizens,  he  is  regarded  with  rcs|)ect  as  a 
worthy  citizen  and  stanch  friend.     Mr.  and  Mrs. 


'    1 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


609 


Bean  are    valued    members    of  -the    Presb^'terian 
Church. 

The  parents  of  our  subject,  James  and  Margaret 
(Harmon)  Bean,  were  earl^'  settlers  in  this  county, 
having  located  here  in  the  '40s.  They  are  mem- 
bers of  the  Presbjterian  Church,  and  are  honored 
and  prominent  residents  of  township  6,  range  7. 
Their  family  comprised  ten  children,  Thomas  L. 
being  the  eldest  in  order  of  birth. 


•i-^m-r 


^^ 


«^ 


JOHN  J.  KING  is  successfully  engaged  in 
general  farming  on  section  15,  Tamaroa 
Precinct,  Perry  County,  where  he  owns  and 
operates  a  good  farm  of  one  liundred  and 
ten  acres.  He  also  has  a  twenty-acre  tract  of  lim- 
ber land  one  mile  to  the  west.  His  home  is  pleas- 
antly located  six  miles  northeast  of  Du  Quoin. 
Well  tilled  fields  and  good  buildings  indicate  the 
thrift  and  enterprise  of  the  owner,  who  is  justly 
ranked  among  the  practical  and  progressive  agri- 
culturists of  the  community.  Mr.  King  was  born 
March  25,  1849,  in  this  county,  and  is  a  son  of 
Joshua  and  Polly  (^Brooks)  King. 

The  father  was  born  in  Jackson  County,  Tenn., 
November  13,  1814,  and  the  mother's  birth  oc- 
curred in  that  county,  on  tlie  28th  of  April,  1812. 
They  were  reared  and  married  in  that  state,  and 
soon  after  their  marriage  they  emigiated  to  Perry 
County,  111.,  locating  on  Paradise  Piairie,  where 
Mr.  King  purchased  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres 
of  land.  This  was  in  1832.  On  the  farm  which 
he  there  developed  he  continued  to  reside  until 
his  death,  which  occurred  January  16,  1881.  He 
was  noted  as  a  man  of  firm  convictions,  unswerv- 
ing in  his  ideas  of  right  and  justice.  He  never 
engaged  in  litigation,  was  known  as  a  man  of 
sterling  worth  and  integrity,  and  was  very  popu- 
lar and  highly  respected  by  his  neighbors.  In 
politics  he  was  a  Republican,  and  in  religious  be- 
lief was  a  Methodist. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  was  first  married  to 
Henry  Carner,  of  Virginia.  Three  children  were 
born  to  them,  of  whom  two  are  yet  living.  They 
were  reared  with  the  children  of  Mr.  King,  and  an 
affection  existed  between  them    rare!}'    witnessed, 


and  which  has  endured  throughout  the  ^'ears.  The 
two  children  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Carner  are,  Mary  J., 
wife  of  Archibald  House,  all ighly  respected  farmer 
of  Allendale,  Mo.;  and  William  H.,  a  Baptist  min- 
ister now  residing  in  Pinckneyville,  111.  He  tra- 
verses a  vast  amount  of  territor}'  in  the  discharge 
of  his  duties,  and  is  a  faithful  minister. 

Joshua  King  and  his  wife  became  the  parents  of 
nine  children,  six  of  whom  are  living.  Elizabeth 
Laurretta  is  the  wife  of  Elislia  G.  Keeling,  a  farmer 
of  Paradise  Piairie;  Martha  C.  married  Levi  Com- 
means,  a  farmer  of  Paiadise  Prairie;  John  J.  is  the 
subject  of  this  sketch;  Larkin  B.,  who  married 
Dora  Harrison,  of  Paradise  Prairie,  is  employed  as 
clerk  in  Miller  Brothers  general  mercantile  store 
at  Du  Quoin;  Matthew  T.,  a  farmer  of  Paradise 
Prairie,  wedded  Sarah  Turner,  of  Marshfield,  Mo., 
by  whom  he  has  five  children;  Anio  R.,  who  mar- 
ried Martha  Jones,  of  Nashville,  111.,  is  now  clerk- 
ing for  S.  B.  Eaton,  of  Du  Quoin.  The  members 
of  the  familj'  now  deceased  are,  Sallie  B.,  Eletha 
and  Martha  Canzada. 

Upon  his  father's  farm  John  J.  King  was  reared, 
and  his  bo3'hood  d.a3's  were  spent  in  farm  work 
and  in  attendance  at  the  district  schools.  Being 
the  eldest  son,  the  general  supervision,  and  conse- 
quently all  the  hard  work  of  the  place,  devolved 
upon  him.  He  continued  upon  the  old  homestead 
until  his  marriage,  but  shortly  after  that  event  re- 
moved to  a  forty-acre  farm  in  the  neighborhood, 
where  he  remained  for  six  years.  He  then  sold 
out  and  purchased  sixty  acres  of  land  two  miles  to 
the  north,  which  he  operated  for  nine  years,  when 
he  removed  to  his  present  home. 

On  the  28th  of  February,  1867,  was  celebrated 
the  marriage  of  Mr.  King  and  Almira  J.,  daughter 
of  Samuel  Burr,  a  native  of  Canada,  who  came  to 
the  United  States  when  a  young  man  and  settled 
on  what  is  known  as  the  Four  Mile  Piairie,  near 
Pinckneyville.  Ten  children  were  born  to  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  King,  of  whom  seven  yet  survive:  Cor- 
lie  B.,  wife  of  Daniel  A.  Hampleman,  a  farmer  of 
Union  County,  111.;  William  B.,  Roy  O.,  Orrin  G., 
John  J.,  Almira  F.  and  Polly  J.  E..all  of  whom  are 
still  living  witli  their  parents.  Those  who  have 
passed  away  are,  Ira  J.,  Ula  G.  and  Carroll  J. 

Mr.  King  for  four  years  filled  the  office  of  Jus- 


610 


PORTRAIT    AND   BIOGRAPHICAL    RECORD. 


tice  of  the  Peace  for  Paradise  Precinct,  and  is  at 
present  Township  Treasurer  of  Schools,  in  wbicli 
position  he  has  etticient'lj'  served  for  six  years.  In 
politics,  lie  is  a  stalwart  supporter  of  tiie  Repub- 
lican party.  He  and  his  family  are  members  of 
the  Missionary  Baptist  Church,  and  are  people  of 
prominence  in  this  community,  where  they  are 
held  in  hijjii  reijard. 


C.  EADE,  a  successful  architect  and  tiie 
proprietor  of  the  Du  Quoin  Planing-  Mills, 
is  a  native  of  the  Keystone  State.  He  was 
born  Maj'  28,  1852,  and  is  a  son  of  Charles 
Eade.  His  father  was  a  native  of  Sussex,  England, 
born  in  1831,  and  his  mother  was  a  native  of 
Brighton,  England.  They  were  married  in  that 
land,  but  soon  afterward  came  to  America,  settling 
first  in  Pennsylvania,  whence  they  came  to  Illinois 
in  1853.  They  took  up  their  residence  upon  a 
farm  in  Washington  County, and  the  father  turned 
his  attention  to  agricultural  pursuits,  although  lie 
was  a  carpenter  by  trade  and  had  previously  fol- 
lowed that  vocation.  Later  he  engaged  in  mer- 
cantile business.  In  1861  he  removed  to  Bond 
County,  where  his  wife  died  in  1866.  He  was  after- 
ward again  married,  and  subsequently  returned  to 
Pennsylvania,  where  he  is  now  living. 

Our  subject  is  the  eldest  of  four  children,  the 
family  numbering  three  sons  and  a  daughter.  He 
also  had  two  half-brothers  and  a  half-sister.  His 
brother  A.  T.  is  now  engaged  in  farming  in  Bond 
County,  and  G.  E  is  in  the  employ  of  Mr.  Eade  of 
this  sketch.  The  sister  is  still  living  with  her  fa- 
ther in  Pennsylvania. 

In  early  life,  J.  C.  Eade  attended  the  common 
school,  and  completed  his  education  in  Greenville. 
AVlien  a  j-outli  of  seventeen  he  began  learning  the 
carpenter's  trade,  and  as  he  was  a  natural  me- 
chanic, it  did  not  take  him  long  to  master  the 
business.  As  a  draughtsman  and  architect,  he  has 
planned  and  built  some  of  the  finest  structures  in 
southern  Illinois.  He  engaged  in  business  in 
Nashville,  and  also  carried  on  operations  in  other 
lilaces  in  this  state  until  about  1888,  when  became 
to  Du  Quoin.     It  was  not  long  before  he  had  se- 


cured a  liberal  patronage  as  an  architect  and 
builder,  doing  a  large  and  constantly  increasing 
business.  In  1891  he  established  his  extensive 
planing  mill,  which  is  now  under  successful  opera- 
tion. Since  coming  to  Du  (Juoin,  he  has  drawn 
plans  for  and  erected  many  of  the  fine  buildings 
of  the  place,  including  the  City  Hall,  the  Odd  Fel- 
low's Building,  M.  Teague's  residence  with  many 
others. 

In  1874,  while  residing  in  Nashville,  Mr.  Eade 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Lizzie  K.,  daugh- 
ter of  John  Thomson,  who  was  a  native  of  Ken- 
tuck}',  and  of  English  and  Irish  descent.  He  en- 
gaged in  business  as  a  civil  engineer  until  after 
his  removal  to  Nashville,  where  he  carried  on  farm- 
ing until  his  death  in  1872.  Mrs.  Eade  is  a  lady 
of  good  education  and  presides  with  grace  over 
her  hospitable  home.  By  their  marriage  have  been 
born  iliree  children,  Emery  T.,  Kittie  R.  and 
Hahme  I.,  and  they  also  lost  one  son  in  infancy. 

In  politics  Mr.  Eade  is  a  Republican,  but  has 
never  aspired  to  public  office.  Socially  he  is  con- 
nected with  the  Odd  Fellows'  society  and  the 
Modern  Woodmen  of  America.  He  was  one  of 
the  charter  members  of  the  latter,  and  is  one  of 
its  Directors.  He  and  his  wife  are  members  of  the 
Baptist  Chuicli,  in  which  he  has  served  as  Deacon 
for  the  p.ast  twelve  years,  and  in  church  and  be- 
nevolent work  they  take  a  prominent  part. 

II.  FRIZZELL,  who  is  extensively  engaged 
in  the  clothing  business  in  Du  Quoin,  has 
^^^  ,  the  honor  of  being  a  native  of  the  city 
^^f)  which  is  still  his  home,  his  birth  having 
there  occurred  on  the  22d  of  November,  1867.  He 
is  the  onl}'  son  of  the  late  William  Frizzell,  who 
was  born  in  Mt.  Vernon,  111.,  in  1826.  He  re- 
moved to  Du  Quoin,  becoming  one  of  the  pioneer 
merchants  of  this  place,  where  he  continued  l)usi- 
ness  up  to  the  time  of  his  death.  During  that  time 
he  prospered  exceedinglj'.  and  became  one  of  the 
wealthiest  men  of  Perry  County  as  the  result  of  his 
enterprise  and  good  business  ability.  He  was  also  a 
prominent  Mason  and  Odd  Fellow  and  was  one  of 
the   most  highly  esteemed   citizens  of  Du  Quoin. 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


611 


He  married  Marian  Dening,  who"  was  also  a  native 
of  Illinois  and  died  in  1884.  Our  subject  was 
their  onlj-  son,  but  they  had  three  daughters,  two 
of  whom  are  now  living  in  California.  The  other 
is  the  wife  of  J.  M.  Browning,  a  wealthy  coal  op- 
erator of  Du  Quoin. 

The  gentleman  whose  name  heads  this  sketch 
was  only  three  years  of  age  when  his  father  died. 
He  was  reared  and  educated  in  Du  Quoin,  and 
also  attended  a  college  in  St.  Louis.  He  began 
business  for  himself  as  a  druggist,  which  he  con- 
tinued for  five  j'ears.  Afterward  he  took  an  ex- 
tensive trip  through  the  west,  visited  the  Pacific 
Slope  and  then  returned  to  his  home  in  Du  Quoin. 
Sliortly  afterward  he  embarked  in  the  clothing  bus- 
iness on  a  large  scale.  He  had  inherited  a  consid- 
erable fortune  from  his  father's  estate  and  started 
out  in  life  under  very  favorable  circumstances. 

Mr.  Frizzell  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  rising 
young  business  men  of  this  place,  being  enterpris- 
ing, energetic  and  ambitious.  He  pays  close  at- 
tention to  the  details  of  his  business,  and  by  his 
well  directed  efforts  and  good  management  he  has 
won  a  liigh  degree  of  success,  which  is  the  just  re- 
ward of  his  labors.  Socially  he  is  connected  with 
the  Knights  of  Pythias  order  and  is  a  prominent 
member.  He  has  spent  his  entire  life  in  Du  Quoin, 
and  those  who  have  known  him  from  his  boyhood 
and  have  witnessed  his  honorable,  upright  career 
are  numbered  amona;  his  warmest  friends. 


Wj^ILLlAM  A.  HAINES,  who  was  one  of  the 
most  public-spirited,  widely  known  and 
highly  esteemed  citizens  of  Tamaroa,  en- 
tered into  rest  March  10,  1890,  mourned  by  a  host 
of  old  time  friends,  in  whose  hearts  his  niemory 
will  long  be  green.  He  was  a  native  of  New  Jer- 
sey, having  been  born  in  Medford,  in  1817.  When 
quite  young  he  left  home,  and  after  a  few  years  spent 
in  various  places,  went  south  and  located  at  Vicks- 
burg,  Miss.,  where  his  marriage  to  Miss  Mary  A. 
Thompson  occurred.  Mrs.  Haines  was  a  native  of 
Hopkinsville,  Ky.,  and  was  the  daughter  of  Will- 
iam   Thompson.     The    young  couple   made  their 


home  in  the  south  until  1857,  when  they  came  to 
Illinois  and  spent  the  following  ten  years  upon  a 
farm  in  Periy  Count3^ 

At  the  expiration  of  that  time  Mr.  Haines  re- 
turned to  New  Orleans,  in  which  place  he  was  en- 
gaged in  the  wholesale  grocery  business,  and  there 
continued  to  make  his  home  until  1869.  He  then 
returned  to  Illinois,  this  time  making  his  home  in 
Tamaroa,  where  he  was  employed  in  buying  and 
selling  grain  and  hay  until  his  decease.  He  was 
a  very  progressive  business  man  and  was  liberal  to 
a  fault.  He  was  well  known  among  the  citizens 
of  this  section,  was  an  active  member  of  the  United 
Presbyterian  Chilrch,  and  his  correct  mode  of  liv- 
ing gained  for  him  a  popularity  which  was  merit- 
ed in  every  respect.  Mrs.  Haines,  who  is  still  liv- 
ing (1894),  has  reached  the  age  of  seventy-three 
years. 

At  his  decease  our  subject  left  two  sons,  the  eld- 
er of  whom,  J.  AV.,  was  born  in  Mississippi,  and 
grew  to  manhood  on  the  farm  in  this  county.  He 
received  a  fine  education,  and  when  quite  a  young 
man  engaged  in  merchandising.  Although  his 
private  affairs  naturally  receive  much  of  his  time 
and  attention,  j'et  he  is  interested  in  matters  of 
public  interest,  and  has  twice  been  elected  Treas- 
urer of  Perry  County,  an  office  which  he  now  holds. 
At  the  time  of  the  establishment  of  the  banking 
house  of  S.  R.  Haines  it  Co.,  J.  W.  was  made  cash- 
ier, and  has  since  continued  to  fill  that  important 
position.  Since  becoming  a  resident  of  this  coun- 
ty he  has  been  identified  with  its  upbuilding,  and 
at  all  times  has  been  deeply  interested  in  matters 
pertaining  to  local  and  national  welfare.  He  mar- 
ried Miss  Eva  J.,  daughter  of  M.  B.  and  E.  .J.  Dim- 
mick,  of  Frankfort,  111. 

S.  B.  Haines,  the  second  son  of  our  subject,  who 
is  likewise  one  of  the  prominent  business  men  of 
Tamaroa,  was  born  in  Vicksburg,  and  was  a  lad  of 
eighteen  years  when  he  came  to  Tamaroa  and  en- 
gaged as  clerk  in  the  store  of  Blanchard  Brothers. 
In  1892  he  was  instrumental  in  the  organization 
of  the  bank  of  Tamaroa,  of  which  he  was  made 
President.  Although  this  branch  of  business  occu- 
pies a  great  deal  of  his  attention,  3-et  he  finds  time 
to  engage  in  other  interests  and  is  carrying  on  a 
prosperous  trade  as  a  merchant,  and  also  raises  fine 


dl2 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


blooded  horses.  In  every  interprise  to  which  he 
gives  his  support  he  maintains  a  deep  and  un- 
wavering interest,  and  his  efforts  have  resulted  in 
the  promotion  of  the  material  welfare  of  his  coun- 
ty. In  1878  he  married  Miss  Nettie,  daughter  of 
Townsend  Blanchard,  and  to  them  have  been  born 
a  daughter.  Birdie,  and  a  son,  Howard  Blanchard. 
.S.  R.  Haines  served  as  Postmaster  at  Taniaroa 
during  Cleveland's  first  administration.  Socially, 
he  and  his  brother  are  prominent  Masons. 

IT=I     .^ 


(V  _^  ARVEY  BILDERBACK,  wlio  resides  on  sec- 
liTjij  tion  21,  Kiiikaid  Township,  Jackson  Coun- 
''s^^'  t3',  where  he  successfull3'  carries  on  agri- 
(^)  cultural  pursuits,  was  born  near  Rockwood, 
Randolph  County,  March  9,  1826.  He  is  a  repre- 
sentative of  one  of  the  honored  pioneer  families  of 
southern  Illinois.  His  grandfather,  John  Bilder- 
back,  settled  near  Kaskaskia  in  a  ver3-  early  day 
and  there  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life.  His 
wife  passed  away  in  1838.  She  was  a  remarkable 
woman,  being  six  feet  tall  and  very  strong.  In 
the  familj'  were  the  following  children:  James, 
Charles,  Friend,  Ephraim,  William,  Stewart,  Henry, 
Thomas,  John;  Lydia,  wife  of  Charles  Garner; 
Gettie,  wife  of  Harvey  Clendennen;  and  Nancy, 
wife  of  Jacob  Harmon. 

James  Bilderback,  father  of  our  subject,  was  a 
native  of  Kentuck}-,  and  during  his  boyhood  ac- 
companied the  family  to  Illinois.  He  married 
Maria  Clendennen,  and  in  Randolph  County  fol- 
lowed farming  until  his  death,  in  January,  1863. 
His  wife  died  in  May,  1876.  The  children  were: 
Harvey;  Henry,  wlio  was  born  in  December,  1822, 
and  died  in  Ava  in  1889;  Jane,  wife  of  James 
Petitt,  of  California;  Mary,  who  became  the  wife 
of  John  Ilanna,  and  after  his  death  wedded  A. 
Goodman,  of  Ava;  Nancj',  deceased  wife  of  An- 
drew Hanna;  Lj'dia,  wife  of  David  Bean,  of  Kan- 
sas; Martha  and  Loranc^-,  both  of  whom  died  in 
childhood. 

Mr.  Bilderback  of  this  sketch  has  always  made 
his  home  in  the  state  of  his  nativity.  In  the  year 
in  which  he  arrived  at  man's  estate  he  was  mar- 
ried,  September  8,  1847,  in  Randolph  County,  to 


Martha  Gray,  daughter  of  John  Gray,  a  native  of 
Belfast,  Ireland,  who  when  three  j-ears  old  was 
taken  b}'  his  parents  to  South  Carolina.  He  wedded 
Mary  Black,  and  they  had  a  family  of  eleven  chil- 
dren :  Margaret,  wife  of  Samuel  Skelly;  Isabel,  wife 
of  Miller  Murphy;  Elizabeth;  Sarali,  wife  of  Robert 
Linn;  Mary,  wife  of  Joseph  Latimore;  Alexander; 
Jane,  wife  of  William  Jeffry;  William  Thomas; 
and  Adeline,  wife  of  A.  J.  Cross.  The  parents  of 
this  family  both  died  in  July,  1848. 

Mrs.  Bilderback  was  born  March  9,  1826.  The 
young  couple  began  tlieir  domestic  life  in  Ran- 
dolph County,  but  after  six  years  came  to  Jack- 
son County,  locating  in  Kinkaid  Township,  where 
our  subject  and  his  brother  Henry  operated  a  saw- 
mill. In  those  days  tlie  sawmills  of  the  neigh- 
borhood furnished  the  lumber  for  all  buildings. 
They  also  carried  on  a  stave  factory  for  a  time.  In 
the  fall  of  1867,  the\'  removed  to  the  farm  upon 
which  Mr.  Bilderback  now  resides,  purchasing  and 
improving  seventy  acres  of  land,  and  also  there 
carrying  on  a  sawmill  for  about  five  years.  On 
the  expiration  of  that  period  our  subject  purchased 
his  brother's  interest  in  the  land  and  has  since 
bought  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres  adjoining. 
His  industrious  labors  have  transformed  this  tract 
into  one  of  the  finest  and  most  valuable  tracts  of 
the  community. 

To  Mr.  and  ]NLs.  Bilderback  was  born  a  large 
famil}'  of  children.  Willis  IL,  born  November  20, 
1848,  wedded  Marj-  Asbury,  by  whom  he  had  one 
child,  Nettie.  After  the  death  of  his  first  wife  he 
married  Matilda  Austin,  and  they  have  seven  chil- 
dren, Ei)hraim,  Hiram,  Dell,  Ernest,  Murray,  Martha 
and  Minnie.  James  C,  born  January  1.5,  1851, 
died  at  the  age  of  eighteen  months.  Maria,  born 
January  25,  1853,  became  the  wife  of  Samuel  Wil- 
son, and  died  February  5,  1876,  leaving  two  chil- 
dren, Otis  and  Harvey.  Mary  J.,  born  August  7, 
1855,  married  W.  L.  Asbuiy,  and  died  April  15, 
1893.  Three  of  their  eight  children  are  yet  liv- 
ing, Lettie,  Freddie  and  Aggie.  H.  Edwin,  born 
Slay  10,  1857,  died  at  the  age  of  sixteen  months. 
Gabriel  J.,  born  August  13,  1859,  married  Ann 
Bower,  and  they  have  four  children,  Hubert,  Har- 
vey, Mamie  and  Bessie.  Nancy  A.,  born  Septem- 
ber 1, 1861,  married  George  AVhitsen,  by  whom  she 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


613 


had  three  children,  May,  Bell  and  Willie,  deceased. 
She  died  in  May,  1883.  John  AV.,  born  March  27, 
1864,  m.arried  Addie  McCormick  and  they  have  two 
children,  Claude  and  George.  AVilliam  A.,  born 
June  19,  1868,  married  Cora  McCormick  and  had 
a  daughter,  Grace.  His  death  occurred  October  7, 
1891. 

For  many  j'ears  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bilderhack  have 
been  members  of  the  Presbyterian  Church.  In 
politics  he  is  a  Republican,  having  supported  the 
party  since  its  organization.  He  served  as  Collec- 
tor for  one  terra.  During  the  late  war  he  mani- 
fested his  Io3"alty  to  the  Government  b^-  enlisting, 
August  20,  1862,  in  Company  A,  Eightieth  Illi- 
nois Infantry,  under  Capt.  Luther  Mann  and  Col. 
Thomas  Allen.  On  account  of  disability  he  was 
discharged  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  in  Blarch,  1863.  He 
has  ever  lieen  a  lo3'al  citizen,  prompt  and  faithful 
in  tlie  discharge  of  his  duties,  and  in  this  volume 
he  well  deserves  representation. 

r^y^W  O  M  A  S  PE  N  W  A  R  D  E  N,  ex-Sheriff  of 
Perry  County,  and  a  prominent  real-estate 
dealer  of  Du  Quoin,  is  one  of  the  wide- 
awake and  enterprising  citizens  to  whom  the  pros- 
perity' of  this  place  is  due.  A  native  of  Elgin 
County',  Canada,  he  was  born  January  28,  1843, 
and  is  a  son  of  John  Pen  warden,  a  native  of  Dev- 
onshire, England.  The  grandfather,  David  Pen- 
warden,  and  his  son  John  were  botli  sea-faring 
men.  In  1842  the  famil3'  came  to  America,  lo- 
cating in  Elgin  Count}-,  Canada,  where  the  father 
was  frozen  to  death  when  Thomas  was  only  nine 
years  old.  He  had  married  Sarah  Bromell,  also  a 
native  of  Devonshire.  After  the  death  of  her 
first  liusband  she  was  again  married,  and  is  now 
living  in  Minnesota.  In  the  Penwarden  family 
were  three  sons  and  a  daugliter,  of  whom  Thomas 
is  the  eldest.  John,  a  soldier  of  the  late  Civil 
War,  who  was  wounded  in  battle,  is  now  a  farmer 
of  Wisconsin;  Margaret  is  the  wife  of  Henry  Shep- 
herd; and  David,  who  was  one  of  the  boys  in  blue, 
IS  now  living  in  Port  Huron,  Mich. 

A  year  after  his  father's   death,   Thomas   Pen- 
warden  started  out  to  make  his  own   way   in   the 


world.  After  that  he  received  no  school  privi- 
leges, and  for  some  j'ears  had  a  hard  struggle  to 
get  along.  Going  to  Kansas,  he  experienced  all 
the  trials  of  frontier  life.  We  there  find  him  when 
the  Civil  AVar  broke  out.  AVhen  the  first  call  for 
thirty  thousand  troops  was  made  he  promptly 
responded,  and  in  July,  1861,  became  a  member 
of  the  Third  Kansas  Infantry.  Soon  afterward  he 
was  transferred  to  the  Fifth  Regiment,  and  for 
some  time  served  on  the  western  frontier,  taking 
part  in  the  battles  of  Wilson's  Creek,  Mo.,  and 
Pea  Ridge,  Ark.  He  afterward  went  on  the  Red 
River  expedition.  During  his  service  he  received 
three  wounds,  one  in  the  left  hand  at  AVilson's 
Creek,  another  in  the  right  knee  at  Helena,  Ark., 
and  the  third  at  Mark's  Mills,  where  he  w.as  shot 
through  the  head.  His  comrades,  thinking  life 
extinct,  left  him  on  the  battlefield,  where  he  lay 
unattended  from  Monday  at  ten  o'clock  until 
AVednesday  noon.  During  this  time  the  field  was 
in  possession  of  the  rebels.  He  was  wounded  in 
April,  and  although  it  was  thought  he  could  not 
recover,  the  following  August  he  was  again  in  the 
ranks,  and  was  with  Sherman  on  the  memorable 
march  to  the  sea,  taking  part  in  all  the  important 
engagements  of  the  Atlanta  campaign.  He  received 
an  honorable  discharge  in  Leavenworth,  Kan., 
Julj'  7,  1865,  after  four  j-ears  of  faithful  service, 
during  which  time  he  was  alwajs  found  at  his 
post,  valiantly  defending  the  Old  Flag  and  the 
cause  it  represented. 

After  his  return  from  the  arm}-,  Mr.  Penwarden 
located  in  Du  Quoin,  and  in  1866  married  Miss 
Jennie  Huston.  They  have  two  sons,  Robert  and 
John,  both  of  whom  are  upon  the  farm.  For  some 
years  after  his  marriage,  Mr.  Penwarden  engaged 
in  mining  and  farming.  In  1880  he  was  elected 
Sheriff  of  Perry  County,  and  served  for  two  years. 
In  1886  he  was  again  elected,  and  filled  the  office 
for  four  years.  During  his  first  term  the  only 
man  on  whom  capital  punishment  was  inflicted 
in  the  county  was  hung. 

On  his  retirement  from  ollice,  Mr.  Penwarden 
returned  to  his  farm  near  Du  Quoin,  and  soon 
afterward  embarked  in  the  real-estate  business,  in 
which  he  is  now  extensively  engaged.  He  is  also 
filling  the  office  of  Public  Administrator.    He  is  a 


614 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


leading  member  of  the  Grand  Army  post,  is  a 
Royal  Arch  Mason,  and  in  politics  has  been  a  life- 
long Republican.  No  man  in  Perry  County  is 
more  widely  and  favorably  known  than  Air.  Pen- 
warden,  whose  friends  are  legion. 


*^^ 


■ji^^RANK  W.  CASE,  the  popular  agent  of  the 
j^=i^^  Illinois  Central  Railroad  Company,  and  the 
/ll  St.  Louis,  Alton  it   Terre   Haute   Railroad 

Company,  has  charge  of  the  office  at  Du  Quoin. 
A  native  of  Momence,  111.,  he  was  born  February 
10,  1«53.  His  father,  William  Case,  was  a  native 
of  the  Empire  State,  and  came  to  the  west  before 
tiie  city  of  Chicago  was  founded,  making  the  trip 
on  foot  from  Cleveland.  The  grandfather,  Will- 
iam Case,  Sr.,  visited  Cliicago  when  Ft.  Dearborn 
was  the  only  building  at  the  place.  He  entered 
land  in  Will  County,  111  ,  and  it  was  to  look  after 
this  property  that  his  son  AVilliam  came  to  the 
west. 

The  latter  followed  carpentering  as  well  as  farm- 
ing. During  the  late  war  he  served  as  a  soldier 
of  the  One  Hundred  and  Forty -seventh  Illinois 
Infantry  with  the  rank  of  Lieutenant,  and  was  af- 
terwards Army  Postmaster  in  Savannah,  Ga.  He 
is  now  living  retired  in  Cook  County.  He  mar- 
ried Ellen  B.  Roberts,  of  Niagara  Falls,  N.  Y.,  who 
with  her  parents  came  to  the  west  in  an  early  day, 
the  family  settling  in  Momence,  111.,  where  her 
brother  became  a  prominent  merchant.  Her  father 
was  Sheriff  of  Will  County  in  the  early  '50s.  Will- 
iam Case,  in  company  with  H.  M.  Singer,  opened 
up  the  first  stone  quarrj'  in  Lemont,  111.,  and  Mr. 
Singer,  who  was  an  uncle  of  our  subject,  was  Su- 
perintendent of  the  Illinois  Canal,  Mr.  Case  serv- 
ing as  foreman  under  him.  In  the  Case  famil}' 
were  three  sons  and  a  daughter,  of  whom  Frank 
W.  is  the  eldest.  H.  S.,  of  Chicago,  is  in  the  em- 
l)loy  of  the  Chicago  &  Northwestern  Railroad 
Company.  Charles  II.  is  with  the  Missouri  Pacific 
Railroad  Company,  and  for  seven  years  has  been 
stationed  in  St.  Louis.  Florence  is  the  wife  of 
A.  H.  Sommuns,  a  wholesale  furniture  dealer  of 
Kansas  City. 

Mr.  Case  of  this  sketch  has  throughout  life  been 


connected    with    railroad    work.     At    the   age  of 

eight  he  became  a  messenger  boy  on  the  Chicago 
&  Alton  Railroad,  and  little  bj-  little  he  has  mas- 
tered ever>'  branch  of  the  business.  (Jn  the  close 
of  the  late  war  he  went  on  the  train  as  brakeman, 
and  before  he  was  eighteen  years  of  age  had  charge 
of  a  train  on  the  Chicago  it  Alton,  with  which  he 
continued  seven  years,  after  which  he  spent  two 
years  with  the  Indiana,  Bloom iiigton  &  Western 
Railroad.  Later  he  was  with  different  roads  in 
Missouri  and  the  southwest,  including  the  Iron 
Mountain  Road.  He  spent  some  time  in  Texas  in 
other  business,  with  headquarters  at  Houston,  and 
subsequently  took  charge  of  the  yards  of  the  Chi- 
cago tt  Alton  Road  at  the  Chicago  Stock  Yards. 
He  was  next  in  charge  of  the  yards  of  the  Grand 
Trunk,  with  several  assistants  under  him,  and  thus 
served  for  a  year  and  a-half,  after  which  he  was 
with  the  Atchison,  Union  Pacific  and  Northern 
Pacific  Roads  W^ith  the  last-named  he  had  charge 
of  the  yards  in  Duluth,  Minn. 

Later  Mr.  Case  returned  to  the  employ  of  the 
Chicago  &  Alton,  and  subsequently  was  connected 
with  the  Travelers'  Insurance  Company  for  three 
years.  He  then  had  charge  of  the  Chicago,  Bur- 
lington ife  Quiucy  Yards  in  Chicago  until  the  time 
of  the  big  strike,  after  which  he  was  for  a  short 
time  with  the  Atchison  Road  at  Streator,  III.,  and 
then  served  as  station  agent  in  Huntington,  Oregon. 
He  was  also  made  Deputj-  Sheriff,  as  at  that  time 
there  was  much  burglary  on  the  r{>ads  of  the  far 
west.  His  fight  against  this  class  of  citizens  made 
it  dangerous  for  him  to  retain  his  position, and  he 
was  warned  to  leave  the  place,  but  instead  of  doing 
so,  he  waged  war  more  desperately  than  ever,  and 
captured  and  sent  to  the  penitentiary  fifty-two 
of  the  robbers,  including  a  Justice  of  the  Peace 
and  Constable,  which  shows  that  he  not  onlj^  had 
the  thieves  to  contend  against,  but  also  officers  of 
the  law,  who  were  linked  with  them  in  their  vil- 
lainy. 

Mr.  Case  was  later  sent  to  Portland,  where  he 
filled  the  same  position.  Afterward  he  served  in 
the  same  capacit}'  in  other  places,  and  in  the  spring 
of  1893  came  to  Du  Quoin  to  take  charge  of  the 
yards.  Soon  afterward  he  was  made  agent  for 
both  the  Illinois  Central  and  St.  Louis,  Alton   & 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


615 


Terre  Haute  Railroads.  The  pos-ition  he  now  fills 
is  a  responsible  one.  He  is  a  most  thoroughgoing 
railroad  man,  having  masteied  ever}'  branch  of  the 
business,  aikfl  is  capable  of  filling  any  place  on  the 
road. 

In  the  year  1879  Mr.  Case  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Maggie  E..  daughter  of  Dr.  J.  C.  Thorp, 
an  army  surgeon.  Mrs.  Case  was  with  her  father 
all  through  the  war,  and  was  with  him  on  many  of 
the  bloody  battlefields.  She  is  a  graduate  of  the 
sisters'  school  of  Warsaw,  and  is  a  lady  of  culture 
and  refinement.  They  have  had  two  children, 
Fred,  who  died  at  the  age  of  twenty-two  months, 
and  Gertrude,  a  bright  maiden  of  eleven  summers. 
Mr.  Case  is  a  Knight  Templar  Mason,  holding 
membershij)  with  a  blue  lodge  and  chapter  in  Chi- 
cago. While  in  Slater,  Mo.,  he  served  as  Master 
of  the  lodge,  and  for  four  years  was  District 
Deputy.  In  politics  he  is  a  supporter  of  the  Re- 
publican party. 


DN.  POPE,  President  of  the  First  National 
)  Bank  of  DuQuoin,  is  a  native  of  Franklin 
^  County,  III.  He  was  boru  on  a  farm  near 
'  J,  Benton  September  26,  18.38,  and  is  a  son  of 
Dr.  Benjamin  Ward  Pope,  a  prominent  ph^'sician, 
who  also  followed  farming.  He  was  born  in  North 
Carolina  in  1806,  and  was  a  sou  of  Hardy  Pope, 
who  was  of  Scotch  and  English  descent  and  was  at 
one  time  an  extensive  land  and  slave  owner.  He 
died  in  Tennessee. 

Dr.  Pope  came  to  Illinois  in  1828,  settling  near 
Benton,  where  he  practiced  medicine,  operated  a 
farm  and  built  the  first  gristmill  in  southern  Illi- 
nois. He  served  in  the  Black  Hawk  War  and  was 
a  man  of  far  more  than  average  intelligence  and 
ability.  He  came  to  the  stale  in  limited  circum- 
stances, but  by  well  directed  efforts  and  upright 
dealings  he  accumulated  a  handsome  property. 
He  was  a  most  ardent  Democrat,  and  long  served 
as  Justice  of  the  Peace.  He  died  in  1873.  He  had 
been  twice  married.  He  first  wedded  Sarah  Read, 
a  native  of  Tennessee,  and  a  daughter  of  a  wealthy 
slaveholder.  She  was  a  lady  of  much  culture, 
having  been   reared   in    ease    and    luxury.     They 


became  the  parents  of  two  children :  P.  N.  and  Ben- 
jamin F.,  who  is  engaged  in  merchandising  in 
Du  (.^uoin.  Another  brother,  William  J.,  was  a 
prominent  and  wealthy  farmer  of  Williamson 
County,  and  there  died  after  the  death  of  the 
father.  By  his  second  marriage  Dr.  Pope  had 
two  daughters  and  one  son,  the  latter  being  Dr. 
Ta^'lor  S.  Pope,  who  was  a  prominent  physician, 
but  is  now  engaged  in  merchandising  in  Benton, 
111.  One  of  the  sisters  is  the  wife  of  Dr.  Benja- 
min F.  Pope,  of  Du  Quoin. 

Our  subject  was  reared  in  the  usual  manner  of 
farmer  lads,  and  was  educated  in  the  public 
schools  of  Benton.  Before  he  had  attained  the 
age  of  twenty-one  he  engaged  in  the  milling 
business  with  his  father  and  brothers,  and  also  en- 
gaged in  merchandising.  In  1859,  in  company 
with  his  brother,  Benjamin  F.,  he  came  to  Du 
Quoin,  where  he  engaged  in  grain  dealing  and  in 
merchandising.  In  1867  he  sold  his  interest  in 
the  store,  but  continued  in  the  grain  business, 
while  his  brother  carried  on  merchandising.  In 
1877,  in  company  with  Henry  Horn,  he  established 
the  Du  Quoin  Bank,  with  which  he  was  connected 
until  1887,  when  he  sold  his  interest  in  the  same. 
During  all  this  time  he  continued  to  deal  in  grain, 
and  to  that  business  devoted  his  energies  until 
1892,  when  he  sold  out,  and,  in  compan}'  with 
other  capitalists,  established  the  First  National 
Bank,  of  which  he  was  elected  President.  This 
is  one  of  the  strongest  financial  institutions  in 
the  state,  and  was  one  of  the  very  few  that  con- 
tinued to  loan  money  during  the  financial  de- 
pression of  1893.  The  success  of  this  bank  is  un- 
doubtedly due  in  a  large  measure  to  Mr.  Pope. 

In  1866  Mr.  Pope  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Eliza  C.  Pierce,  who  was  born  in  southern  Illinois 
and  was  a  daughter  of  Capt.  James  Pierce,  a 
Mexican  soldier,  who  lost  his  life  in  that  war. 
Mrs.  Pope  was  a  college  graduate  and  .-i  lady  of 
superior  qualities.  She  died  in  1880,  leaving  four 
children:  E.  H.,  a  railroad  engineer  on  the  St. 
Louis,  Atchison  Si  Terre  Haute  Railroad,  living  in 
Pinckneyville,  111.;  W.  E.,  at  home;  C.  E.,  a  law 
student  in  the  State  University;  and  Kate,  who 
graduated  from  Forest  Park  University  and  is  now 
her  father's  confidential  clerk  in   the    bank.     In 


616 


'PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


1881  Mr.  Pope  wedded  Ellen  J.  McClure,  daugh- 
ter of  George  Y.  McClure,  who  was  a  Lieutenant 
in  the  late  Civil  War,  and  lost  his  life  in  the  serv- 
ice. Mrs.  Pope  is  a  highly  educated  lady,  and  for 
eight  years  before  her  marriage  successfully  en- 
ga^ged  in  teaching.  By  this  union  have  been  born 
thi'ee  children,  Lillian,  Edith  and  Helen.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Pope  are  connected  with  the  Christian 
Church,  to   the   support  of  which  they  contribute 

liberally. 

In  connection  with  his  other  business  interests 
Mr.  Pope  is  half  owner  in  the  St.  Nicholas  Hotel, 
the  largest  and  finest  hotel  in  the  city,  and  has 
much  other  valuable  property,  being  numbered 
among  the  wealthiest  men  of  the  county.  His 
residence  property,  which  includes  twenty  acres  of 
land,  is  one  of  the  finest  in  Du  Quoin.  Mr.  Pope 
is  a  man  of  most  excellent  business  and  executive 
ability,  and  the  success  which  has  come  to  him  is 
the  result  of  his  enterprise,  industry  and  well 
directed  efforts.  He  is  a  Royal  Arch  Mason  and 
has  served  as  Treasurei-  of  the  blue  lodge  and 
chapter  for  many  years.  He  has  never  aspired  to 
political  honors,  but,  like  all  of  his  family,  is  a 
Democrat 


'ffj  OHN  B.  ROSSON,  M.  D.,  a  practicing  phy- 
I     sician    of    Ava,   was    born    November    30, 
I     1849,  in  Marshall  County,  Tenn.,  and  is  a 
{^|/    son    of  Osborn    Rosson,  who  was    born    in 
North  Carolina  September  23,  1813.     The  grand- 
father was  .loseph  Rosson,  and  his  father  was  an  ofh- 
cer  of  the  Revolution,  who  served  on  the  staff  of 
General  Washington   and  was  present  at  the  sur- 
render   of  Cornwallis,   at   Yorktown.    He    was   a 
prominent  man  and  a  well  known   physician,  who 
graduated  from  .Jefferson  Medical  College  of  Phil- 
adelphia.    He  was  of  Scotch    and  French  lineage. 
The    mother  of  our   subject   bore    the    maiden 
name  of  Rebecca  Patton,  and  was  born  in  Tennes- 
see in   1823.     Her  father,  .Tohn  Patton,  was  a  na- 
tive of  North  Carolina,  of    Scotch  and    German 
descent,  and  served    as   a  soldier  in   the   war  in 
Florida.     The   parents   of  our  subject  were  mar- 
ried  in   Tennessee   in    1839,  and  removing  to  the 
western  part  of  the  state,  located  near  Union  City, 


where  Mr.  Rosson  developed  a  farm.     Upon  that 
place  he  made  his  home  until  1866,  when  he  came 
with  his   family  to  Jackson   County,  111.,  locating 
in  Yergennes  Township.     He  is  now  a-  resident  of 
Pomona.     During   his  residence  in  the  south   he 
was  a  Douglas  Democrat  and  never  feared  to  ex- 
press his  views.     During  the  war  he  was  a  strong 
advocate  of    the  Union.     Mrs.   Rosson  died   De- 
cember 27,  1875.     She    was   a  cousin   of  General 
Forrest,  and  they  were  reared  as  brother  and  sister. 
In  the  Rosson   family  were  five  children:     The 
Doctor;  Jennie,   wife  of  Dr.  O.   L.  Mahoney,  of 
Phoenix,  Ariz.;    William    T.,    who  lives  with  his 
father;  James  A.,  who  is  married  and   makes  his 
home  in   Carbondale;  and   Theodore  W.,  a  drug- 
gist  of    Pomona.     Dr.    Rosson    was  reared  on    a 
farm  and  acquired  his  education  in  Newburn  Col- 
lege, of  Tennessee.    He  then  embarked  in  leaching, 
which    profession    he    followed    for    five    years. 
During    that    time   he  spent  his  leisure  hours  in 
studying  medicine,  and  later  attended  lectures  at 
the    Ohio    Medical    College    of    Cincinnati,    from 
which  he  was  gr.aduated  on  the  1st  of  March,  1872. 
He  began   practice    in   Jackson   County   and    has 
since  continued  the  prosecution  of  his  profession. 
On  the  26th  of  March,  1876,  was  celebrated  the 
marriage  of  Dr.   Rosson  and    Miss  Louise  Perry. 
They  had  four  children :     Charles  Tilden,  Dora  L., 
Rebecca   Maud  and   Jennie   Forrest.     On   the  2d 
of  June,  1889,  the  Doctor  wedded  Miss  Phcebe  A., 
daughter  of  Rev.  Joseph   B.  and   Angeline  (May- 
field)   Davis,  who  were  natives  of  Kentucky  ,  and 
became  pioneer  settlers  of  Jackson  County.     Tbe 
father  was  one  of  the  early  Jlethodist  ministers  of 
this  region.     Mrs.  Rosson   was  born   in    De  Soto 
Township  August  31,  1865,  and  is  a  highly  edu- 
cated lady,  a  graduate  of  Simpson  College  of  In- 
dianola,  Jowa.     She  is  County  President  of  the 
Woman's    Christian   Temperance    Union    and    is 
prominent   in   benevolent   and   temperance  work. 
She  also   belongs   to    the   Presbyterian^   Church. 
By  her  marriage  she  has  one  son,  Ray  Wright. 

The  Doctor  holds  membership  with  the  Odd 
Fellows'  society  and  the  Knights  of  Pythias,  also 
with  the  Independent  Order  of  Good  Templars. 
In  1889  he  removed  to  Ava,  and  is  now  serving 
as  a  member  of  its  Board  of  Health.     He  has  also 


Ct^^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


619 


been  a  member  of  the  School  Board.  In  his 
political  views  he  is  an  ardent  advocate  of  the 
Democracy.  He  belongs  to  the  Southern  Illinois 
Medical  Association,  has  been  its  Secretar3-  two 
j'cars,  and  is  its  stenographer.  For  six  years  he 
has  been  connected  with  the  American  Medical 
Association.  He  has  written  many  able  articles 
for  medical  journals  and  has  won  a  prominence  in 
his  profession  that  is  certainly  enviable,  having 
performed  many  successful  surgical  operations, 
which  are  to-day  living  monuments  of  his  sliill. 


v®),  i^i^h ^ 


^|UDGK  DAVID  B.  THOMAS,  Justice  of  the 
Peace,  and  general  agent  for  the  Hartford 
Life  Insurance  Company,  also  several  Are 
insurance  companies,  is  a  well  known  citizen 
of  Murphysboro,  and  a  man  highly  esteemed  for 
his  sterling  qualities.  He  possesses  those  character- 
istics which  win  him  friends,  and  by  his  pleasant 
and  cordial  manner  and  upriufhtlife  has  gained  the 
confidence  and  good  will  of  all  wlio  i<now  liim. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  born  in  tiie  parish 
of  St.  Clair,  Wales,  September  1,  1828,  and  is  a 
SOD  of  Benjamin  and  Jane  (Lewis)  Thomas.  His 
father  was  a  Welsh  farmer,  and  died  in  that  conn- 
try  at  the  age  of  sixty-five.  The  niothei'  also 
spent  her  entire  life  in  her  native  land.  Our  sub- 
ject is  the  3'oungest  and  only  surviving  child  in  a 
family  of  eleven.  He  was  reared  upon  the  home 
farm  until  twent^'-live  and  attended  the  subscrip- 
tion schools.  He  then  became  a  railroad  porter, 
and  from  that  position  worked  liis  way  upward 
until  he  became  one  of  the  leading  conductors.  He 
was  offered  the  position  of  Division  Superintend- 
ent, but  for  some  time  he  had  hoped  to  come  to 
America,  and  resolved  that  he  would  now  seek  a 
home  in  the  New  World. 

In  Wales,  Mr.  Tiiomas  wedded  Frances  Jones. 
They  were  married  in    1850,  and  her  death  occur- 
red in  1862.  She  left  three  children:  Joseph  B.,  who 
is  now  clerking  for  his  brother;  Thomas  B.,  a  mer- 
22 


chant  of  this  place;  and  Jane,  wife  of  James  Mark, 
of  Murphysboro.  In  1864  Mr.  Thomas  came  with 
his  children  to  America,  sailing  on  the  vessel  "Old 
Webster"  from  Liverpool  to  New  York,  where  he 
arrived  after  a  voyage  of  six  weeks.  Going  to 
Scran  ton,  Pa.,  he  secured  a  railroad  position,  and 
in  1867  came  to  Jlurphysboro  with  the  Superin- 
tendent of  the  Mt.  Carbon  Coal  Works.  For  two 
years  he  had  charge  of  the  lumber  department,  and 
tiien  engaged  in  coal  mining  for  ten  years,  after 
which  he  became  general  agent  of  the  transporta- 
tion department  of  the  Carbondale  Coal  and  Coke 
Company.  Later  he  was  made  Superintendent 
of  the  coke  ovens,  having  charge  of  their  one 
hundred  and  eight  ovens  at  Harrison  for  two 
years. 

In  1884  Mr.  Thomas  organized  the  Bryden  Coal 
and  Coke  Company,  of  Ora  Township,  and  pur- 
chased the  drift  mine,  of  which  he  was  Superintend- 
ent two  years,  when  he  sold  out.  He  next  turned 
his  attention  to  the  insurance  business,  becoming 
general  agent  for  the  Hartford  Compan\'  between 
ihe  Wabasli  and  Mississippi  Rivers,  and  for  eight 
years  he  traveled  over  southern  Illinois.  Having 
through  good  management  and  business  ability  ac- 
quired a  handsome  competence,  he  is  now  living  a 
retired  life,  save  that  he  is  serving  as  Justice  of 
the  Peace.  For  three  years  he  served  as  Supervisor 
of  his  township,  was  elected  Collector  for  two 
terms,  and  in  the  spring  of  1893  was  made  Justice 
of  the  Peace,  receiving  a  large  majority.  He  has 
ever  been  a  stalwart  advocate  of  the  piincii)les  of 
the  Democratic  party. 

Since  coming  lo  this  country,  Mr.  Tiiomas  has 
again  been  married.  He  wedded  Miss  Tennessee 
Couns,  who  was  born  in  Tennessee  and  died  seven 
months  after  her  marriage.  In  1873  Miss  Eliza 
Wilson,  a  native  of  Jackson  County,  became  his 
wife.  Thej'  reside  on  Cherry  Street,  and  are  well 
known  people  of  this  community.  Mr.  Thomas  is 
ever  found  on  the  side  of  right  and  is  an  active 
worker  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  South, 
as  is  also  his  wife.  For  some  years  he  was  Super- 
intendent in  the  Sunday-school,  and  lie  is  also  a 
stalwart  advocate  of  temperance.  He  belongs  to 
the  Odd  Fellojvs'  society  of  Mt.  Carbon,  and  to 
the  encampment,  and  has  represented  his  lodge  in 


620 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL    RFX'ORD. 


the  Grand  Lodge.  For  two  years  he  served  as 
School  Director  in  Mt.  Carbon,  and  the  cause  of 
education  finds  in  him  a  faithful  friend. 


^/OHN  II.  DKLANO,  President  of  the  Board 
of  Trade  of  Murpliyshoro,  and  dealer  in 
general  merchandise,  is  numbered  among 
tlie  native  sons  of  Illinois,  his  birth  having 
occurred  in  Bunker  Hill,  JIacoupin  County,  Janu- 
ary 28,  1843.  His  father,  William  A.  Delano,  was 
born  in  M.HSsachusetts,  and  the  grandfather,  Gideon 
Delano,  was  a  native  of  New  Bedford,  Mass.  The 
latter  was  a  farmer,  and  in  1848  emigrated  to  the 
west,  where  hi.s  last  days  were  spent.  The  family 
is  descended  from  the  old  French  Huguenots,  and 
the  first  American  ancestors  crossed  tlie  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "Fortune"  in  1623,  the  second  ship 
that  sailed  from  England.  The  name  was  originally 
spelled  De  La  Noye. 

The  father  of  our  subject  was  reared  on  a  farm 
in  Massachusetts,  afterward  engaged  in  merchan- 
dising in  Ellington,  Conn.,  and  later  was  con- 
nected with  the  silk  industry  of  New  Jersey.  In 
1838,  he  became  one  of  the  pioneer  settlers  of  Ma- 
coupin County,  111.,  and  about  1848  went  to  St. 
Louis,  where  he  carried  on  merchandising  until 
1859.  He  then  engaged  in  the  lumber  and  milling 
business  in  Ironton,  Mo.,  and  was  also  a  merchant  of 
tliat  place,  where  he  made  bis  home  until  his  death, 
in  1876.  In  politics  he  was  a  Republican,  and 
served  as  a  delegate  to  the  national  convention  in 
Baltimore.  The  Presbyterian  Church  found  in  him 
a  faithful  member,  and  he  served  as  one  of  its  El- 
ders. His  wife,  who  bore  the  maiden  name  of 
Sophia  Hall,  was  born  in  Ellington,  Conn.,  and 
was  of  English  lineage.  Her  father.  Prof.  John 
Hall,  established  the  high  school  of  Ellington,  and 
continued  its  Principal  until  his  death.  Mrs.  De- 
lano j-et  makes  her  home  in  .St.  Louis. 

John  IL.  the  subject  of  this  sketch,  is  the  second 
in  a  famil}'  of  eight  children,  five  of  whom  are  yet 
living.  He  was  educated  in  the  public  and  high 
schools  of  St.  Louis,  but  left  that  city  the  year  be- 
fore his  graduation  and  aided  his  father  in  the 
Store.     On  attaining   his  majority,  he  enlisted,  in 


the  fall    of  1864,   as  a  member   of   Company  F, 

Fortj'-seventh  Missouri  Infantry,  and  was  niustered 
in  at  Pilot  Knob.  Soon  afterward  ho  was  detailed 
as  Sergeant-Ma jor  of  the  regiment.  Pursued  bj' 
Price  after  the  battle  of  Pilot  Knob,  he  went  to 
RoUo,  Mo.,  and  then  proceeded  to  Tennes.<ee  to 
relieve  Thomas.  Later  he  went  south,  where  he 
did  garrison  duty  until  the  close  of  the  war.  In 
May,  1865,  he  was  mustered  out  in  St.  Louis  as 
Second  Lieutenant  of  Company  E,  Forty -seventh 
Missouri  Infantry. 

Immediately  after  his  return,  Mr.  Delano  re- 
sumed work  in  his  father's  store.  He  afterward 
carried  on  business  in  Pocahontas,  Ark.,  for  ayear^ 
and  then  again  went  to  Ironton,  Mo.,  where  his 
father  had  built  a  water  mill.  He  became  agent 
for  the  Southern  and  Adams  Express  Companies, 
which  position  he  held  for  four  years,  and  was  As- 
sistant Postmaster  for  two  j'ears.  After  his  father's 
death  he  closed  up  the  business,  and  in  1882  be- 
came a  traveling  salesman,  representing  the  firm 
of  Krafft,  Holmes  &  Co.,  of  St.  Louis,  wholesale 
grocers.  In  vSepteraber  of  that  3-ear  he  was  offered 
the  management  of  the  mercantile  store  at  Pilot 
Knob,  owned  bj'  the  Ore  &  Steele  Company,  of  St. 
Louis.  His  time  was  thus  occupied  until  tlie  year 
1884,  when  he  was  sent  to  this  place  as  manager 
of  their  store.  The  Illinois  Truck  La-v  prevented 
the  firm  from  selling  goods  in  this  state,  so  in 
connection  with  W.  S.  Craine,  our  subject  bought 
out  the  store  of  his  employers.  He  now  deals  in 
general  merchandise  and  all  kinds  of  miners'  sup- 
plies. He  occupies  a  storeroom  25x70  feet,  with 
a  basement,  and  employment  is  furnished  to  four 
salesmen. 

In  Ironton.  Mo.,  in  1868,  Mr.  Delano  wedded 
Miss  Mattie  Harvey,  a  native  of  Keeseville,  N.  Y. 
The}'  now  have  seven  children:  John,  a  fireman  on 
the  Mobile  it  Ohio  Railroad;  Arthur,  who  was 
graduated  from  the  Manual  Training  School  of  St. 
Louis  in  the  Class  of  '93;  William,  Carrie,  Jennie, 
Harvey  and  Chester. 

While  living  in  lion  ton.  5Ir.  Delano  served  as 
School  Director  for  four  3ears,  and  proved  an  efli- 
cieiit  officer,  for  the  cause  of  education  has  ever 
found  in  him  a  warm  friend.  Socially,  he  is  a 
Mason,  belonging  to  the  blue  lodge  and  chapter  of 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD, 


621 


Carbondale.  He  is  also  the  honored  Commander 
of  Worthen  Post  No.  128,  G.  A.  R.  In  politics,  he 
is  a  stalwart  Republican,  and  in  religious  belief  is 
a  Presbyterian.  He  takes  a  very  prominent  part 
in  cliurclj  and  benevolent  work, and  ,is  now  serving 
as  Elder  and  Trustee  of  the  church,  and  as  Super- 
intendent of  the  Sunday-school.  In  tiie  spring  of 
1891,  he  aided  in  the  organization  of  the  Board  of 
Trade,  of  which  he  was  made  Vice-President,  and 
at  the  death  of  C.  C.  Smith,  he  succeeded  to  the 
Presidency.  He  is  recognized  as  one  of  the  leading 
business  men  of  Blurphj'sboro,  and  his  prominence 
in  business,  church  and  social  circles  makes  him 
well  worthy  of  representation  in  the  history  of  his 
adopted  countiy. 

»  ^'^^^^^^^^^^{•^^•^^^^=^    ~  '^ 

<^f^  DWARD  AIMES  DAVIS,  M.  D.,  a  prominent 
'fe)  practicing  ph3'sician  of  Ava.and  one  of  tlie 
/V — '^  leading  citizens  of  that  place,  is  so  widely 
and  favorably  known  that  he  needs  no  special 
introduction  to  our  readers,  yet  this  volume  would 
be  incomplete  without  the  record  of  liis  life.  He 
was  born  in  Red  River  County,  Tex.,  June  17, 
1849,  and  is  of  Welsh  descent.  His  grandfather, 
Amos  Davis,  was  a  pioneer  farmer  of  Indiana, 
having  made  settlement  there  when  the  entire 
country  was  a  wilderness  infested  by  Indians  and 
wild  animals. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  Rev.  Absalom  Looney 
Davis,  was  born  in  East  Tennessee  in  1812,  and  at 
the  age  of  two  years  was  taken  by  iiis  parents  to 
southern  Indiana,  near  the  present  site  of  New 
Alban3'.  Two  of  his  uncles  were  particii)ants  in 
the  battle  of  Tippecanoe,  and  one  of  them,  Will- 
iam Davis,  was  killed  in  that  engagement.  Dur- 
ing the  Mexican  War,  and  prior  to  the  annexation 
of  Texas,  Rev.  Mr.  Davis  removed  io  the  Lone 
Star  State,  and  visited  Dallas  when  that  now  flour- 
ishing cit3-  contained  but  a  few  log  shanties.  He 
was  licensed  as  a  local  preacher  in  the  Southern 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  but  while  he  followed 
that  profession,  his  occupation  in  life  was  that  of 
fanning. 

Removing  to  Illinois  in  1859,  Rev.  A.  L.  Davis 
engaged  in  the  mercantile  business  for  a  few  years, 
and  afterward  devoted  his  attention  exclusively 
to  the  ministry.  He  was  the  principal  factor  in  the 


organization  of  the  Southern  Methodist  Church 
in  Illinois.  In  youth  his  advantages  were  meagre, 
and  he  attended  school  only  a  few  days,  yet  by 
diligent  study,  by  the  reading  of  good  books,  and 
by  the  exercise  of  determination,  he  obtained  con- 
siderable knowledge  of  the  English  language,  which 
he  spoke  fluently  and  wrote  correctly.  He  was  an 
eloquent  speaker,  a  perfect  judge  of  the  Methodist 
doctrine  and  law,  and  a  leading  member  of  his 
chosen  denomination.  His  wife,  whose  maiden 
name  was  Elizabeth  C.  Lidaka,  was  born  in  East 
Tennessee  in  181 G,  and  was  descended  from  an  old 
Pennsjivania  Dutch  famil}'.  When  about  three 
years  old  she  was  taken  to  Indiana  b}' her  parents. 
A  lady  of  devoted  Christian  character,  she  was 
loved  by  all  who  knew  her,  and  her  death  in  18G4 
was  widely  mourned. 

Of  a  family  of  ten  children,  four  are  yet  living: 
Green  Berry,  Postmaster  and  druggist  of  De  Soto, 
III.;  Amos  J.,  a  farmer  of  Texas;  Edward  A.,  of 
this  sketch;  and  John  L.,  a  carpenter  of  De  Soto. 
Rev.  Mr.  Davis  was  a  second  time  married.  His 
death  occurred  in  April,  1882,  and  his  remains 
were  laid  to  rest  in  De  Soto,  where  he  had  made 
his  home  since  1859.  He  was  a  man  of  great  en- 
erg}',  yet  was  modest,  kind-hearted  and  charitable 
to  a  fault.  He  hived  his  family  and  humanity, 
and  endeavored  to  make  the  world  better  for  his 
having  lived  in  it. 

At  the  time  of  coming  to  Illinois,  the  subject  of 
this  sketch  was  a  lad  of  ten  years.  The  trip  was 
made  overland  with  sixty  horses  and  one  hundred 
and  fifty  cattle,  and  he  rode  horseback  the  entire 
distance  of  one  thousand  miles.  Upon  his  pon}' 
he  swam  the  Canadian  River,  a  very  wide  and 
swift  stream  of  water.  After  settling  in  Illinois 
he  suffered  for  some  time  from  chills,  and  during 
the  first  eighteen  months  in  this  state  was  accus- 
tomed to  attend  school  two  daj'S  and  "shake"  at 
home  the  third  day.  However,  he  had  a  splendid 
constitution,  and  although  he  was  sick  a  great  por- 
tion of  the  time  in  boj'hood  and  for  three  years 
suffered  from  rheumatism,  he  is  now  quite  robust. 

The  Doctor  was  educated  in  Illinois  and  one  of 
his  teachers  was  Cyrus  Thomas,  now  entomologist 
in  the  Smithsonian  Institute  of  Washington,  D.  C. 
He  taught  school  one  term,  then  engaged  in  clerk- 


622 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


ing,  also  worked  at  the  carpenter's  trade  and  in  a 
drug  store.  In  1869  be  began  tlie  study  of  medi- 
cine under  Dr.  Robinson,  of  De  Soto,  and  after  at- 
tending a  course  of  lectures  in  the  Missouri  Med- 
ical College  of  St.  Louis,  he  located  at  Ava  and 
began  the  practice  of  his  profession.  He  passed  the 
examination  before  the  State  Board  in  1880,  car- 
rying off  the  highest  scholarship  in  the  class  of 
fifteen.  He  was  graduated  from  the  Missouri 
Medical  College  in  1887,  and  has  since  continu- 
ouslj-  engaged  in  practice  at  Ava. 

As  a  physician,  surgeon  and  gynecologist.  Dr. 
Davis  has  .icquired  a  more  than  local  reputation, 
and  in  manj'  surgical  operations,  such  as  herniot- 
omy, tracheotomy  and  laparotomy,  he  has  been 
uniformly  successful.  AVhile  he  does  not  fear  to 
undertake  any  kind  of  an  operation,  he  is  yet 
cautious  and  sympathetic  to  an  unusual  degree. 
One  of  the  most  difficult  operations  undertaken 
by  him  was  the  removal  of  a  five-pound  tumor 
from  the  right  lumbar  region,  the  patient  being  a 
lady  sixt3'  3'ears  of  age.  She  neither  lost  rest  nor 
appetite,  and  the  wound  healed  b}-  first  intention. 
The  Doctor  is  a  man  of  large  heart  and  the  utmost 
generosity,  and  never  collects  a  bill  for  medical 
services  from  dependent  widows, girls  that  depend 
upon  their  own  labor  for  support,  and  cl)aritable 
subjects.  Realizing  that  the  road  of  life  is  brief 
and  will  be  traveled  but  once,  it  is  his  desire  to  do 
all  the  good  possible  while  passing.  In  his  prac- 
tice he  does  not  use  alcoholic  liquor,  and  is  an 
enemy  of  the  liquor  trafiic. 

Politically,  the  Doctor  adheres  to  the  principles 
of  the  Prohibition  party,  and  in  1890  was  their 
candidate  for  Congress",  and  in  1888  was  nomin- 
ated upon  that  ticket  for  the  office  of  Coroner. 
He  opposes  monopolies,  and  believes  that  railroads 
and  telegraph  lines  should  be  under  the  control  of 
the  Government;  that  emigration  should  be  re- 
stricted; that  the  (government  should  issue  all  mon- 
ey's direct  to  the  people;  that  both  sexes  should  have 
equal  rights  of  suffrage;  and  that  the  American 
public  school  system  should  receive  the  support  of 
ever^'  true  American  citizen.  He  opposes  the 
bond  system  and  national  banks  as  banks  of  issue, 
and  also  opposes  alien  ownership  of  land. 

Dr.  Davis  has   been   alike  prominent  in  church 


work,  has  been  Superintendent  of  the  Sunday- 
school,  is  an  earnest  worker  in  the  cause  of  tem- 
perance, and  has  served  as  Worthy  Chief  and  is 
now  financial  secretary  in  the  Good  Templars' 
lodge.  He  also  belongs  to  the  Masonic  fraternil}' 
and  is  now  Junior  AVarden.  In  politics  he  is  a 
stalwart  advocate  of  the  Prohibition  party,  and 
does  all  in  his  power  for  it«  advancement.  He  is 
a  friend  to  the  public  schools  and  to  the  best  in- 
terests of  his  town.  In  1893,  he  was  elected  Pres- 
ident of  the  Village  Board  of  Ava,  and  we  can 
thus  sum  up  the  opinions  of  his  fellow-citizens  b\' 
quoting  what  one  paper  said  of  him:  "Dr.  Davis, 
the  newly  elected  President  of  the  Board,  is  a  man 
of  whom  nothing  but  the  best  can  be  said.  He  is  a 
man  to  be  admired,  loved,  honored  and  respected, 
and  one  who  can  only  be  appreciated  most  by  those 
who  are  familiarlj-  acquainted  with  him.  Honest, 
and  true  to  the  dictates  of  his  conscience,  he  stands 
boldl3'  before  the  people  of  Ava  as  a  genuine 
specimen  of  true  manhood." 

Ma}-  7,  1871,  the  Doctor  married  Miss  Lucy  C. 
Walker,  who  was  born  in  Somerset  County.  Pa., 
July  18,  1846,  and  was  a  daughter  of  Gabriel  and 
p;iizabeth  Walker,  noble  Christian  pioneers  of 
German  blood.  Luc^'  C.  was  educated  in  English 
and  German  in  PeniiS3'lvania,  and  when  a  girl  at 
home  was  noted  for  many  kind  acts, one  of  which 
was  to  carry  food  to  a  family  affiicted  with  small- 
pox, she  and  one  of  her  associates  being  the  only 
persons  in  the  community  that  dared  venture  near 
the  house.  Coming  to  Illinois  in  1869,  she  made 
her  home  with  her  brother,  Samuel  Walker,  until 
her  marriage.  She  was  a  girl  of  noble  character, 
lovely  and  pleasant  in  her  dail}'  life,  gentle  and 
tender  in  heart,  and  of  an  energetic  dis[3osition. 
Her  face  was  beautiful, butnot  less  so  than  her  char- 
acter. She  was  never  idle,  and  won  the  Doctor's 
heart  one  da^-  as  he  was  passing  while  she  was  at  the 
wash  tub.  Her  home,  though  plain  and  humble,  she 
made  a  paradise  of  love,  peace,  happiness  and  har- 
mony. In  Pennsylvania  she  was  a  member  of  the 
Lutheran  Church,  but  after  coming  to  Illinois  was 
identified  with  the  Presb\  terian  Church.  Her  onl^' 
child.  May  L.,  was  born  February  18,  1872,  and  is 
an  amiable  and  accomplished  ^oung  lad}-  and  a 
talented  musician;  she  la  the  wife  of  Charles  Brett, 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


623 


a  young   man  of  noble  principle   and  character. 

Mrs.  Davis  was  called  to  her  final  rest  April  13, 
1893.  In  an  obituary  notice  was  written  the  fol- 
lowing: "Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  robust 
healtli  was  never  hers,  few  women  have  done 
more  in  the  cause  of  good  in  ever}'  walk  of  life 
than  she  did.  A  persistent  worker  in  the  church, 
a  true  friend,  an  untiring  helper  of  her  husband 
and  a  most  tender  mother,  she  united  in  herself 
those  virtues  which  made  her  so  lovely  and  lova- 
ble." 

The  following  resolutions  were  passed  by  tlie 
Ava  Presb3-terian  Sabbath-school: 

'•'Calm  on  the  bosom  of  thy  God, 

Dear  sister,  rest  thee  now. 
E'en  while  with  us  thy  footsteps  trod, 
His  seal  was  on  thy  brow.' 

"Resolved.  That  in  the  death  of  his  beloved 
wife  and  companion,  our  worthy  brother  and  his 
daughter  have  sustained  one  of  the  grestest  sor- 
rows that  fall  to  tlie  lot  of  man. 

-Eesoloed,  That  we  tender  to  our  esteemed 
brother  and  his  daughter  our  heat-felt  love  and 
sj-mpath}'  in  this  their  darkest  hour,  and  hope 
they  may  be  sustained  and  soothed  b}'  an  unfalt- 
'tering  trust  in  Him  who  doeth  all  things  well. 

"Resolved,  That  in  the  death  of  our  esteemed 
sister,  Lucy  C.  Davis,  this  school  has  lost  a  worth}' 
teaclier  and  consistent  worker,  a  kind  and  loving 
friend,  whose  presence  was  a  bright  ray  of  sun- 
shine, dispelling  the  gloom  from  our  hearts;  her 
husband,  a  devoted  companion;  her  daughter,  a 
loving,  kind  and  gentle  mother." 

Her  Sunday-school  class   passed   the   following: 

"Whereas,  The  all-wise  God  has  called  our 
beloved  teacher,  Mrs.  Lucy  C.  Davis,  from  earth 
to  Heaven,  we  as  a  class  have  lost  a  verj-  earnest 
and  devoted  teacher,  but  our  loss  is  Heaven's  gain. 
Her  place  in  the  class  will  never  be  forgotten.  The 
tender  love  .and  kindness  she  had  for  us  will  never 
die.  We  extend  our  great  love  and  sympathy  to 
her  husl)and.  Dr.  E.  A.  Davis,  and  daughter,  Mrs. 
Charles  Brelt." 

The  Woman's  Cliristian  Temperance  Union  also 
passed  resolutions  speaking  of  her  untiring  service 


in  the  cause  of  temperance,  and  closing  it  with 
these  words: 

"Resolved,  That  we  tender  our  deepest  sympa- 
thy to  the  husband  and  daughter  and  commend  to 
them  her  glorious  awakening  from  the  bed  of  pain 
and  suffering  to  regions  of  perennial  sunshine 
and  glory  in  full  communion  with  her  Savior.  We 
commend  to  them  as  a  rich  legacy  the  blessing  of 
her  memory,  which  will  rest  upon  all  who  knew  her. 
We  commend  to  them  the  tender  welcome  which 
must  have  been  hers  as  she  entered  the  sunset 
gate  and  the  Master's  smiling  approval  as  He  said: 

"  'Thine  is  the  crown  of  the  toilers 
Wlio  gathered  for  Me  in  thy  name. 
And  the  bells  of  Heaven  were  ringing 
While  the  angel  choii-s  were  singing, 
She  has  come.'  " 


•ji^REDERICK  A.  C.  KUEllLE,  one  of  the 
ilr?^'^  self-made  men  of  Murphysboro,  who  is  now 
ili  serving  as  its  efficient  Postm.aster,  is  one  of 

the  native  sons  of  Illinois,  his  birth  having  oc- 
curred in  Cairo,  September  17,  1863.  His  father, 
Fred  A.  Kuelile,  was  born  and  reared  in  German}', 
and  there  learned  the  shoemaker's  trade.  At  the 
age  of  seventeen  he  crossed  the  Atlantic  to  New 
Orleans,  and  after  a  short  time  went  to  Cape 
Girardeau,  Mo.,  and  thence  to  Cairo,  111.,  where  he 
engaged  in  merchandising.  In  1870  he  came  to 
Murphysboro,  and  as  a  member  of  tiie  firm  of 
Kuehle  &  Son  still  carries  on  mercantile  pursuits. 
He  wedded  Mary  Gilhofer,  who  was  born  in  Ger- 
many, and  with  her  parents  came  to  this  country. 
They  went  first  to  Chicago  and  thence  to  Cairo, 
111.     Her  father  served  in  the  late  war. 

Mr.  Kuehle.  whose  n.ame  heads  this  record,  is  the 
eldest  of  a  family  of  ten  children,  eight  of  whom 
are  yet  living.  He  comiileted  his  education  in  the 
high  school  of  this  place  and  became  a  competent 
and  practical  bookkeeper.  He  was  first  employed 
by  the  Bryden  Coal  and  Coke  Company,  serving 
as  their  head  bookkeeper  for  eigiit  consecutive 
years,  when  the  firm  made  an  assignment.  He 
then  continued  with  the  assignee  for  four  years, 
in  charge  of  the  shipping  department  and  as  book- 


624 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


keeper,  after  which  he  resigned  to  accept  the  posi- 
tion of  Deputy  Circuit  Clerlv,  in  Frbruar3',  1889, 
having  been  appointed  In'  R.  W.  Watson.  He  re- 
signed that  office  October  1,  189.3,  for  he  had  been 
appointed  Postmaster  on  the  23d  of  September  by 
President  Cleveland.  Soon  afterward  he  entered 
upon  the  duties  of  the  position,  which  he  lias  since 
faitiifuUy  and  promptly  performed. 

On  the  18th  of  December,  1888,  was  celebrated 
tlie  marriage  of  Mr.  Kuehle  and  Miss  Edna  C. 
Pigott,  a  native  of  Alabama.  They  have  a  pleas- 
ant home  on  Second  Street,  which  is  the  abode  of 
hospitality.  AVith  the  Methodist  P^piscopal  Church 
thej-  hold  membership.  In  politics  Mr.  Kuehle  is 
a  stalwart  Democrat,  and  in  1891  was  elected  on 
that  ticket  as  City  Treasurer  for  a  term  of  two 
years.  He  has  been  Secretary  of  the  Count}' 
Democratic  Central  Committee  for  the  past  four 
3'ears,  also  of  the  Citj'  Committee,  and  is  an  active 
worker  in  his  party's  interest.  He  belongs  to  the 
Odd  Fellows'  society,  and  to  Hope  Lodge,  of  the 
Mystic  Circle.  He  is  a  warm-hearted,  generous 
man,  who  manifests  a  commendable  interest  in 
everything  pertaining  to  the  welfare  of  the  com- 
munity, and  is  ever  found  in  the  front  ranks  of 
enterprises  calculated  to  prove  of  public  benefit. 
His  success  in  life  is  due  to  his  own  efforts,  and 
his  example  is  one  worthy  of  emulation. 

JAMES  PARK.  Throughout  Randolph  Coun- 
ty, where  the  greater  portion  of  his  life  has 
been  passed,  the  subject  of  this  sketch  has  be- 
come well  known  as  a  progressive  agricult- 
urist and  genial  gentleman.  Of  Irish  birth  and 
parentage, and  of  Scotch  ancestry,  he  combines  the 
energy  of  one  race  with  the  thrift  of  the  other. 
Though  not  a  native  of  the  United  States,  he  is  a 
lo^al  citizen,  public  spirited  and  patriotic,  and 
naturally'  occupies  a  position  of  prominence  among 
the  residents  of  township  4,  range  6,  where  his 
home   is  situated. 

A  brief  account  of  our  subject's  ancestry  will 
not  be  amiss.  The  Park  familv  emigrated  from 
Scotland  in  the  year  1752.  Samuel  Park,  the 
father  of  James,  was  born  in  the  Nortli  of  Ireland 


in  1786,  and  in  1823  he  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Margaret  Michan,  who  was  of  Englisii 
descent.  In  religious  affiliations  the  Parks  were 
Presbyterians,  while  the  Michan  family  held  mem- 
bership in  the  Episcopal  Church.  For  more  than 
twenty  years  Samuel  Park  was  an  Elder  in  the 
Presbyterian  Church  in  the  town  where  he  was 
born  and   reared. 

In  the  parental  family  there  were  nine  children, 
of  whom  four  are  living,  two  sons  and  two  daugh- 
ters. One  of  the  latter  still  resides  in  Ireland. 
James,  of  this  sketch,  was  born  in  Ireland  in  1832 
and  passed  his  boyhood  j-ears  in  his  native  land. 
In  1848,  in  company'  with  his  parents,  one  brother 
and  four  sisters,  he  crossed  the  ocean, and  arriving 
in  the  United  States,  sojourned  for  a  time  in  Mem- 
phis, Tenn.  John,  the  eldest  member  of  the  fam- 
ily, had  preceded  the  othere  two  years,  and  settling 
in  Mempliis,  became  a  prosperous  merchant  of  that 
city.  For  over  ten  years  he  was  a  successful  busi- 
ness man  of  that  place,  and  then,  on  account  of  ill- 
health,  he  retired  from  business  and  spent  several 
years  in  travel,  hoping  to  regain  his  former  strength. 
He  finally'  settled  in  Hooversville,  Somerset  Coun- 
ty, Pa.  He  was  married  in  1857,  and  died  two  years 
later;  his  remains  lie  in  the  cemetery  of  that  vil- 
lage. David,  the  second  son,  embarked  in  farm- 
ing in  Perry  Count}',  111.,  in  1856,  and  the  same 
year  married  Miss  Eliza  Kilpatrick.  An  indus- 
trious, energetic  man,  he  accumulated  a  valuable 
propert}'  and  now,  retired  from  business,  lives 
with  his  family  near  Pinckue3'ville,  the  county 
seat  of  Perry  Count}'. 

The  family  came  to  Randolph  County  in  July, 
1848,  and  bought  a  farm  in  township  4,  range  6. 
James,  the  youngest  son,  remained  with  his  father 
on  the  farm  until  the  death  of  the  latter,  which 
occurred  in  1852.  His  education  was  limited; 
nevertheless  by  self-culture  and  observation,  he  be- 
came a  well  informed  man,  with  a  thorough 
knowledge  of  topics  of  current  interest  as  well  as 
historic  importance.  After  the  de  nise  of  his 
father,  he  continued  to  remain  upon  the  farm  with 
his  mother  and  sisters  until  the  death  of  the  for- 
mer, in  1868,  when  he  removed  fiom  the  old  home- 
stead. However,  in  1875  he  returned  hither  with 
his  sister  and  three  children  of  a  deceased  sister 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


625 


and  since  that  time  has  continued  to  reside  upon 
the  old  iiome  farm. 

Mr.  Park  is  greatl3'  interested  in  political  mat- 
ters and  has  been  a  life-long  Democrat.  He  has 
frequently  represented  his  party  as  delegate  to 
senatorial  and  congressional  conventions,  and 
served  as  delegate  to  the  state  convention  that 
nominated  John  M.  Palmer  Governor  of  Illinois. 
He  is  especially  fond  of  horses  and  has  on  his  place 
some  fine  trotters  of  the  Hambletonian  breed.  In 
all  of  his  enterprises  he  has  been   very  fortunate. 


yfclLLIAM  JACKSON,  who  resides  on  section 
30,  Du  Quoin  Precinct,  where  he  carries 
\5^^  on  general  farming,  was  born  December 
24,  1831,  and  is  a  son  of  Richard  and  Elizabeth 
(Munton)  Jackson.  His  father  was  a  native  of 
Leicestershire,  England,  and  was  there  employed 
as  a  shepherd.  He  died  in  the  place  of  his  birth, 
July  1,  1858,  at  the  age  of  sixty-two  years.  His 
wife  was  also  born  in  Leicestershire,  and  was  called 
to  her  final  rest  August  12,  1869,  at  the  age  of 
sixty-seven.  By  their  marriage  were  born  eight 
children,  but  only  two  are  now  living,  Thomas, 
who  resides  in  Van  Buren  County,  Mich.,  and 
William,  of  this  sketch. 

Our  subject  grew  to  manhood  in  the  county  of 
his  nativity,  and  at  an  early  .age  began  to  earn  his 
livelihood  by  working  in  the  neighborhood  at  any 
employment  which  he  could  find  that  would  yield 
him  an  honest  living.  His  wages  often  amounted 
to  but  $15  per  month.  He  acquired  such  education 
as  opportunities  afforded,  but  his  privileges  were 
very  meagre.  When  a  young  man  of  twenty-two 
years,  he  became  possessed  of  a  strong  desire  to 
seek  a  home  beyond  the  Atlantic,  for  he  had  pict- 
ured to  himself  brighter  prospects  and  a  more  suc- 
cessful career  in  America. 

Crossing  the  ocean,  Mr.  Jackson  landed  in  New 
York  City  fin  Independence  Day  of  1852.  He  had 
only  sufficient  means  to  purchase  a  ticket  to  Syra- 
cuse, N.  Y.,  whither  he  journeyed.  Arriving  there, 
he  VFas  compelled  to  pawn  his  trunk  in  order  to 
buy  his  breakfast.  Heat  once  started  on  foot  into 
the  country  to  seek  work  and  succeeded  in  engag- 


ing himself  to  a  farmer  at  fifty  cents  per  day.  At 
the  end  of  six  weeks,  having  saved  enough  money 
for  the  purpose,  he  started  to  find  a  brother  living 
in  Michigan,  and  succeeded  in  locating  him  in 
Grass  Lake. 

At  that  place  our  subject  remained  for  eighteen 
months,  working  in  the  emploj'  of  the  railroad, 
when  he  determined  to  go  south,  and  made  his  way 
to  Red  River  Landing,  La.  While  in  thesoutli  he 
frequently  witnessed  the  sale  of  slaves  on  the 
block.  The  crueltj'  of  the  transaction  was  more 
than  his  humane  nature  could  tolerate,  and  he  left 
for  a  free  state.  He  was  stricken  with  typhoid 
fever  at  Cairo,  111.,  and  unattended  lay  on  the  berth 
of  a  dirty  Mississippi  steamboat,  with  often  no  one 
to  give  him  a  drink  of  water,  but  his  strong  con- 
stitution at  length  overcame  the  disease,  and  after 
some  time  he  was  restored  to  health. 

For  two  months  Mr.  Jackson  engaged  in  driving 
mules,  and  then  started  for  Nine  Mile  Prairie,  now 
known  as  Du  Quoin  Precinct,  walking  the  entire 
distance.  This  was  in  1854.  He  secured  work  on 
the  construction  of  the  railroad  which  was  just  be- 
ing built  in  Perry  County,  and  was  thus  employed 
for  nine  months,  during  which  time  he  saved 
enough  money  to  purchase  eighty  acres  of  land 
three  miles  west  of  Du  Quoin.  This  was  his  first 
real  start  in  life,  and  that  little  property  served  as 
the  nucleus  around  which  has  gathered  his  present 
possessions. 

On  the  25th  of  February,  1855,  occurred  the 
marriage  of  William  Jackson  and  Elizabeth  Mor- 
gan, of  Du  Quoin  Precinct,  daughter  of  Abram 
Morgan,  of  Kentucky.  Five  children  blessed  this 
union,  of  whom  three  are  yet  living,  Sarah  E., 
wife  of  Henry  H.  Kimmell,  a  farmer  of  Du  Quoin 
Precinct;  William  A.,  who  married  Anna  A.  P.yatt, 
daughter  of  Izri  Pj-att,  of  Pincknej'ville,  111.,  and 
Minnie  A.,  wife  of  Arthur  C.  Hoge,  of  Du  Quoin 
Precinct. 

Two  years  after  Ins  marriage  Mr.  Jackson  pur- 
chased three  hundred  acres  of  land,  mostly  covered 
with  timber,  and  the  only  improvement  thereon 
was  a  log  cabin.  He  kept  adding  to  his  possessions 
as  his  financial  resources  increased  until  he  ac- 
quired fifteen  hundred  acres.  He  has  dealt  liber- 
ally with  his  chilflren,  giving  to  each  a  good  farm, 


626 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


yet  he  still  owns  twelve  hundred  acres  of  valuable 
land,  upon  which  he  has  erected  a  magniflcient 
and  commodious  residence.  His  farm  is  equipped 
with  all  tlie  latest  improvements  and  agricultural 
implements,  and  his  barns  and  outbuildings  are 
models  of  convenience.  He  has  shown  his  neigh- 
bors what  thrift  and  enterprise  have  done  for  a 
boj'  who  started  in  life  with  scarcely  a  dollar.  He 
has  the  rei)utation  of  being  one  of  the  best  and 
most  successful  farmers  of  Perry  County,  and  in 
connection  with  farming  he  is  also  largely  inter- 
ested in  coal  mining.  In  politics  he  is  a  Republica«, 
and  is  a  stanch  supporter  of  America  aud  her  in- 
stitutions. AVhile  not  a  member  of  any  church, he 
is  a  liberal  contributor  to  religious  work. 


I 


JAMES  II.  HARVEY,  of  the  mercantile  firm 
I    of  Harvey  &  Johnson,  was    born    in    Craw- 
ford   County,  Oiiio,  near  Buoyrus,  on   the 


^^f)  10th  of  January,  1840.  His  father,  James 
IIarve3%  was  a  native  of  Pennsylvania,  and  went 
to  Ohio  in  1836.  Farming  was  his  life  occupation. 
The  grandfather  was  of  Irish  birth,  and  on  emi- 
grating to  this  country  made  his  home  in  Penn- 
sj'lvania.  He  became  a  well-to-do  agriculturist. 
The  mother  of  our  subject,  whose  maiden  name 
was  Agnes  Dunn,  was  also  born  in  the  Keystone 
State,  and  was  of  Scotch  descent.  After  the  death 
of  her  first  husband  she  married  Mr.  Wagoner  and 
came  to  Illinois.  Her  death  occurred  in  Du  Quoin, 
in  September,  1875.  The  sister  of  our  subject, 
Sarah,  became  the  wife  of  J.  M.  Johnson,  a  large 
lumber  dealer  of  Carbondale,  111.,  who  served 
throughout  the  late  war  in  the  One  Hundredth 
Illinois  Infantry. 

James  Harvey  was  only  three  jears  of  age  at 
tlie  time  of  his  father's  death.  The  mother  was 
left  witii  no  means  save  the  little  farm  which  was 
not  yet  paid  for,  but  she  managed  to  save  her 
home  and  provide  for  her  children.  As  soon  as 
old  enough,  Harve3'  gave  her  his  assistance.  In 
1856  they  removed  to  Marion  County',  Ind.,  set- 
tling seven  miles  north  of  Indianapolis,  where  he 
acquired  his  education.  In  1859  he  came  to  Du 
Quoin    and   engaged    in    farming,  but  in  1861  re- 


turned to  Ohio,  aud  on  the  9th  of  August,  1862, 
entered  the  army  as  a  member  of  Company  E,  One 
Hundred  and  First  Ohio  Infantry.  He  was  first 
sent  to  the  front  at  Covington,  Ky.,  thence  to 
Louisville,  and  participated  in  the  battle  of  Peny- 
ville.  He  then  went  through  Cumberland  Gap  and 
to  Bowling  Green,  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Stone 
River,  where  he  was  wounded,  and  in  the  battles 
of  Chattanooga,  Chickamauga,  Missionary  Ridge 
and  Lookout  Mountain.  He  served  througliout  . 
the  Atlanta  campaign,  taking  part  in  the  battles  of 
Buzzard's  Roost,  Resaca,  New  Hope  Church,  Kene- 
saw  Mountain,  Peach  Tree  Creek,  Atlanta  and 
Franklin.  Th,e  winter  of  1864-65  was  spent  in 
Nashville,  and  in  June  of  the  latter  year  he  re- 
ceived his  discharge,  being  mustered  out  as  Ser- 
geant. He  was  alwaj's  found  at  his  post  of  duty, 
faithful  to  the  trust  reposed  in  him  aud  to  the 
Stars  and  Stripes. 

Soon  after  the  close  of  the  war,  Mr.  Harvey  re- 
turned to  Illinois  and  embarked  in  the  manufac- 
ture of  lumber  in  connection  with  his  brother-in- 
law  in  Carbondale,  where  he  continued  business 
until  1866,  when  he  again  went  to  his  farm,  two 
and  a-half  miles  south  of  Du  Quoin.  There  he 
continued  agricultural  pursuits  until  the  fall  of 
1893,  wiien  he  embarked  in  merciiandising  in  Du 
Quoin  in  connection  with  W.  S.  Johnson. 

In  1869  Mr.  Harvey  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Charity  Johnson,  a  native  of  Will  County, 
111.,  and  a  daughter  of  Miles  M.  Johnson,  who  was 
born  in  Ohio,  and  became  one  of  the  pioneers  of 
Will  County.  He  was  a  prominent  merchant,  and 
died  in  Franklin  Count}-,  111.,  in  1881.  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Harvey  have  three  children:  William,  a 
young  man  of  twenty-two,  who  is  engaged  in  busi- 
ness in  this  place;  Edward,  who  is  in  his  father's 
store;  and  Delia.  The  family  is  one  of  prominence 
in  the  community,  holding  an  enviable  position  in 
social  circles.  Mr.  Harvey  is  a  leading  member  of 
the  Grand  Army  post,  and  is  a  stalwart  Republi- 
can. 

W.  S.  Johnson,  the  junior  member  of  the  firm 
of  Harvey  &  Johnson,  has  the  honor  of  being  a 
native  of  Illinois.  He  was  born  July  14,  1851,  in 
Will  County,  where  his  |)arents  had -settled  in  an 
early  day.     Under  the  parental  roof  he  was  reared 


•.■***> 

-^''4% 


\    I 


4,  df'S^^ 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


629 


to  manhood,  and  the  public  schools  afforded  him 
his  educational  privileges.  His  father  was  for  a 
longtime  a  prominent  merchant  of  tliis  state.  His 
death  occurred  in  1881.  The  mother,  who  was  in 
her  maidenhood  Hannah  Bennett,  is  now  living 
with  her  son  in   Du  Quoin. 

On  the  24th  of  January.  1870,  Mr.  Johnson  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Belle  Phillips,  and  two 
children  grace  their  union:  Lillia,  aged  eight  years, 
and  Earle,  two  3ears  of  age.  In  his  political  views 
Mr.  Johnson  is  a  Republican,  and  is  a  member  of 
the  Presbvterian  Church.  Throughout  his  life  he 
lias  been  connected  with  mercantile  pursuits,  and 
is  recognized  as  a  wide-awake  and  enterp'.ising 
business  man.  The  firm  will  undoubtedly'  meet 
with  success  in  their  new  undertaking. 


"j;  OEL  C.  BARBER,  M.  D.,  is  a  fine  representa- 
tive of  the  prominent  ph3sicians  of  Ran- 
dolph County  who  are  successfully  engaged 
in  the  practice  of  their  noble  calling.  He 
is  a  man  of  marked  enterprise,  possesses  great 
ability-,  and  has  an  extensive  practice  throughout 
this  part  of  the  counlr3-.  Born  June  24,  1838,  he  is  a 
native  of  Rockwood,  where  he  has  spent  his  entire 
life.  He  is  a  son  of  Alexander  and  Jinsj'  (Crane) 
Barber,  also  natives  of  this  county,  the  mother 
born  on  St.  Mary's  River,  and  the  father  at  Ellis 
Grove. 

Joel  C.  spent  his  boyhood  days  in  and  near 
Rockwood,  and  attended  the  district  schools  of 
his  native  place  until  reaching  his  eighteenth 
j'car,  when  he  began  reading  medicine  in  the  office 
of  his  uncle,  Joseph  Barber,  a  prominent  physician 
of  Rockwood.  Later  he  attended  lectures  at  the 
Eclectic  Medical  Institute,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  and 
returning  thence  to  his  native  place,  he  resumed 
his  studies,  and  also  engaged  in  practice  to  some 
extent. 

The  outbreak  of  the  late  war  caused  Dr.  Barber 
to  abandon  temporarilj-  all  thought  and  ambition 
toward  building  up  a  practice.  Enlisting  his  serv- 
ices in  behalf  of  the  Union,  he  became  a  member 
of  Comimnj'  H,  Twenty-second  Illinois  Infantry, 
and  served   in   its  ranks  for  three  years  and  two 


months.  During  that  period  he  fought  under 
Generals  Grant,  Sherman,  Sheridan,  Pope  and 
Thomas,  and  participated  in  many  of  the  hard- 
fought  battles  of  the  war,  among  which  were  Bel- 
mont, Farmington,  Corinth,  Stone  River,  Resaca, 
and  New  Hope  Church,  near  Slarietta,  Ga.  After 
receiving  his  discharge  he  was  mustered  out  of 
service  at  .Springfield,  and  coming  direct  to  Rock- 
wood, resumed  the  study  of  his  profession,  and 
also  practiced  some.  In  1874  he  was  graduated 
from  the  American  Medical  College  in  St.  Louis. 
He  has  since  continued  to  minister  to  the  bodil^y 
ills  of  the  people,  his  piactice  covering  a  wide  cir- 
cuit. 

Dr.  Barber  was  united  in  marriage,  February  1, 
1866,  with  Miss  Anna,  daughter  of  Alfred  G.  and 
Frances  (Cornelius)  McConnack.  Their  union  luas 
been  blessed  by  the  birth  of  twelve  children, 
namely:  Albert,  Harr^'  G.,  Olive  F.,  Joel  C,  Mary, 
Carrie,  Ora,  Nina,  Willie,  Charles  A..  Gird  v  A.  and 
Maggie  B.  Of  these,  six  are  deceased:  Harry  G.. 
Mar}',  Carrie,  Nina,  Willie  and  Maggie  B.  Dr. 
and  Mrs.  Barber  are  members  in  good  standing  of 
the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  In  his  political 
relations  the  Doctor  has  always  voted  with  the 
Republican  party,  and  is  influential  in  the  jjublic 
affairs  of  the  coramuuit}'. 

For  several  generations  the  Doctor's  ancestors 
have  been  prominent  and  loj-al  citizens  of  our 
Government.  His  paternal  grandfather,  Alexan- 
der Barber, .  was  appointed  by  the  Governor  as 
Captain  in  the  Indian  War  between  1812  and 
1815,  and  was  placed  in  charge  of  two  or  three 
keel  boats  with  one  hundred  men,  among  wlioin 
was  Joel  Crane,  our  subject's  maternal  grandfather. 
The  boats  had  to  be  towed  bv  hand  from  Kaskas- 
kia  to  Peoria  with  supplies  for  the  arm\-.  The  In- 
dians having  taken  a  different  route  from  that  an- 
ticipated, the  compan}-  fell  back,  bringing  as  pris- 
oners some  French  who  were  in  sympathy  with  the 


Indians. 


:£)^e: 


<|       l»ILLIAM  A.  CHAPMAN.     Perhajis  no  man 
\/\/il     l'^'D§     '"     township    4,   range    2,    Perry 
\>7^      County,  has    been    more    intimately    con- 
nected with  its  progress  than  the  gentleman  above 


630 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


named,  and  certainly  no  family  stands  higher  in 
the  annals  of  this  region  than  that  of  which  he  is  a 
worthy  rejjresentative.  He  has  been  a  resident  of 
his  fine  farm  since  1869,  and  he  and  his  mother-in- 
law  are  joint  owners  of  four  hundred  and  forty 
acres  of  land,  the  greater  portion  of  which  has 
been  placed  under  high  cultivation  through  his 
own  efforts. 

The  sul)jet't  of  this  sketch  is  the  son  of  Thomas 
H.  and  Virinda  (Snow)  Chapman,  natives  of  Wil- 
son County,  Tenn.,  where  they  grew  to  mature 
years  and  were  married.  In  1850  they  removed 
from  Tennessee  to  Illinois  and  made  their  home  in 
Washington  County,  where  the  mother  died.  In 
1860  Thomas  H.,  who  had  married  again,  came  to 
Perry  Conntj'.  His  family  included  six  children: 
John  S.  and  Agnes,  deceased;  William  A.,  of  this 
sketch;  Sarah,  the  wife  of  W.  S.  Hungate,  of  Ham- 
ilton County;  one  that  died  in  infanc}',  and  Mary, 
who  married  John  Halpin  and  is  now  deceased. 

William  A.  Chapman  was  born  in  Wilson  Coun- 
ty, Tenn.,  in  1846,  and  was  brought  by  his  parents 
to  the  Prairie  State  in  1851,  which  place  has  since 
been  his  home.  Here  he  received  his  education, 
and  when  reaching  mature  years  was  united  in 
marriage,  in  1869,  with  Miss  Malina,  daugiiter  of 
George  L.  and  Permelia  Thomas.  Mrs.  Chapman 
is  a  native  of  Tennessee,  from  which  state  her  par- 
ents removed  to  Illinois  in  1842. 

In  1864,  while  the  Civil  AVar  was  in  progress, 
our  subject  offered  his  services  to  the  Union  and 
was  mustered  into  Company  D,  Forty-eighth  Illi- 
nois Infantr}',  and  served  faithfully  until  the  ces- 
sation of  hostilities.  He  was  witli  Sherman  on  his 
famous  march  to  the  sea,  participitated  in  twenty- 
seven  battles  and  skirmishes  and  witnessed  the 
Grand  Review  at  Washington.  Since  his  return 
home,  in  October,  1865,  be  has  given  his  undivided 
attention  to  farm  pursuits.  He  settled  upon  his 
present  estate  in  1869,  and  by  his  energy  and  abil- 
ity has  made  of  it  one  of  the  most  valuable  tracts 
in  this  part  of  the  county. 

To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Chapman  were  born  eight 
children,  as  follows:  Dora,  Mary,  Oliver,  Ezra, 
Sophronia,  Maud,  Joe  A.,  and  one  who  died  in  in- 
fanc}'. Our  subject  has  always  been  a  stanch  sup- 
porter of  Democratic    principles,  whether  in  times 


of  war  or  peace,  and  for  the  past  twenty-one  years 
has  held  the  ollice  of  Justice  of  the  Peace,  perform- 
ing liis  duties  faithfull}'  and  satisfactorily  to 
all  concerned.  He  is  a  devoted  member  of  the 
Primitive  Baptist  Church,  and  for  the  good  princi- 
ples which  have  governed  his  life  he  is  justly  re- 
spected by  all  who  know  him. 


m>-^^<B 


J.  MILLER,  of  the  mercantile  firm  of  F.  J. 
Schleiier  &  Miller,  of  Du  Quoin,  was  born 
in  the  cit}'  of  Chicago,  October  26,  1855. 
^_^  His  father,  Nicholas  Miller,  was  born  in 
Germany  in  1821,  and  upon  a  farm  was  reared  to 
manhood,  while  the  common  schools  afforded  him 
his  educational  privileges.  He  served  for  three 
j'ears  in  the  standing  army  of  Germany,  and  in 
1849,  having  determined  to  seek  home  and  fortune 
in  America,  he  sailed  for  the  New  World.  Going 
to  Ohio,  he  worked  by  the  month  as  a  farm  liand 
for  a  time,  and  then  went  to  Chicago,  where  he 
purchased  eighty  acres  of  land  on  the  north  side 
of  the  city,  now  comprised  within  the  town  of 
Lake  View.  For  this  he  paid  84  per  acre.  There 
he  engaged  in  gardening  and  in  clearing  the  tim- 
ber off  his  land.  With  ox-teams  he  hauled  the 
wood  to  the  cit}'  to  sell.  This  tract  of  land,  how- 
ever, made  him  a  wealthy  man.  The  rapid  growth 
of  the  city  caused  great  advancement  in  real 
estate,  and  he  sold  forty  acres  at  a  high  price.  He 
still  owns  the  remaining  fort}',  which  is  worth  a 
large  sum.  His  foresight  in  selecting  his  propert}' 
has  led  to  his  becoming  one  of  the  wealthiest  citi- 
zens of  Lake  View.  About  1851  he  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Anna  Gruenewold,  who  was  also 
born  in  Germany,  and  when  a  young  lad}'  came  to 
this  country.  They  had  a  family  of  six  sons  and 
two  daughters. 

The  members  of  the  ^liller  family  are,  John  II., 
now  a  gardener  of  Chicago;  J.  J.,  of  this  sketch; 
Nicholas,  who  is  also  engaged  in  business  in  Chi- 
cago; P.  L.,  a  grocery  merchant  of  Chicago; 
Henry,  who  is  engaged  in  gardening  on  his  father's 
place;  Matthew,  who  is  in  partnership  with  iiis 
brother  P.  L.;  Anna,  wife  of  John  Meyer,  a  dry- 
goods  merchant  of  Chicago;    and  Kate,  who  mar- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


631 


ried  F.  J.  Schleper,  and  died  November  8,  1882. 
The  sons  are  all  prosperous  business  men. 

In  tlie  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads,  our  subject 
spent  the  da.ys  of  his  boyhood  and  youth.  He  ac- 
quired a  good  education,  which  was  completed  by 
three  terras'  attendance  at  Bryant  &  Stratton's 
Commercial  College  of  his  native  city.  He  re- 
mained in  Chicago  until  1882,  when  he  came  to 
Uu  Quoin,  where  for  one  year  he  was  employed  as 
a  clerk  in  a  store.  On  the  expiration  of  that 
period  he  embarked  in  his  present  business,  which 
he  has  successfully  conducted  since  that  time.  He 
received  some  aid  from  his  father,  but  the  success 
of  his  life  is  due  mainly  to  his  own  efforts. 

In  1883  Mr.  Miller  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Kate  Eisenhauser,  daughter  of  a  prosperous 
farmer  of  Perry  Count}'.  Their  union  has  baen 
blessed  with  four  children,  two  sons  and  two 
daughters,  Katie,  Joseph,  Victor  and  Clara.  Tlie 
family  is  widely  and  favorably  known  in  this  com- 
munity, and  the  parents  hold  an  enviable  position 
in  social  circles.  In  politics  Mr.  Miller  is  a  Demo- 
crat, in  religious  belief  is  a  Roman  Catholic,  and 
belongs  to  the  Catholic  Order  of  Knights  of  Amer- 
ica. He  possesses  those  qualifications  which  are 
essential  to  success,  enterprise  and  industry,  and 
by  his  fair  and  honest  dealing  and  courteous 
treatment  of  his  customers,  he  has  won  a  liberal 
patronage. 

ARTIN  C.  CARR,  M.  D.,  is  a  worthy  rep- 
resentative of  the  medical  profession  of 
11:  Perry  County.  He  is  now  successfully- 
engaged  in  practice  in  Du  Quoin,  where 
ho  is  both  widely  and  favorably  known.  We  feel 
assured  that  his  man}-  friends  who  read  this  vol- 
ume will  receive  with  interest  the  record  of  his 
life.  The  Doctor  was  born  in  Prairie  du  Long, 
St.  Clair  County,  111.,  February  28,  1850.  His 
grandfather,  Henry  Carr,  went  to  that  count}'  when 
five  years  of  age  with  his  father,  who  also  bore 
the  name  of  Henry.  This  was  in  the  early  part  of 
the  century,  before  the  state  was  admittc^l  to  the 
Union.     With  them  came  Joseph   Carr,  a  Revolu- 


tionary soldier.  The  ancestry  of  the  Carr  family 
can  be  traced  back  to  the  eleventh  century,  when 
its  representatives  went  from  Normandy  to  Eng- 
land, where  they  resided  until  some  time  prior  to 
the  American  Revolution. 

Dabney  Carr,  the  father  of  Henry  and  Joseph, 
before  mentioned,  crossed  the  Atlantic  and  settled 
in  Virginia,  and  was  the  founder  of  the  now  nu- 
merous family  in  the  United  States.  The  Carrs 
have  ever  been  noted  for  their  strong  likes  and 
dislikes,  there  being  no  truer  friends  or  more  bit- 
ter enemies  to  be  found  anywhere.  Many  noted 
men  are  among  their  numbers,  and  those  who  set- 
tled in  St.  Clair  County  were  prominent  in  its  his- 
tory. The  great-grandfather,  grandfather  and  fa- 
ther of  the  Doctor  all   spent  their  last  days  there. 

The  last-named,  Nathan  F.  Carr,  was  born  in 
St.  Clair  County.  He  had  a  number  of  brotiiers, 
but  nearly  all  died  before  reaching  middle  life. 
One  died  at  the  age  of  seven  months,  and  only  one 
is  now  living,  James,  who  is  a  |)rosperous  farmer  of 
Franklin  County.  Nathan  Carr  married  Margue- 
rite E.  McMurtrey,  who  was  born  in  Monroe  Coun- 
ty, 111.,  and  was  a  daughter  of  Abraham  McMur- 
trey, who  removed  from  Georgia  to  that  county 
in  1820.  He  was  a  farmer  by  occupation,  and  was 
descended  from  genuine  Highland  .Scotch  ances- 
try. Removing  to  St.  Clair  County,  he  became 
one  of  its  prominent  citizens,  and  there  spent  his 
last  days.  Mrs.  Carr  died  in  1882,  at  the  age  of 
fifty-four.  The  three  sons  of  the  family  were, 
George  W.  and  Christopher  C,  who  followed  farm- 
ing, but  are  now  deceased;  and  Martin  C. 

The  early  life  of  our  subject  was  spent  on  the 
home  farm,  where  the  widowed  mother  continued 
to  live.  His  education  was  acquired  in  the  com- 
mon schools,  and  as  soon  as  old  enough  he  aided 
his  mother  in  the  farm  labors.  Pearly  in  life  he 
manifested  a  liking  for  the  medical  profession  and 
began  study  along  that  line.  In  1876  he  was 
graduated  from  the  Missouri  Medical  College  of 
St.  Louis  in  the  "Centennial  Class,"  and  soon 
afterward  commenced  practice  in  Smith  ton,  a  little 
town  in  St.  Clair  County  not  far  from  Belleville, 
where  he  remained  until  the  latter  part  of  1879, 
when  he  came  to  Du  Quoin.  Here  he  has  since 
resided  with  the  exception  of  the  two  years,  1885 


632 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


and  1886,  when  he  filled  a  chair  as  assistant 
jirofessor  of  nervous  diseases  in  tlic  I'osL  Gradu- 
ate College  of  St.  Louis,  Mo. 

The  Doctor  has  been  twice  married.  In  1877 
he  wedded  Bertlia,  daughter  of  Henry  Keira,  of 
Smithton,  111.  His  wife  and  their  child  died  in 
1878,  and  in  1888  he  married  Cora  Bock,  daugh- 
ter of  the  late  Dr.  Bock,  of  Waterloo,  111.  Three 
children  grace  this  union.  Earl  Henr^',  Flora  Bea- 
trice and  Bertha. 

Tlie  Doctor  is  a  member  of  tiie  Masonic  fra- 
ternity and  the  Knights  of  Pythias  lodge,  and 
also  belongs  to  the  southern  Illinois  Medical  As- 
sociation. In  politics  he  is  a  Deniocat,  and,  al- 
though he  has  never  sought  office,  lie  has  served 
as  City  Alderman  and  in  other  local  positions.  He 
is  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  prominent  phy- 
sicians of  southern  Illinois,  a  reputation  well  de- 
served. 


^  OHN  MILLER,  who  is  numbered  among  the 
enterprising,  progressive  and  substantial 
business  men  of  Tainaroa,  is  one  of  the  old 
settlers  of  Perry  County,  and  has  been  no 
unimportant  factor  in  advancing  its  material  in- 
terests. He  has  been  engaged  in  selling  farm  im- 
plements for  over  twenty  years,  and  commands  an 
extensive  trade  among  the  farmers  of  the  outlying 
country. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  Baltimore  County,  Md., 
in  1823,  and  was  quite  young  when  he  accompanied 
his  parents,  Jacob  and  Eva  (Masemore)  Miller,  to 
Richland  County,  Ohio.  Tliey  located  near  Mans- 
field, where  .John  grew  to  mature  years,  and  in 
1840  came  to  Perry  County,  this  state,  where  he 
has  since  resided.  The  parents  of  our  subject  were 
born,  reared  and  married  in  Baltimore  County, 
Md.,  of  which  place  grandfather  .John  Miller  was 
also  a  native,  although  his  parents  came  from  Ger- 
many. 

.lolin  Miller  was  the  eldest  in  a  family  of  ten 
children,  of  whom  we  note  the  followins:  Henry 
resides  in  this  county;  Caroline,  the  wife  of  A. 
Heap,  makes  her  home  in  Montgomery  County, 
Kan.;  F^phraim  is  dead;  Lydia  lives  in  Kansas; 
Michael    is    engaged    in    farming   in   Montgomery 


County,  this  state;  Catherine,  Mrs.  S.  B.  Morrow, 
is  a  resident  of  Tamaroa;  Jacob  A.  is  a  well-to-do 
farmer  in  this  county;  two  children  died  in  in- 
fancy. Our  subject  came  to  this  county  when  in 
his  eighteenth  year,  and  immediately  engaged  to 
work  out  b}'  the  month  on  a  farm.  Being  indus- 
trious and  economical  he  soon  laid  by  a  sufficient 
sum  to  enable  him  to  purchase  land  of  his  own, 
and  in  this  way  became  the  proprietor  of  an  eight^-- 
acre  tract  which  is  still  in  his  possession. 

Mr.  Miller  and  Miss  Catherine  Heap  were  united 
in  marriage  January  16,  1842,  and  to  them  were 
born  nine  children,  only  four  of  whom  are  living: 
Elizabeth,  Mrs.  Bose  Ford;  Betsey,  the  wife  of 
Thomas  Stockton;  Jacob  J.,  and  Eliza,  Mrs.  J.  N. 
Linsby.  Mrs.  Miller  departed  this  life  February  5, 
1894.  Our  subject  helped  to  build  tlie  first  house 
erected  in  this  place,  and  is  consequently  one  of 
tlie  oldest  residents  in  Tainaroa.  He  is  a  practical 
business  man,  possessing  the  necessary  foresight 
and  ability  requisite  to  success  in  any  walk  in  life, 
and  his  affairs  are  managed  with  scrupulous  hon- 
esty and  with  a  conscientious  regard  for  the  rights 
of  others.  As  before  stated,  he  has  conducted  an 
agricultural  implement  store  for  over  twenty  years, 
and  for  thirty-six  years  he  has  been  the  proprietor 
of  a  first-class  meat  market  in  this  place.  With 
his  family  he  is  identified  with  the  Christian 
Church  as  one  of  its  most  earnest  and  valued  mem- 
bers, and  carries  his  religion  into  his  everyday 
life.  In  his  political  relations  he  always  votes  with 
the  Republican  party. 

\fl  OIIN  R.  KAKE  is  a  worthy  representative 
of  the  business  interests  of  Murphysboro, 
and  is  an  influential  and  popular  citizen  in 
commercial  and  social  circles.  He  occupies 
the  positions  of  Treasurer  and  manager  of  the  Jack- 
son Count}'  Abstract  and  Title  Guarantee  Com- 
pany, and  is  its  leading  stockholder.  Born  in 
Rock  Island,  111.,  March  31,  1856,  he  is  a  son  of 
John  and  Lois  A.  (Willis)  Kane,  the  former  a  na- 
tive of  Scotland,  and  the  latter  a  native  of  AVliite 
County,  III. 

The  maternal  grandfather,  James  Willis,  was  an 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


633 


early  settler  of  Jackson  County,  and  served  as 
Sheriff  in  an  early  daj'.  He  took  part  in  the  Mexi- 
can War,  and  during  the  gold  excitement  went  to 
California,  where  he  died.  The  father  of  our  sub- 
ject was  a  shoemaker  bj'  trade,  but  on  emigrating 
to  this  country',  he  located  in  Jackson  Countj', 
where  he  engaged  in  coal  mining.  He  afterward 
followed  the  same  pursuit  in  Rock  Island.  Later 
he  removed  to  Carondelet,  Mo.,  where  he  carried 
on  coal  mining  until  his  death  in  1864.  His  wife 
was  a  faithful  member  of  the  Baptist  Church,  and 
passed  away  in  1877.  Their  family  numbered 
three  children,  two  of  whom  are  still  living. 

John  R.  Kane,  the  only  son,  was  reared  in  Mur- 
physboro  from  an  earl}'  age,  and  attended  the  pub- 
lic schools  until  his  father's  death.  He  was  soon 
afterward  thrown  upon  his  own  resources,  and  be- 
gan to  earn  his  own  livelihood  bj'  clerking  in  a 
store  in  this  place.  In  1879,  when  twenty-three 
years  of  age,  he  was  appointed  Deputy  County 
Treasurer  under  Philip  Kimmell,  and  served  for 
one  term.  In  1882  he  was  nominated  for  the  posi- 
tion of  Count}'  Clerk  on  the  Democratic  ticket, 
and  having  been  elected,  entered  upon  the  duties 
of  the  office  the  fol^jwing  December.  In  Decem- 
ber, 1886,  he  was  re-elected  to  that  position,  serv- 
ing altogetlier  eight  years.  He  made  a  faithful 
officer  and  is  recognized  as  a  capalile  and  trust- 
worthy man. 

In  his  business  relations  Mr.  Kane  has  been  a 
member  of  the  Big  Muddj'  Lumber  Company,  with 
which  he  was  connected  until  the  spring  of  1892, 
when  he  went  to  Boulder,  Colo.,  on  account  of  his 
wife's  health.  He  there  remained  for  a  year,  and 
was  engaged  in  the  feed  business.  In  the  spring 
of  1893  he  returned  to  his  old  home,  purchased  an 
interest  in  the  Abstract  and  Title  Guarantee  Com- 
pany', and  became  its  Treasurer  and  manager.  This 
compan}-  was  organized  in  October,  1892,  by  two 
old  businesses  being  consolidated.  The  capital 
stock  is  #50,000,  and  the}'  have  a  complete  abstract 
of  all  property  in  the  county.  The  President  is 
George  W.  Hill;  Vice-President,  J.  M.  Herbert,  and 
Secretary,  W.  W.  Kimball. 

On  the  26th  of  April,  1885,  was  celebrated  the 
marriage  of  Mr.  Kane  and  Miss  Maggie  Murphy, 
who  was  born  in  De  Soto,  this  county,  her  father. 


Riley  Murphy,  being  one  of  its  early  settlei-s.  Two 
children  grace  their  union,  Charles  R.  and  John 
H.  Socially,  Mr.  Kane  is  connected  with  Amity 
Lodge,  I.  O.  O.  ¥.,  and  the  encampment,  and  rep- 
resented the  subordinate  in  the  Grand  Lodge.  He 
has  also  held  some  of  its  offices.  In  1878  and  1879 
he  served  as  Township  Collector,  and  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Scliool  Board  from  1890  until  his  re- 
moval to  Colorado.  The  best  interests  of  the  com- 
munity have  ever  found  in  him  a  friend,  and  his 
worth  and  ability  are  recognized  by  his  many  ac- 
quaintances. 

' 0^P •    , 


"\f|  AMES  TODD,  who  is  one  of  the  oldest  set- 
tlers of  Perry  County,  has  been  successful  as 
a  farmer,  and  his  understanding  of  agricul- 
ture in  its  various  departments  is  broad  and 
deep.  He  owns  four  hundred  acres  of  land,  one 
hundred  of  which  he  has  improved  and  has  erected 
thereon  attractive  and  commodious  buildings. 
Mr.  Todd  is  a  native  of  Ireland,  having  been  born 
in  Londonderry,  in  1830.  His  parents,  Joseph  and 
Anna  (Shannon)  Todd,  having  decided  to  come 
to  America  when  he  was  a  lad  of  nine  years,  he 
accompanied  them  on  their  journey  across  the  At- 
lantic and  has  ever  since  made  his  home  in  the 
New  World. 

The  parental  family  included  eight  children,  of 
whom  our  subject  was  the  eldest.  The  otiier  mem- 
bers of  the  household  are:  Patrick  A.,  a  farmer  in 
Washington  County,  this  state;  Catherine,  the 
wife  of  Charles  Latchner,  of  St.  Louis;  Mary  J., 
deceased  wife  of  Peter  Readelbarger;  Richard  P., 
also  deceased;  Joseph,  who  resides  in  Texas;  Annie, 
Mrs.  Patrick  Smith,  and  Thomas,  who  resides  on 
the  old  homestead  and  is  the  possessor  of  about 
three  hundred  acres  of  land. 

The  father  of  our  subject  established  the  first 
sawmill  in  Perry  County  in  1854,  and  with  the 
aid  of  his  sons  conducted  that  enterprise  until 
1870.  He  departed  tiiis  life  in  1880.  at  the  age  of 
eighty-two  years.  His  father,  the  grandfather  of 
our  subject,  after  coming  to  the  United  States  fol- 
lowed his  trade  of  a  baker  for  a  number  of  years, 
and  settling  in  St.  Louis  in  1842,  remained  in  the 


634 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPmCAL  RECORD. 


Mound  City  until  bis  removal  to  Perry  County. 
Tiie  lady  vvliom  our  subject  married  in  1873  was 
Mrs.  Ann  (Riley)  Anderson,  a  native  of  Countj' 
Cavan,  Ireland.  As  before  stated,  Mr.  Todd  owns 
four  hundred  acres  of  land,  and  the  success  which 
he  has  gained  is  that  of  which  he  is  worthy.  His 
properly  has  been  gained  through  much  hard 
labor  on  his  part,  and  he  is  a  man  who  has  the 
confidence  of  all,  his  word  being  considered  as 
good  as  his  bond.  In  his  political  relations  our 
subject  is  a  stanch  Democrat  and  for  twenty  years 
was  Trustee  of  his  township.  Ilis  brother  Thomas, 
who  is  likewise  very  prominent  in  political  affairs, 
has  been  Township  Treasurer  seven  years.  Mr. 
Todd  and  his  familj'  are  members  of  the  Catholic 
Church  and  are  classed  among  tlie  substantial  citi- 
zens of  the  township. 


1(g).      ^m^ ,(S)J 


m^" 


"^®1 


lt_^  ON.  JOHN  BOYD  is  the  leading  attorney 
iTjl  of  Pinckneyville  and  is  a  man  prominent 
l^^'  in  his  profession'in  Perry  Count}',  having 
(^^  won  a  high  reputation  among  his  profes- 
sional brethren  and  with  Lite  public  at  large  as  the 
result  of  his  skill  and  ability.  He  was  honored 
with  an  election  to  the  State  Legislature  and  is 
everywhere  regarded  as  a  progressive  and  valued 
citizen.     The  record  of  his  life  is  as  follows: 

Born  near  the  village  of  Preston,  Randolph 
County,  June  30,  1833,  our  subject  is  a  son  of 
William  Boyd,  who  was  born  near  Milledgeville, 
Ga.,  1806.  The  grandfather,  John  Boyd,  was  born 
in  the  same  state  and  was  a  soldier  in  tlie  War  of 
1812.  His  father,  William  Bo^'d,  Sr.,was  a  native 
of  the  Emerald  Isle.  Coming  to  this  county  during 
the  Revolution,  he  joined  the  Continental  army 
under  Washington  and  fought  valiantlj'  for  the 
independence  of  his  adopted  country.  When  its 
freedom  was  achieved  he  located  in  Georgia,  where 
he  died  in  1818.  John  Boyd  and  his  family  re- 
moved from  Georgia  to  Tennessee,  and  in  1823 
came  to  Illinois.  After  a  short  residence  in  Nash- 
ville, Washington   County,  the}'   located    in   Ran- 


dolph County,  settling  at  what  is  now  known  as 
Dutch  Hill  Prairie,  where  the  grandf.ither  died  in 
1837. 

William  Boyd,  father  of  our  subject,  manicd 
Isabel,  daugliter  of  Lancelot  Douglass,  a  native  of 
Scotland,  who  crossed  the  Atlantic  to  America  in 
1830  and  located  near  Chester,  Randolph  County, 
where  he  engaged  in  farming.  Mr.  and  .Mrs. 
Boyd  were  the  parents  of  seven  children,  (if  xvIkiiu 
our  subject  was  the  eldest.  He  has  three  brotliers 
and  one  sister  yet  living.  Tliomas  is  a  resident  of 
Pulaski  County,  111.,  has  twice  served  as  Count}- 
Commissioner,  and  was  twice  Ma3'or  of  Mound 
City.  Lansus  was  a  soldier  of  the  Forty -eighth 
Illinois  Infantry  during  the  late  war,  and  during 
his  service  was  killed  in  a  railroad  wreck  at  Cliat- 
tanooga.  James,  who  was  also  one  of  tlie  boys  in 
blue  and  served  throughout  the  war,  is  now  a 
farmer  of  J.ackson  County.  Tlie  father  of  this 
family  died  in  1854,  and  the  mother  passed  away 
in  1880. 

Mr.  Boyd  of  whom  we  write  spent  his  boyhood 
days  upon  the  home  farm  and  acquired  his  educa- 
tion in  the  common  schools.  He  then  learned  the 
carpenter's  trade,  which  he  followed  for  six  years, 
and  during  that  period  he  spent  his  leisure  hours 
in  reading  and  study.  In  1860  he  determined  to 
abandon  carpenter  work,  and  coming  to  Pinck- 
neyville, entered  the  law  office  of  Judge  Lewis 
Hammack,  where  he  studied  for  the  legal  profes- 
sion two  years.  He  was  then  admitted  to  the  Bar 
and  has  since  been  engaged  in  active  practice. 
For  one  year  he  was  in  partnership  with  his  pre- 
ceptor. In  1866  he  formed  a  partnership  with 
Hon.  William  K.  Murphy,  which  connection  con- 
tinued until  1882. 

Another  important  event  occurred  in  1866, 
when  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  Mr.  Boyd 
and  Emeline  (Osborn)  Phelps,  sister-in-law  of  Mrs. 
William  K.  Murphy.  She  survived  her  marriage 
only  a  short  time,  however,  and  in  1868  he  married 
Mary  E.,  daughter  of  William  G.  Brown,  of  Pinck- 
neyville, who  was  a  soldier  in  the  Mexican  War. 
Seven  children  were  born  to  them,  and  witli  the 
exception  of  one  who  died  in  infancy,  all  are  yet 
living,  namely:  Elizabeth  J.;  Mary  E.,  wife  of  Fred 
Beck,   a  merchant,  who    died    January  30,  1894; 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


635 


William  AV.,  Florence,  Man-ilia  and  John  Volnej-, 
who  are  at  home. 

In  1876  Mr.  Boyd  was  elected  on  the  Demo- 
cratic ticket  to  the  State  Legislature  and  served 
on  several  important  committees.  As  a  member  of 
the  House  he  discharged  his  duties  with  credit  to 
himself  and  satisfaction  to  his  constituency.  He 
has  also  held  some  local  offices,  and  from  personal 
preference  he  has  given  the  greater  part  of  his 
time  and  attention  to  the  legal  profession, and  but 
few  attorneys  in  southern  Illinois  can  boast  of  a 
larger  or  more  successful  practice  than  Mr.  Boyd. 


j  OY  ALDEN,  editor  and  proprietor  of  the 
if'  Democrat,  of  Pickneyville,  is  numbered 
among  the  native  sons  of  Perry  County, 
^^(^-his  birth  having  occurred  in  Tamaroa  on 
the  22d  of  July,  1863.  His  grandfather.  Royal 
Alden,  was  a  native  of  New  England,  and  was  a 
direct  descendant  of  John  Alden,  who  came  to 
this  country  in  the  "Mayflower"  with  the  Pilgrim 
Fathers.  Royal  Alden  engaged  in  school  teach- 
ing, and  was  a  man  of  more  than  average  intelli- 
gence and  ability.  In  1869  he  emigrated  to  Illi- 
nois, and  for  a  time  served  as  Deputy  County 
Clerk  of  Hamilton  County,  where  he  made  his 
home. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  Col.  A.  J.  Alden,  was 
a  native  of  North  Carolina  and  was  a  printer  by 
trade.  At  the  breaking  out  of  the  Civil  War  be 
was  serving  as  Circuit  Clerk  of  Hamilton  County, 
but  resigned  his  position  in  order  to  enter  the 
army.  He  was  made  Captain  of  a  company  of  in- 
fantry', and  being  captured  during  the  war,  was 
confined  in  T3'ler  and  other  southern  prisons. 
After  being  liberated,  he  resigned  his  commis- 
sion on  account  of  ill-health,  but  later  he  again 
went  to  the  front  as  Major  of  a  company  of  cav- 
alrj'.  Subsequently,  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank 
of  Colonel,  which  position  he  filled  until  hon- 
orably discharged  after  the  fall  of  Richmond.  On 
his  return  from  the  war  he  engaged  in  merchandis- 
ing and  also  edited  a  newspaper  in  Du  Quoin, 
but  for  the  past  eight  years  he  has  been  in  the 
Government    printing  office   in    Washington.     He 


married  Beady  Penny,  sister  of  J.  J.  Penn}-,  edi- 
tor of  the  Murphysboro  Independent. 

Our  subject  was  the  only  son  in  the  Alden  fam- 
ily. As  early  as  seven  years  of  age  we  find  him 
in  his  father's  newspaper  office,  where  he  picked 
up  the  business,  becoming  familiar  with  the  art  of 
printing  in  all  of  its  branches.  He  first  embarked 
in  the  newspaper  business  on  his  own  account  m 
Mississippi,  but  the  venture  was  not  a  profitable 
one.  He  was  then  a  youth  of  only  seventeen 
years.  So  for  a  time  he  gave  up  the  newspaper 
business  and  accepted  a  position  with  the  Southern 
Express  Compan}',  with  headquarters  at  Cairo,  III. 
He  filled  various  capacities,  from  clerk  to  mana- 
ger, but  at  length  severed  his  connection  with  that 
company  to  again  embark  in  newspaper  work. 
In  1891  he  bought  out  the  Democrat,  of  Pinckney- 
ville,  of  which  he  is  now  editor  and  proprietor, 
and  which  he  has  since  conducted  with  marked 
success.  It  is  one  of  the  neatest  and  best  edited 
papers  in  southern  Illinois,  and  is  receiving  a  lib- 
eral patronage,  which  has  constantly  increased 
from  the  beginning,  and  which  will  be  much 
farther  enlarged,  for  the  paper  is  in  all  ways 
worthy  of  extensive  circulation. 

Mr.  Alden  is  a  member  of  the  Masonic  frater- 
nity and  of  the  Knights  of  Pythias  and  the  Odd 
Fellows'  societies.  He  is  interested  in  everything 
pertaining  to  the  welfare  of  the  community  in 
which  he  makes  his  home,  and  is  one  of  the  popu- 
lar and  highly  respected  citizens  of  Pinckney  Ville. 


?RTT5reC"-7SC  ^fltT'ZSl^^^^^fcC^K^^ 


^(  OHN  A.  WERNER,  deceased,  was  one  of  the 
most  prominent  citizens  of  Murphysboro, 
and  this  work  would  be  incomplete  without 
^^  tlie  record  of  his  life.  He  was  numbered 
among  the  best  informed  men  of  the  state.  In 
public  work  that  tended  to  advance  the  general 
welfare  he  took  a  leading  part,  and  his  name  is 
inseparably  connected  with  man}-  enterprises. 

Born  in  Coburg,  Saxony,  German}',  in  1833, our 
subject  was  reared  in  his  native  land,  and  in  its 
common  schools  acquired  a  good  education,  which 
he  largeh'  supplemented  by  extensive  reading  and 
study  in   later  years.     He   was  a  thorough  Greek 


636 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


bludent,  was  always  well  informed  on  the  current 
topics  of  the  da_v,  possessed  a  most  remarkable 
mcmorj',  and  Hon.  George  W.  Hill  said  of  him  that 
he  was  one  of  the  best  posted  men  in  the  country. 
When  a  younof  man  he  crossed  the  Atlantic  to  New 
York,  and  learned  civil  engineering,  working  on 
the  Government  survey-.  He  served  in  the  Mexi- 
can War,  and  after  that  struggle  was  over  went  to 
Kentucky,  wliere  he  was  first  married.  He  there 
made  his  home  until  about  1862,  and  then  came  to 
Murphysboro,  where  he  worked  as  a  civil  engineer 
and  also  engaged  iu  teaching.  In  1868  he  was 
elected  County  Surveyor,  and  so  well  did  he  dis- 
charge his  duties,  that  on  the  expiration  of  his  first 
term  he  was  re-elected.  On  retiring  from  office, 
he  resumed  his  labors  as  a  civil  engineer,  and  also 
engaged  in  the  real-estate  business. 

While  residing  in  Kentucky  Mr.  Werner  had 
been  twice  married,  and  by  his  first  wife,  whose 
maiden  name  was  Lucy  D.  Marshall,  he  had  one 
son,  Henry,  now  a  resident  of  Ohio.  After  her 
death  he  married  Sarah  Riggs,  who  died  shortly 
afterward.  On  the  12th  of  April,  1865,  near  Steele- 
ville,  Randolph  County,  he  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Nanc}'  Badgley,  who  was  born  near 
Belleville,  St.  Clair  Count}',  as  was  her  father, 
David  Badgley.  Her  grandfather,  Aaron  Badgley, 
was  a  native  of  Virginia,  and  was  one  of  the  first 
to  locate  in  what  became  known  as  the  Badgley 
settlement.  He  served  in  the  Black  Hawk  War, 
became  a  prominent  farmer,  and  died  in  St.  Clair 
County.  The  father  of  Mrs.  Werner  followed  agri- 
cultural pursuits  in  St.  Clair  County,  and  afterward 
removed  to  Randolph  Count}',  where  he  owned 
and  operated  a  large  farm  until  his  death.  His 
wife,  who  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Amy  Abbott, 
was  born  in  Ft.  W.aync,  Ind.,  and  is  a  daughter  of 
John  Abbott,  who  died  in  the  Hoosier  State.  She 
is  now  living  in  St.  Louis. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Werner  were  born  seven 
children,  only  two  of  whom  are  now  living,  Wal- 
lace, a  druggist  of  Paducah,  Ky.,  and  Ralph,  of 
Murphysboro.  Mr.  Werner  was  a  faithful  and  con- 
sistent member  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church, 
and  to  charitable  and  benevolent  work  gave  his 
earnest  support.  He  won  the  friendship  of  the 
best  minds,  for  his  literary  tastes  and  wide  knowl- 


edge made  him  a  favorite  with  people  of  culture 
and  education.  In  politics  he  supported  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  Democrac}'.  He  was  called  to  his  fin.al 
rest  July  2,  1893,  and  all  who  knew  him  mourned 
his  loss.  Mrs.  Werner  shared  with  her  husband  in 
all  the  J03'S  and  sorrows  of  life  and  was  to  him  a 
faithful  companion.  She  too  has  many  friends  in 
the  community,  and  ranks  high  in  social  circles. 
In  temperance  work  she  takes  a  very  prominent 
part,  and  is  now  serving  her  third  .year  as  Secre- 
tary of  the  Woman's  Christian  Temperance  Union. 
Of  the  principles  of  the  Prohibition  party  she  is 
an  earnest  advocate. 


\i7  WILLIAM  PELZER,one  of  the  young  busi- 
I  (@  "®^*  ™^'^  *^^  Murphysboro,  who  is  num- 
I|l3i^  bered  among  its  valued  cititzens  on  ac- 
count of  his  thrift  and  enterprise,  carries  on  a 
general  mercantile  establishment  as  a  member  of 
the  firm  of  Wisely  &  Pelzer.  They  have  a  full 
line  of  dry  goods,  groceries,  and  in  fact  evpiy- 
thing  found  in  a  first-class  general  store.  They 
are  located  at  No.  32  East  AValnut  Street,  and 
their  customers  are  many,  for  by  fair  and  honest 
dealing*  and  courteous  treatment  they  have  se- 
cured a  liberal  patronage. 

The  junior  member  of  the  firm  was  born  in 
Du  Quoin,  111.,  February  1,  1869,  and  his  father, 
Louis  Pelzer,  was  born  near  Red  Bud,  Randolph 
County.  The  grandfather,  Louis  Pelzer,  Sr.,  was 
a  native  of  Baden,  German}',  who  emigrated  to 
America,  and  for  half  a  centur}  lived  on  a  farm 
in  Randolph  County.  In  early  life  the  father  of 
our  subject  followed  agricultural  pursuits,  and  in 
1870  embarked  in  the  livery  business  in  Murphys- 
boro. Subsequently  he  carried  on  a  meat  market 
at  this  place,  but  of  late  years  has  again  resumed 
farming,  which  he  now  successfully  carries  on  in 
Murphysboro  Township.  He  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Catherine  Parrott,  a  native  of  Ohio  and 
a  daughter  of  Peter  Parrott,  one  of  the  pioneer 
settlers  of  Randolph  County,  111.,  where  the  daugh- 
ter grew  to  womanhood. 

L.  W.  I'elzer  is  the  eldest  in  a  famil}'  of  eight 
children,  seven  sons  and   one  daughter,  of  whom 


>®^     •^^^v^^-''    % 


^SA/ 


Of.  J  ^^/^^^rw^/^ 


Jft/.^ >  Sv^S^r^^^-^uxyK 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


641 


six  are  yet  living.  Under  the  parental  roof  the 
days  of  his  boyhood  and  youth  were  passed,  and 
after  attending  the  common  schools  he  became  a 
student  in  the  high  school,  thus  acquiring  a  good 
practical  English  education.  He  entered  upon  his 
mercantile  career  in  1882,  as  a  clerk  in  the  store 
of  W.  E.  Chambers,  where  he  was  employed  for 
three  years,  working  during  the  morning  and  even- 
ing, while  through  the  day  he  gave  his  time  to 
his  lessons.  .  He  afterward  spent  one  year  with 
W.  M.  Rothrock,  and  later  served  as  Assistant 
Postmaster  for  one  year  under  Judge  G.  W.  An- 
drews. On  leaving  the  post  office,  he  became  a 
salesman  in  the  store  of  John  W.  Hawk,  a  general 
merchant  of  this  place,  with  whom  he  continued 
until  1892.  He  may  truly  be  called  a  self-made 
man,  and  his  success  in  life  is  the  just  reward  of 
his  own  labors.  He  vote*  with  the  Republican 
party  and  is  a  supporter  of  the  Lutheran  Church, 
with  which  he  holds  membership. 


^**4"}-'^J^  •5"5"i"H 


:^ 


^  ILLIAM  C.  McCORMICK,  who  resides  on 
'/    section    21,  Kinkaid  Township,  is   recog- 


nized as  one  of  the  leading  and  progress- 
ive farmers  of  Jackson  County,  and  it  is  with 
pleasure  that  we  present  to  our  readers  this  record 
of  his  life.  Born  in  the  neighboring  state  of  In- 
diana, on  the  2d  of  August,  1832,  he  is  a  son  of 
Alfred  G.  McCormick,  who  was  born  in  Lafayette 
County,  Pa.,  in  1795.  On  the  paternal  side  he  was 
of  Irish  descent,  and  on  the  maternal  side  was  of 
Pennsylvania-German  lineage. 

In  the  Keystone  State  Alfred  McCormick  was 
first  married,  and  by  that  union  had  two  children: 
David,  who  died  in  childhood;  and  Hanua,  who 
was  married  in  Chester,  111.,  to  Philip  Meyers  and 
is  now  living  near  Los  Angeles,  Cal.  They  have 
seven  children:  Thomas,  Cyrus,  Charles,  Zeb,  Ada, 
Anna  and  Frank.  Mr.  McCormick  was  married 
in  Indiana  about  1830  to  Frances  Cornelius,  and 
in  1837  took  his  family  to  Randolph  County, 
where  he  lived  on  a  farm  until  1855.  In  that 
year  he  came  to  Jackson  County  and  made  a  per- 
manent location  in  Kinkaid  Township.  He  taught 
school  until  his  eldest  sons  were  large  enough  to 
23 


carry  on  the  farm.  He  was  also  a  tailor  and  cigar 
maker,  and  in  the  first  named  vocation  he  met  with 
raost  excellent  success.  In  politics  he  voted  with 
the  Democracy  until  1860,  when  he  supported 
Lincoln,  and  thereafter  continued  his  allegiance 
to  the  Republican  party.  He  was  a  fine  scholar, 
especially  proficient  in  arithmetic,  and  was  an  ex- 
pert penman.  His  wife  was  a  faithful  member  of 
the  Free  Will  Baptist  Church  from  her  thirteenth 
year,  and  died  in  that  faith  in  May,  1886.  In 
their  famil3'  were  nine  children:  Sarah  A.,  who 
died  at  the  age  of  eighteen;  our  subject;  Christian 
L.,  a  store  keeper  of  Polk  County,  111.;  Alfred  G., 
who  died  during  the  late  war,  in  August,  1862, 
near  Huntsville,  Ala.;  .lane,  wife  of  Nathan  Ash, 
who  died  in  Franklin  County,  111.;  Virginia,  wife 
of  Thomas  Gray,  of  Randolph  County;  Maria, 
wife  of  Dr.  Joel  Barber,  a  physician  of  Rockwood, 
111.;  Theodocia,  wife  of  Alexander  Barber,  of  Rock- 
wood,  and  George  W.,  of  Kinkaid  Township. 

William  C.  McCormick  continued  to  live  with 
his  parents  and  aid  in  their  support  until  twenty- 
three  3'ears  of  age,  when  he  purchased  a  farm  of 
one  hundred  acres  on  section  29,  Kinkaid  Town- 
ship, beginning  the  cultivation  of  the  same.  As  a 
companion  and  helpmate  on  life's  journey  he 
chose  Martha  E.  Talbott,  the  wedding  being  cele- 
brated January  14,  1858.  They  lived  on  his  first 
farm  until  1874,  when  they  removed  to  the  one  on 
which  they  now  reside.  A  great  transformation 
has  taken  place  since  that  time — the  land  has 
been  placed  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation  and 
many  excellent  improvements  made.  He  how  has 
an  elegant  home  and  all  the  necessary  buildings 
and  conveniences  of  a  model  farm,  and  two  hun- 
dred and  forty  and  a-half  acres  of  rich  land  yield 
to  him  a  golden  tribute. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  McCormick  were  born  ten 
children,  six  of  whom  are  yet  living.  AVilliam  D., 
born  September  3,  1859,  married  Amanda  Wor- 
then;  Eliza  A.,  born  August  17,  1865,  is  the  wife 
of  John  Bilderback  and  has  two  children,  Claude 
and  George;  Cora,  born  September  3,  1867,  mar- 
ried Alva  Bilderback,  who  died  October  16,  1891, 
leaving  a  daughter,  Gracie,  who  is  living  with  her 
grand|)arents;  C3'rus  G.,  born  June  24,  1874,  mar- 
ried Laura  Quails;  Annie,  born  February  2,  1876, 


642 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


is  the  wife  of  Henry  Davis;  Hannah  B.,  born  No- 
vember 5.  1879,  is  the  next  younger;  Fred,  born 
December  25,  1880,  died  at  the  age  of  eighteen 
months. 

In  politics  Mr.  McCormick  has  been  a  stanch 
Republican  for  many  yeai'S,  but  now  votes  with 
the  Prohibition  party.  He  and  his  wife  have  for 
twenty-six  years  been  prominent  members  of  and 
active  workers  in  the  Free  Will  Baptist  Church. 
He  has  served  as  Deacon,  and  for  twenty  years 
was  Sunday-school  Superintendent,  and  his  wife 
has  for  manj-  j'ears  been  Clerk  of  the  church. 
When  he  joined  the  army  he  united  with  the 
Union  Church  of  his  regiment.  Mr.  McCormick 
enlisted  as  a  private  for  the  late  war  in  August, 
1862,  as  a  member  of  Company  A,  Eightieth  Illi- 
nois Infantrj-,  under  Capt.  Luther  ]\[ann  and  Col. 
Thomas  Allen.  He  continued  in  the  service  for 
almost  three  years  and  was  Corporal  of  his  com- 
pany. At  the  siege  of  Atlanta,  August  20,  1864, 
he  was  seriouslj'  wounded  and  was  not  again  in 
active  service,  but  was  not  discharged  until  his 
regiment  was  mustered  out.  He  received  a  gun- 
shot wound  in  the  top  of  his  head,  the  ball  crush- 
ing the  skull  and  piercing  the  brain.  For  weeks 
it  was  thought  he  could  not  recover,  but  at  length 
his  vigorous  constitution  triumphed.  Since  his 
return  from  the  war,  he  has  devoted  his  energies 
untiringly  to  farm  work  and  has  thereb}'  acquired 
a  handsome  competence.  Socially,  he  is  a  member 
of  the  Masonic  fraternity  of  Ava,  of  which  he  is 
now  Chaplain.  He  is  a  charter  member  of  the 
Knights  of  Honor,  in  which  he  is  also  Chaplain, 
and  is  a  charter  member  of  Ava  Post,  G.  A.   R. 


l(s), ^m^         .(5)j 


<jt^  DWARD  CRAWFORD,  who  resides  in  Mur- 
iM  physboro,  is  the  efficient  Count}'  Clerk  of 
it — ^  .Jackson  Count}-,  .and  is  a  genial  and  enter- 
taining gentleman,  well  liked  by  all.  In  the  his- 
tory of  this  community  his  record  should  not  be 
omitted.  He  has  the  honor  of  being  a  native  of 
Illinois,  iiis  birth  having  occurred  in  the  capital 
city  on  Christmas  Day  of  1861.     His  grandfather. 


Thomas  Crawford,  was  a  pioneer  farmer  of  Cadiz, 
Ohio,  and  was  of  Scotch  descent.  He  died  in  1893, 
at  the  age  of  ninety-three  years.  His  son  Hugh, 
the  father  of  our  subject,  was  born  in  Cadiz,  and 
was  reared  to  manhood  in  tiie  Buckeye  State.  At 
an  early  age  he  removed  westward.  Attracted  by 
the  discovery  of  gold,  he  went  to  California,  where 
he  engaged  in  mining  for  a  time,  but  afterward  re- 
turned to  Jackson  County,  111.  Subsequently  he 
engaged  in  teaching  school  in  Springfield,  but  in 
1862  we  again  find  him  in  Murphysboro. 

Hugh  Crawford  married  Elizabeth  Kimrael,  a 
native  of  Pennsylvania.  Her  father,  Philip  Kim- 
mel,  emigrated  from  the  Keystone  State  to  this 
county  in  1840,  and  located  in  Somerset  Town- 
ship. There  he  improved  a  farm,  upon  which  he 
is  still  living,  at  the  advanced  age  of  ninety  years. 
The  family  is  of  German  descent.  Mrs.  Crawford, 
who  was  a  faithful  member  of  the  Lutheran  Church, 
died  in  1884.  In  the  family  were  five  sons  and  a 
daughter  who  grew  to  mature  years,  and  they  also 
lost  two  children  in  early  life.  Hugh  Crawford 
still  survives  his  wife,  and  is  a  well  known  and 
honored  citizen  of  this  community.  He  was  ap- 
pointed County  Clerk  to  fill  a  vacancy,  then  for 
two  terms  was  elected  Circuit  Clerk  of  the  county. 
Subsequently  he  acted  as  Deputy  in  that  office  for 
one  term,  and  is  now  serving  as  Deputy  in  the 
office  of  County  Clerk. 

Edward  Crawford,  whose  name  heads  this  record, 
was  principally  reared  in  Murphysboro,  and  in 
his  youth  received  the  advantages  of  a  common 
school.  His  life  has  been  a  busy  and  useful  one. 
From  an  early  age  he  spent  his  vacations  working 
in  offices  or  stores,  and  for  ten  years  was  employed 
as  clerk  in  a  dry-goods  estalilishment.  Of  late 
years  his  time  has  all  been  given  to  official  duties, 
and  so  faithfully  has  he  discliarged  these  that  he 
has  won  the  high  commendation  of  all  concerned. 
In  1887  he  was  elected  City  Treasurer  for  a  term 
of  two  years;  was  then  appointed  Tax  Collector  of 
Murphysboro  Township  to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  after- 
ward was  elected  to  that  office.  In  1890  he  was 
nominated  as  County  Clerk  and  received  the  largest 
majority  of  any  candidate  on  the  Democratic  tick- 
et. In  December  he  entered  upon  the  discharge 
of  his  duties  and  is  the  present  efficient   and    cap- 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


643 


able  County  Clerk.     Socially,  he  is  connected  with 
the  Odd  Fellows'  societj'. 

In  1885  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  Mr. 
Crawford  and  Miss  Laura  Coad.  The  lady  is  a 
native  of  Hardin  County,  and  a  daughter  of  Sam- 
uel Coad.  They  have  a  pleasant  and  comfortable 
home  on  Logan  Street,  which  is  the  abode  of  hos- 
pitality and  good  cheer.  Their  friends  throughout 
the  community  are  many,  and  by  all  thej-  are  held 
in  warm  regard. 


r  I  n  I  ■!  Ml 


^=^EORGE  FINLEY  BLAKESLEE  is  the  man- 
jll  |_-  ager  and  principal  stockholder  of  the  Du 
^^i|  Quoin  Iron  AYorks  Company,  one  of  the 
leading  industries  of  Perry  Count}'.  He  was  born 
in  Metamora,  AVoodford  County,  III.,  December 
30,  1855,  and  is  a  son  of  Halidon  Finley  Blakeslee, 
a  native  of  New  York,  who  was  given  the  name  of 
Halidon  by  an  old  aunt,  Minerva  Judd,  who  wa.s 
reading  an  old  French  book  when  she  heard  of  his 
birth,  and  her  eyes  fell  upon  the  word  Halidon. 
Nothing  would  satisfy  her  but  that  this  name  be 
given  to  the  child,  which  was  done. 

Like  his  family  through  past  generations,  Mr. 
Blakeslee  was  a  machinist.  He  married  Hannah 
Caroline  Kingsbury,  a  native  of  Fraucestown,  N. 
H.,  and  a  daughter  of  George  Kingsburj-,  who  was 
born  in  the  same  place,  February  1,  1795.  His 
grandfather  removed  to  New  Hampshire  about 
1794,  and  there  spent  his  last  daj's.  The  familj' 
was  of  English  origin,  and  was  founded  in  Ded- 
ham,  Mass.  The  brothers  and  sisters  of  Mrs. 
Blakeslee  were,  Harriet  Newell,  who  was  born 
July  9,  1824,  and  was  educated  in  South  Hadle}', 
Mass.;  George,  who  was  born  January  8,  1827, 
and  educated  in  Francestown,  N.  H.;  Sarah,  who 
was  born  February  5,  1829.  and  educated  in  South 
Hadley,  Mass.;  Hannah  Frances,  who  was  born  in 
November,  1831,  and  died  in  childhood;  and 
Mark  Justin,  who  was  born  November  12,  1837, 
and  died  in  New  London.  Conn.  The  grand- 
mother of  our  subject  bore  the  maiden  name  of 
Sallie  Everett,  and  is  still  living  in  the  Granite 
State,  at  the  advanced  age  of  ninety-three.  Her 
daughter,   Mrs.   Blakeslee,   was   educated    in    Mt. 


Holyoke  Female  Seminary,  and  came  to  Illinois 
with  her  eldest  sister,  Sarah,  who  was  to  become 
the  wife  of  Julius  Clark  Blakeslee,  but  his  death 
occurred  ere  their  marriage  was  celebrated.  Mr. 
Blakeslee,  father  of  our  subject,  died  in  Du  Quoin 
in   1878. 

Our  subject  is  the  eldest  of  four  children.  His 
sister,  Mary  B.,  was  born  July  2,  1860,  and  is  the 
wife  of  John  L.  Holmes,  who  is  in  the  employ  of 
the  South  Side  Elevated  Railroad  of  Chicago.  She 
is  a  graduate  of  the  musical  department  of  the 
Rockford  (111.)  Female  Seminary.  Thej-  have  three 
children:  James  Halidon, born  September  12,1882; 
Frank  Everett,  March  27,  1888;  and  Albert  Lewis 
April  21, 1891.  Frank  Arthur, a  brotherof  oursub- 
ject,  was  born  in  Du  (Juoin,  May  17,  1864.  He  was 
educated  in  the  .State  L'niversitj'  at  Champaign, 
and  resides  at  Leadville,  Colo.,  where  he  is  master 
mechanic  for  the  Arkansas  Valley  Smelting  Com- 
pany. He  married  Anna,  daughter  of  ex-Judge 
Parks,  of  Du  Quoin,  and  the}'  have  one  child,  Wal- 
ter. Will  Everett,  another  brother  of  our  subject, 
was  born  in  Du  Quoin,  May  19,  1868.  He  spent 
some  years  in  Colorado,  but  is  now  in  the  employ  of 
the  Du  Quoin  Iron  Works  Company.  He  married 
September  14,  1893,  Miss  Minnie  Alice,  daughter 
of  George  Hyde,  a  mechanic  of  North  Chelmsford, 
Mass.  She  is  highly  educated  in  music,  and  was 
a  leading  singer  in  one  of  the  principal  churches 
of  Lowell,  Mass. 

G.  F.  Blakeslee  acquired  his  earl}-  education  in 
the  schools  of  Du  Quoin,  and  in  1876  entered  the 
Illinois  State  University  at  Champaign,  but  the 
following  year  was  compelled  to  leave  college  to 
take  his  father's  place  in  the  firm  of  Blakeslee  & 
Brother,  for  the  latter's  health  had  failed.  In 
1878  he  succeeded  to  his  father's  interest  in  the 
business,  with  which  he  was  connected  until  1879, 
when  he  retired  from  the  company.  Like  all  of 
the  family  for  generations,  he  had  learned  the  ma- 
chinist's trade.  Embarking  in  the  hardware  busi- 
ness in  Du  Quoin,  he  continued  operations  along 
that  line  until  1882,  when  he  established  the  Du 
Quoin  Iron  Works  Company,  of  which  he  is  the 
principal  owner.  An  extensive  iron  business  is 
done,  this  being  one  of  the  leading  industries  of 
Du  Quoin.     He  is  also  interested  in  the  Excelsior 


644 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD 


Coal  Mines,  is  a  stockholder  in  the  First  National 
Bank,  and  a  Director  in  the  Perr}'  County  Coal 
Mines. 

On  the  5th  of  September,  1878,  Mr.  Blakeslee 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Mar^'  R.  Holt,  in 
Portage,  N.  Y.  Unto  them  were  born  six  children: 
Harry  Justin,  horn  August  9,  1879;  Bessie  Bel- 
laire,  June  30,  1881;  George  Halidon,  May  20, 
1883;  Clara  Batelle,  August  17,  1885;  Carl  Julius, 
Mary  25,  1887;  and  Mary  Emily,  .January  23, 
1889.  The  famil3'  is.  one  of  prominence  in  the 
community,  holding  an  enviable  position  in  social 
circles.  The  parents  are  members  of  the  Presby- 
tei"ian  Church,  in  which  Mr.  Blakeslee  served  as 
Elder.  In  politics,  lie  is  inclined  to  be  indepen- 
dent, and  is  now  serving  as  a  member  of  the  Cit}' 
Council.  He  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  foremost 
business  men  of  Du  Quoin. 


Qz 


(5" 


-^~) 


"ill  OHN  GROTT.  Among  the  citizens  of  Ran- 
dolph County  who  have  contributed  their 
.^^  I  quota  toward  the  development  of  their 
^^!f/  adopted  land  ma}'  be  properly  mentioned 
Mr.  Grott,  who  for  many  years  was  an  active 
farmer  and  is  now  living  in  retirement  on  section 
10,  township  7,  range  7.  He  has  been  very  pros- 
perous in  the  pursuit  of  his  calling,  establishing 
what  is  considered  one  of  the  model  farms  in  the 
county,  and  now  that  old  age  has  come  upon  him, 
is  enabled  to  retired  from  the  arduous  duties  of 
life. 

A  native  of  Poland,  our  subject  was  born  in 
Sarban,  June  17,  1824,  and  was  the  youngest  of 
five  children  born  to  the  union  of  Andrew  and 
Agnes  (Kosma)  Grott,  the  former  of  whom  died 
when  our  subject  was  but  two  years  old.  The 
mother  survived  until  1852,  when  she  departed 
this  life,  at  the  age  of  sixt}'  years.  While  in  the 
Old  Country  our  subject  served  for  three  and  one- 
half  years  in  the  Prussian  arnij',  that  portion  of 
the  country  in  which  he  lived  having  fallen  to 
that  nation.  While  a  resident  of  Poland  he  was 
engaged  as  a  farraerj  working  on  his  father's  es- 
tate.    On  the  death  of  the  latter  he  sold  his  share 


in  the  property  to  his  brother,  receiving  14,000 
for  the  same. 

When  reaching  his  twentieth  year,  Mr.  Grott 
determined  to  come  to  America,  and  leaving  Po- 
land in  April,  1854,  landed  at  Quebec  after  an 
uneventful  voyage.  His  destination  being  Ches- 
ter, this  state,  be  came  bj'  way  of  the  Lakes  to 
Chicago,  thence  by  rail  to  La  Salle,  from  which 
place  he  descended  the  Illinois  and  Mississippi 
Rivers  by  boat  to  that  city,  where  he  arrived  Jul}' 
12.  His  first  work  after  coming  here  was  on  a 
plank  road  leading  from  Randolph  to  Chester. 
He  was  thus  employed  for  about  two  months,  re- 
ceiving as  his  pa}'  $1.25  per  day,  which  was  con- 
sidered very  good  wages  at  that  time.  After  the 
road  was  completed  he  was  engaged  in"grubbing," 
and  together  with  his  partner  he  cleared  about 
four  hundred  and  seventy  acres.  When  tlie  prop- 
erty came  into  his  possession,  it  was  covered  with 
wood  and  brush,  but  by  hard  work  he  succeeded 
in  converting  it  into  a  valuable  farm. 

Previous  to  settling  on  his  farm,  however,  our 
subject  went  to  Texas  in  the  employ  of  a  railroad, 
but  the  climate  and  water  did  not  agree  with  him 
and  he  became  sick  after  a  stay  of  two  weeks  in 
the  south,  as  did  all  the  other  workmen,  and  in  a 
month's  time  they  were  unable  to  work. 

On  his  return  from  Texas  Mr.  Grott  l)cgan 
working  for  Jacob  Con  vail,  in  whose  employ  he 
remained  for  two  years.  At  the  end  of  that  time 
he  worked  out  by  the  day  on  the  farm  of  Fritz 
Buchman,  with  whom  he  remained  for  seven  3ears. 
Following  this  he  rented  two  hundred  and  forty 
acres  of  land  for  one  3'ear,  after  which  he  pur- 
chased the  first  eighty  acres  of  his  present  posses- 
sions. To  this  was  later  added  twent^'-nine  and 
one-half  acres,  and  since  that  time  he  has  increased 
his  acreage  with  a  tract  of  one  hundred  and 
twenty  acres,  making  in  all  a  valuable  estate  of 
two  hundred  and  twenty  acres. 

In  Kaskaskia,  November  25,  18G6,  Mr.  Grott 
I  married  Miss  Wilhelmena,  daughter  of  Stephen 
and  Julia  Grooste,  now  residents  of  Chester.  By 
their  marriage  were  born  nine  children,  namely; 
Amel.  Roman,  John,  Joseph,  Celia,  Andrew,  Al- 
bert, Mary  and  Rudolph.  Amel  and  John  are 
deceased.     Mr.  and  Mrs.  Grott,  together  with  their 


PORTRArr   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


645 


family,  are  members  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church 
in  Chester,  of  which  our  subject  has  been  Trustee 
since  1877.  In  politics  he  is  a  Democrat,  but  does 
not  hesitate  to  vote  for  the  best  man,  regardless  of 
party.  He  attended  the  World's  Fair  in  Chicago, 
which  was  the  first  time  he  had  visited  the  Gar- 
den City  since  his  advent  into  the  state  in  1854. 
Then  there  were  but  a  few  houses  In  that  now 
great  city,  and  the  present  site  uf  the  Union  de- 
pot was  a  large  marshy  tract  of  land. 

;^OAH  CHEATHAM,  a  retired  farmer  living 
in  Ava,  was  born  in  Elk  Townsiiip,  Jackson 
County,  February  2,  1834,  and  is  a  worthy 
representative  of  one  of  the  honored  pioneer  fami- 
lies of  southern  Illinois.  His  father,  Robertson 
Cheatham,  was  born  in  Virginia  in  1808,  and  was 
a  son  of  Samuel  Cheatham,  who  removed  with  his 
family  to  Tennessee  in  1804,  locating  thirty  miles 
from  Nashville.  There  he  lived  until  1822,  when 
he  removed  to  Mt.  Vernon,  III.  A  short  time  after- 
ward he  took  up  his  residence  on  Elk  Prairie,  where 
his  remaining  da3-s  were  spent. 

Robertson  aided  his  father  and  bore  the  hard- 
ships of  pioneer  life.  In  Brownsville  he  married 
the  daughter  of  Colonel  Creatli,  an  early  settler  of 
this  state,  and  located  on  the  old  Cheatham  liomc- 
slead.  There  he  lived  until  the  fall  of  1844,  when 
he  removed  to  Bradley  Township,  .Jackson  County, 
making  a  permanent  location.  He  first  purchased 
eighty  acres  of  land,  and  afterward  added  to  it  a 
like  amount,  from  which  he  developed  a  fine  farm. 
In  1837  his  wife  died.  Their  family  numbered 
four  children,  of  whom  three  aje  yet  living:  Will- 
iam, a  resident  of  Williamson  County;  Noah;  and 
Heniy,  of  Ava.  The  father  afterward  married 
Elizabeth  Cruse,  who  died  leaving  one  child,  Al- 
bert, now  of  Missouri.  He  then  wedded  Sarah 
Kimmel,  a  native  of  Pennsylvania,  and  a  daughter 
of  Abram  Kimmel.  They  have  six  children:  Car- 
roll, Marion,  Isabel,  George,  Sarah  and  Oliver. 
The  father  died  in  1875.  He  took  an  active  inter- 
est in  political  affairs,  voting  with  the  Democratic 
party,  and  was  a  man  of  many  excellencies  of 
character,  who   had   the  high    regard  of  all.     His 


widow  and  her  sons,  George  and  Oliver,  are  now 
living  on  the  old  homestead. 

Noah  Cheatham  received  but  limited  educational 
advantages  in  his  youth,  but  his  training  as  a  farm 
hand  was  not  meagre.  Having  arrived  at  mature 
years  he  chose  as  a  companion  and  helpmate  on 
life's  journey  Miss  Mary  Jane,  daughter  of  Gideon 
Carr,  who  removed  from  St.  Clair  County,  111.,  to 
Jackson  County  in  1853.  She  was  born  in  the  for- 
mer county,  August  31,1839,  and  their  wedding  was 
celebrated  December  20,  1855.  They  began  their 
domestic  life  upon  a  farm  in  Ora  Township.  It 
was  covered  with  timber,  but  with  characteristic 
energy  Mr.  Cheatham  began  its  development  and 
cleared  one  hundred  and  fifty  acres,  making  one  of 
the  finest  farms  in  this  region.  In  1880  he  built 
a  two-story  brick  residence,  one  of  the  handsome 
homes  of  the  neighborhood,  and  there  resided  until 
1890,  when  he  removed  to  his  pleasant  home  in 
Ava. 

To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cheatham  were  born  six  chil- 
dren, of  whom  four  are  j^et  living:  Caroline,  wife 
of  Murray  Dean;  Frank,  who  married  Alice  Brett 
and  has  two  children;  Albert,  who  wedded  Ida 
Asbury,  by  whom  he  has  two  children;  and  Eva, 
who  completes  the  familj'.  The  household  is  a 
hospitable  one  and  its  members  rank  high  in  social 
circles.  Mr.  Cheatham  belongs  to  the  Free  Will 
Baptist  Church,  and  in  politics  has  been  a  life-long 
Democrat.  His  well  directed  efforts  have  won  him 
success  in  business  and  gained  him  the  handsome 
competence  which  now  enables  him  to  live  retired. 


)ERT  A.  ORLAND,  a  practical  and  skilled 
machinist,  who  is  now  foreman  of  the  ma- 
chine shops  and  roundhouse  of  the  Mobile 
&  Oliio  Railroad  at  Murpliysboro,  claims 
Ohio  as  the  state  of  his  nativity,  his  birth  having 
occurred  in  Cleveland,  on  the  7th  of  July,  1867. 
The  family  is  of  English  origin.  His  father,  W. 
P.  Orland,  was  born  in  England,  and  during  his 
boyhood  crossed  the  Atlantic,  becoming  a  resident 
of  Cleveland,  Ohio,  where  he  learned  the  machin- 
ist's trade.  He  became  an  expert  mechanic  and 
was  emplo3'ed  in  Cleveland  as  general  foreman  of 


646 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


the  shops  of  the  Big  Four  Railroad.  The  year 
1883  witnessed  his  arrival  in  Illinois,  and  he  is 
now  master  mechanic  of  tlie  Cairo  Division  of  the 
Big  Four  Railroad,  his  home  being  in  Mt.  Carmel, 
111.  In  the  Buckeye  Slate  he  wedded  Miss  Alice 
Hyde,  a  native  of  Cleveland,  and  a  daughter  of 
Addison  Hyde,  now  a  resident  of  Syracuse,  N.  Y. 

Our  subject  is  the  eldest  of  four  children,  and  in 
his  native  city  made  his  home  until  sixteen  years 
of  age,  attending  its  public  schools,  where  he  ac- 
quired a  good  practical  education.  In  1883  he 
went  to  Mattoon,  111.,  where  for  one  year  he  was 
employed  in  the  office  of  the  Big  Four  Railroad, 
and  in  1884  lie  entered  the  shops  at  that  place, 
serving  a  four  years'  term  of  apprenticeship  as  a 
machinist.  On  the  15th  of  March,  1889,  he  came 
to  Murphysboro,  where  Mr.  Davis  was  then  serv- 
ing as  master  mechanic.  He  worked  .is  a  machin- 
ist until  1891,  when  lie  was  promoted,  being  ap- 
pointed to  the  responsible  position  of  foreman  of 
the  machine  shops  and  roundhouse.  He  is  well 
liked  by  the  men  under  him  and  has  the  confidence 
and  trust  of  his  emplo^'ers,  for  he  is  faithful  to 
every  duty  and  the  trust  reposed  in  him. 

In  February,  1890,  in  Murphysboro,  was  cele- 
brated the  marriage  of  Mr.  Orland  and  Miss  Ze- 
relda  Riseling,  a  native  of  this  place.  Their 
union  has  been  blessed  with  one  child,  Frank. 
Although  their  residence  here  covers  only  a  few 
years,  they  have  already  won  many  friends  by 
their  excellencies  of  character.  Mr.  Oilaud  holds 
membership  with  the  Masonic  fraternitj',  and  in 
his  political  views  is  an  advocate  of  the  princi- 
ples of  the  Republican  party. 


J.  HEINECKE,  who  is  successfully  engaged 
in  merchandising  in  Du  Quoin,  was  born  in 
Saxony,  Germany,  November  3,  1849,  and 
is  a  son  of  Frederick  Heinecke,  who  was  a 
farmer  and  dealer  in  grain  in  the  Old  Country. 
He  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  1854  and  took  up  his 
residence  in  St.  Clair  County,  where  he  followed 
wagon-making.  Subsequently  he  removed  to  a 
farm  in  Randolph  County,  and  is  now  living  on  a 
farm   with    one    of    his   sons.    He  married  Emily 


Rieticher,  a 'Native  of  Germany,  who  died  August 
16,  1875,  at  the  age  of  fifty-five. 

Their  family  numbered  twelve  children — six 
sons  and  six  daughters — of  whom  four  sons  and 
two  daughters  are  yet  living.  Alwine  is  the  wife 
of  William  Dinges,  a  farmer  of  St.  Clair  County; 
Agnes  married  Godfrey  Eckert,  a  soldier  of  the 
late  war,  wlio  was  wounded,  and  after  carrying  a 
Rebel  bullet  for  twelve  years,  died  from  the  effects 
of  his  injury.  His  widow  has  since  been  married  to 
John  Ferdinand  Debro,  and  is  now  living  in  St. 
Louis.  Henry  T.  is  a  farmer  of  St.  Clair  County; 
William,  a  miner  of  Du  Quoin,  married  Sophia 
H.  Smith, and  Louis  is  a  farmer  of  St.  Clair  County. 

Our  subject  was  reared  upon  the  old  homestead 
and  received  but  limited  educational  privileges. 
He  remained  with  his  father  upon  the  farm  un- 
til twenty-four  years  of  age,  when  he  married 
Elizabeth  Wildy,  a  native  of  St.  Clair  County, 
where  her  father,  who  was  a  native  of  Switzer- 
land, settled  in  a  very  early  day.  To  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Heinecke  were  born  nine  children,  of  whom 
six  are  yet  living:  Henry  T.,  eighteen  years  of 
age,  who  aids  his  father  in  the  store;  Caroline, 
aged  sixteen;  Walter,  who  is  fourteen  j'ears  of  age 
and  is  also  in  the  store;  Elanora  Agnes,  who  is  ten 
years  old  and  attends  school;  Otto  S.,  aged  eight, 
and  Gustauf  E.,  aged  sis.  The  three  other  cliil- 
dreu  died  in  childhood. 

After  his  marriage  Mr.  Heinecke  engaged  in  the 
operation  of  a  rented  farm  in  Randolph  County 
for  a  year,  and  then  followed  farming  in  St.  Clair 
County  for  two  years,  after  which  he  was  forced  to 
abandon  that  occupation  on  account  of  ill  health. 
He  removed  to  Lenzburg  Station,  where  he  en- 
gaged in  the  hotel,  saloon  and  livery  business, 
which  he  successf  UII3'  followed  for  ten  years.  Dur- 
ing that  time  he  became  interested  in  coal  mining, 
which  proved  a  profitable  venture.  At  length  he 
sold  his  mining  interests,  bought  land,  and  also 
purchased  and  operated  a  creamery  for  a  time. 
In  1889  he  embarked  in  general  merchandising  in 
Du  Quoin,  and  has  since  built  up  a  large  business, 
having  a  constantly  increasing  trade.  He  also 
owns  his  farm  in  St.  Clair  County  and  has  been 
very  successful  in  carrying  on  his  interests. 

While  living  in  St.  Clair  County  Mr.  Heinecke 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


647 


served  as  President  of  the  Town  Board  of  Lenz- 
burg  for  several  years.  For  four  years  he  was 
Township  Supervisor,  and  also  served  on  the 
School  Board.  He  has  always  been  a  Democrat  in 
polities  and  is  a  prominent  member  of  the  Luth- 
eran Church.  He  served  as  a  Trustee  in  St.  Clair 
County  and  is  President  of  the  Board  of  Trustees 
of  the  church  in  Du  Quoin.  Socially,  he  is  an 
Odd  Fellow  and  has  filled  all  the  chairs  of  his 
lodge.  He  is  also  a  Knight  of  Pythias  and  he- 
longs  to  two  orders,  the  D.  O.  H.  and  the  U.  O.  T. 
B.  In  all  of  the  organizations  he  takes  an  active 
part.  In  the  community  where  he  lives  he  is 
widely  and  favorably  known,  and  with  pleasure 
we  present  to  our  readers  this  record  of  his  life. 


^f  OHN  FREDERICK  RAUSCH,  who  is  fore- 
man of  the  car  department  of  the  Mobile  & 
Ohio  Railroad  at  Murphysboro,  and  also 
Chief  of  the  fire  company  of  that  road,  is 
a  native  of  the  Buckeje  State.  He  was  born  in 
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  December  5,  1851,  and  is  a  son 
of  John  F.  and  Matilda  (Lentsch)  Rauseh.  The 
parents  were  both  natives  of  Germany.  The  pa- 
ternal grandfather  carried  on  a  feed  store  and  en- 
gaged in  teaming  in  that  country  and  also  in  Cin- 
cinnati, after  his  emigration  to  America. 

The  father  of  our  subject  was  reared  in  Cincin- 
nati, and  followed  the  same  business  as  his  father. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  Union  Fire  Engine  & 
Hose  Company,  and  was  a  stalwart  and  active 
man,  but  in  1853  was  stricken  with  cholera  and 
soon  died.  Mrs.  Rauseh  came  to  the  United  States 
with  her  parents  during  her  girlhood,  the  family 
locating  in  Evansville,  Ind.,  and  later  in  Louis- 
ville, Ky.  After  the  death  of  her  first  husband, 
she  became  the  wife  of  Joseph  Loesch,  who  died 
in  1862.  They  had  one  child,  now  deceased.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Rauseh  had  two  children,  the  daughter 
being  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Boyer,  of  Louisville,  Ky. 

At  the  age  of  four  years,  John  F.  went  with  his 
mother  to  Louisville.  In  1863,  he  was  serving  as 
bartender  when  Colonel  Kingslej',  who  came  in 
to  get  a  drink,  intrusted  -$1,000  to  his  care.  On 
his  return  for  the  money  the  Colonel  said,  "Young 


man,  you  shall  have  a  better  job,"  and  he  was 
made  messenger  under  Capt.  J.  G.  Klink  and  Col. 
J.  R.  Delvechio  in  Louisville,  receiving  $50  per 
month  and  his  board.  This  position  he  held  un- 
til the  close  of  the  war.  One  day  while  out  on 
an  expedition  he  was  confronted  by  Sue  Mun- 
day,  who  called  halt,  but  Mr.  Rauseh  whipped  up 
his  horse  and  at  length  made  his  escape.  Later  he 
saw  his  pursuer  hung. 

After  the  war,  our  subject  served  a  four  j-ears' 
apprenticeship  as  ear  builder  with  Colonel  Del- 
vechio, President  of  llie  Market  Street  Railroad, 
and  then  became  foreman  of  the  shops,  which  po- 
sition he  filled  until  the  company  sold  out.  He 
was  then  with  the  Ohio  Falls  Car  Works  at  Jeffer- 
sonville,  Ind.,  for  two  years,  and  afterwards  served 
as  car  builder  at  Louisville  for  the  Paducah  Rail- 
road. In  1880,  he  went  to  East  St.  Louis  and  was 
placed  in  charge  of  the  shops  of  the  St.  Louis  & 
Cairo  Railroad,  and  continued  as  foreman  after 
the  purchase  of  that  road  by  the  Mobile  &  Ohio 
Railroad.  In  the  fall  of  1889,  when  the  shops 
were  built  at  Murphysboro,  he  was  made  foreman 
at  this  place  and  has  had  entire  charge  since,  with 
about  forty  men  under  him.  He  understands 
every  department  of  the  business,  and  his  practical 
knowledge  well  fits  him  for  the  responsible  posi- 
tion. 

Mr.  Rauseh  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the 
Mobile  &  Ohio  Fire  Company,  and  by  Mr.  Clarke 
was  appointed  Chief.  Tliis  company  won  the  first 
prize  at  Jonesboro  and  Carbondale.  It  was  organ- 
ized for  the  preservation  of  railroad  propert3',  but 
also  acts  as  a  fire  company  for  the  city.  Our  sub- 
ject has  now  been  foreman  of  car  shops  for  eigh- 
teen j'ears,  which  fact  indicates  a  faithful  service 
and  is  a  record  of  which  he  may  well  be  proud. 

In  Louisville,  Ky.,  in  1873,  Mr.  Rauseh  wedded 
Miss  Anne  Kesler,  a  native  of  Germany,  who  came 
to  this  country  in  1865.  They  have  eight  chil- 
dren: Christina  A.,  Julius  C,  Bettie  L.,  Ida  M., 
John  F.,  Freida  D.,  Charles  H.  and  Annie  W.  Mr. 
Rauseh  joined  the  Masonic  fraternity  in  Hardin 
County,  Ky.,  and  now  belongs  to  Murphysboro 
Lodge  No.  498,  A.  F.  &  A.  M.  He  also  holds 
membership  with  the  Lutheran  Cliurch.  In  poli- 
tics he  is  a  Democrat,  and  was  one  of  the  organ- 


648 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


izers  of  the  Gill  Guards,  of  which  he  was  elected 
President.  He  is  also  the  composer  of  the  Gill 
campaign  sono;. 


ON.  THOMAS  M.  LOGAN,  President  of  the 
Street  Railwaj'  Company  of  Murphysboro, 
is  the  oldest  living  settler  of  this  place,  and 
one  of  the  first  pioneers  of  Jackson  Coun- 
He  has  been  prominent  in  the  history  of  the 
community  for  many  years,  and  like  his  illustrious 
brother.  Gen.  John  A.  Logan,  has  become  widely 
known  through  business  and  social  interests. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  Murphysboro,  August 
1,  1828,  and  is  a  son  of  Dr.  John  Logan,  a  native 
of  Ireland.  The  grandfather,  who  also  bore  the 
name  of  John,  brought  the  famil}'  to  America  when 
his  son  was  only  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  located 
in  Ohio,  where  he  engaged  in  farming.  He  after- 
ward removed  to  Perry  County,  Mo.,  and  subse- 
quently came  to  this  county.  When  the  father  of 
our  subject  was  a  young  man  he  went  south  with 
a  stock  drover  and  formed  the  acquaintance  of 
Dr.  Clayburn,  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  with  whom  he 
studied  medicine  for  four  j-ears.  He  then  engaged 
in  practice  in  Perry  County,  Mo.  In  1824  he  lo- 
cated in  Brownsville,  then  the  county  seat  of  this 
county,  and  the  following  year  married  Elizabeth 
Jenkins,  who  was  a  native  of  Virginia,  as  was  her 
father,  Alex  Jenkins.  He  was  a  farmer  and  re- 
moved with  his  family  to  South  Carolina,  thence 
to  Tennessee,  and  later  to  Union  County,  111., 
where  he  became  an  earlj'  settler  and  spent  his  re- 
maining days.  He  raised  a  company  for  the  Black 
Hawk  War  and  became  a  Colonel  in  that  service. 
His  son,  Alex,  served  as  Lieutenant-Governor  of 
the  state. 

In  1826  John  Logan  removed  to  Murphysboro, 
although  the  town  had  not  been  started  at  that 
time,  and  purchased  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres 
of  wild  land.  About  1842  commissioners  were 
appointed  to  chose  a  site  for  the  county  seat,  and 
they  located  it  upon  the  farm  of  Dr.  Logan,  who 
donated  twenty  acres  to  the  town,  in  the  center  of 
which  the  court  house  was  built.  The  Doctor  pur- 
chased several  lots  and  from  this  point  practiced 


medicine,  receiving  calls  from  a  radius  of  over 
thirtj'  miles.  He  also  built  a  hotel  on  the  present 
site  of  the  Logan  House,  but  his  tireless  labors 
proved  too  much  for  him  and  undoubtedly  hast- 
ened his  death.  He  several  times  served  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  State  Legislature,  being  elected  on  the 
Democratic  ticket.  He  was  a  member  of  the  State 
Medical  Society,  and  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church.  He  served  as  surgeon  in  the  Black  Hawk 
War,  and  was  ever  prominent  in  public  affairs  in 
this  community.  The  death  of  this  honored  and 
worthy  gentleman  occurred  in  1853,  at  the  age  of 
sixty-five  years  and  four  months.  His  wife  passed 
away  in  1876.  In  the  family  were  eight  children, 
of  whom  five  besides  our  subject  grew  to  mature 
years,  namely:  Gen.  John  A.  Logan,  whose  name 
is  known  throughout  the  world;  Mrs.  Dorothy 
Tliomas,  who  died  in  Murphysboro;  Mrs.  Augustine 
Rogers,  who  lives  in  this  place;  Hon.  William, 
an  attornej'-at-law,  who  served  as  a  member  of  the 
State  Legislature,  and  died  in  1867,  and  James,  a 
merchant  of  Olney,  111. 

Amid  the  wild  scenes  of  the  frontier  Thomas 
Logan  was  reared.  For  a  time  there  were  no  schools, 
but  afterward  a  log  school  with  slab  seats  was  built 
a  mile  and  a-half  from  his  home.  It  took  two  days 
and  two  nights  to  go  to  mill  and  return,  including 
the  time  while  the  grist  was  being  ground.  Deer, 
wolves  and  bear  were  plentj';  farming  was  done 
with  oxen,  with  a  wooden  mold-board  on  the  plow, 
and  they  used  to  cradle  and  mow  with  the  reap 
hook  and  scythe.  Mr.  Logan  bought  the  second 
reaper  in  the  county.  He  remained  at  home  until 
twenty  years  of  age,  and  then  rented  land  for  three 
j'ears  in  connection  with  Mr.  Osborn,  also  operat- 
ing a  horse  sawmill  for  eighteen  montiis. 

Subsequently  Mr.  Logan  purchased  land,  three 
hundred  acres,  adjoining  the  old  homestead,  which 
he  cleared  and  improved,  carrying  on  general 
farming.  He  also  raised  good  grades  of  cattle  and 
hogs,  and  in  1855  he  began  breeding  thorough  bred 
horses.  For  thirteen  years  he  had  a  stable,  and  at 
one  time  owned  some  of  the  finest  horses  in  the 
country.  In  April,  1891,  his  stable  was  destroyed 
by  fire;  sixteen  head  of  the  finest  standard  bred 
horses  were  burned  to  death,  and  three  thousand 
bushels  of  grain  and  a  considerable  quantity  of 


_J^-<^t' 


.c 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


651 


hay  were  consumed  in  the  flames.  For  twenty- 
seven  years  one  trainer  worked  in  his  employ. 
Among  his  horses  were  "Blind  Tcm,"  "Prairie 
Bird,"  "Stocking  Leg,"  "Cricket,"  "Logan,"  "Sal- 
lie  L.,"  "Prince  Albert,"  "Pet,"  and  others.  In 
connection  with  General  Logan,  he  owned  six  hun- 
dred acres  of  fine  land,  and  he  now  with  J.  C.  Clark 
has  three  hundred  acres  adjoining  the  corporation 
limits  of  Murphysboro.  In  connection  with  J.  C. 
Clark,  in  1892,  he  laid  out  the  Clark  and  Logan 
Addition  to  Murphysboro,  comprising  eight}-  acres. 
This  includes  .John  A.  I^ogan  Park,  a  ten-acre  tract 
of  land,  nicel}'  improved  and  cultivated. 

In  1852  Mr.  Logan  married  Aletha  Gill,  who  was 
born  in  Elk  Prairie,  and  was  a  daughter  of  Peter 
Gill,  one  of  the  first  settlers  and  County  Judges 
of  this  communitj'.  She  died  in  1857,  and  in  Au- 
gust, 1874,  Mr.  Logan  wedded  Miss  Sallie  Oliver, 
a  native  of  Dayton,  Ohio,  and  a  daughter  of 
Thomas  Oliver.  Prior  to  her  marriage  she  engaged 
in  school  teaching.  She  is  a  very  active  and  prom- 
inent worker  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church, 
and  a  leader  in  Sunday-school  work. 

Other  business  interests  have  occupied  the  atten- 
tion of  Mr.  Logan,  who  has  been  very  prominent 
in  the  upbuilding  and  development  of  this  com- 
munity. In  1892  the  Murphysboro  Street  Railway 
Company  was  incorporated  and  the  tracks  laid.  He 
is  one  of  its  Directors  and  has  been  its  President 
from  the  beginning.  He  has  built  two  mills  in  this 
place.  In  connection  with  Mr.  Osborn  he  built 
the  Manufacturers  Mill,  and  later  the  Logan  & 
Deshan  Mill.  Both  of  these  he  has  since  sold.  In 
1891  he  bought  the  site  of  the  original  Logan 
Hotel,  and  built  the  present  house  at  a  cost  of  ^33,- 
000.  It  is  a  three-story  structure,  and  the  finest 
building  in  the  citj-.  He  also  erected  the  Hamilton 
House,  and  has  built  and  sold  other  brick  blocks. 
He  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the  First  ^National 
Bank,  and  is  still  a  stockholder  and  director.  He 
aided  in  the  organization  and  is  a  stockholder  in 
the  City  National  Bank.  In  politics  he  was  a  Dem- 
ocrat until  the  organization  of  the  Republican 
partj",  since  which  time  he  has  been  one  of  its  stal- 
wart supporters.  Could  the  work  and  its  results 
which  Mr.  Logan  has  accomplished  be  withdrawn 
from  Murphysboro,  the  city  would  at  best  be  only 


a  town  of  little  importance,  for  his  labors  have 
been  prominent  factors  in  its  upbuilding  and  in 
the  promotion  of  its  best  interests. 


yE.  TALBOTT,  who  is  now  living  a  retired 
life  in  Ava,  claims  Tennessee  as  the  state 
of  his  nativit}',  his  birth  having  occurred 
in  Smith  County,  April  20,  1817.  The  family  is 
of  English  origin,  and  at  an  early  day  in  Colonial 
history  was  established  in  Virginia,  where  Thomas 
Talbott,  grandfather  of  our  subject,  was  born. 
William  R.  Talbott,  the  father,  was  born  near 
Fredericksburg,  Va.,  in  1796,  and  served  under 
General  Harrison  in  the  "War  of  1812,  taking  i)art 
in  the  battles  of  the  northwest.  He  also  fought 
under  General  Jackson  at  New  Orleans.  Remov- 
ing to  Tennessee,  he  there  married  Martha  M. 
Giflford,  who  was  born  near  Knoxville  in  1793. 

In  October,  1820,  William  R.  Talbott  and  his 
wife  came  to  Illinois,  locating  two  miles  north  of 
Kaskaskia,  and  two  years  later  removed  to  Kin- 
kaid  Township,  Jackson  County,  leasing  a  farm 
from  Captain  McDonougli,  the  pioneer  mail  car- 
rier of  this  section.  Later  they  located  two  miles 
north  of  Rockwood,  Randolph  County,  but  after 
four  j^ears  thej-  came  to  Kinkaid  Township,  set- 
tling on  section  33,  where  the}'  made  a  permanent 
location.  Mr.  Talbott  died  November  16,  1847, 
and  his  wife  passed  away  April  12,  1841.  Of  tlieir 
eight  children  but  two  are  now  living:  W.  E.,  and 
Martha  M.,  wife  of  Samuel  Bowers,  a  farmer  of 
Kinkaid  Township,  by  whom  she  has  three  chil- 
dren. The  mother  was  a  member  of  the  Free 
Will  Baptist  Church,  and  the  father  was  a  Jack- 
souiau  Democrat. 

Mr.  Talbott  of  this  sketch  was  only  three  years 
old  when  brought  by  his  parents  to  Illinois.  His 
mother  carried  a  baby  in  her  arms,  and  he  rode  be- 
hind her  on  horseback.  In  1826  he  entered  the 
first  school  taught  on  the  Mississippi  River  Bluff, 
and  in  his  youth  obtained  such  education  as  the 
schools  of  the  neighborhood  afforded,  but  his  privi- 
leges were  very  meagre.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  as- 
sumed the  management  of  the  farm,  for  his  father 
was  in  poor  health.     He  drove  an  ox-cart  to  mill 


652 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


at  Steeleville,  and  experienced  all  the  difficulties 
of  pioneer  life.  For  two  years'  service  after  at- 
taining his  m.ajority  his  father  gave  him  $200, 
with  which  he  entered  eighty  acres  of  wild  land 
on  section  22,  Kinkaid  Township.,  and  began  the 
development  of  a  farm. 

On  the  14th  of  January,  1841,  Mr.  Talbott  mar- 
ried Elizabeth,  daughter  of  'Squire  Cr.ane,  who  was 
a  territorial  ranger  and  an  early  settler  in  this 
community.  She  was  born  in  Kinkaid  Township, 
June  7,  1820.  They  began  their  domestic  life  in 
a  log  cabin,  but  as  the  years  passed,  they  were  en- 
abled to  secure  the  comforts  and  conveniences  of 
civilization,  and  theirs  became  one  of  the  finest 
farms  of  the  townsliii).  They  made  it  their  home 
until  1887,  since  whicii  time  they  have  lived  re- 
tired in  Ava.  Mr.  Talbott  now  owns  fourteen 
hundred  and  seventy  acres  of  land,  and  has  given 
five  hundred  acres  to  his  children. 

In  the  family  were  twelve  children,  six  of  whom 
are  yet  living:  Mrs.  Martha  M.  McCormick,  S.  A., 
Thomas  R.,  Peter  K.,  William  R.  and  Mrs.Sophro- 
na  J.  Austin.  All  reside  in  Kinkaid  Township. 
S.  A.  served  in  the  Civil  War,  and  was  held  pris- 
oner for  eighteen  months.  The  children  were 
given  good  educational  ad  vantages,  and  were  there- 
by fitted  for  the  practical  duties  of  life. 

In  politics.  Mr.  Talbott  has  long  been  a  Demo- 
crat. For  ten  years  he  served  as  Supervisor,  and 
for  many  years  has  been  School  Director.  He  is 
the  oldest  living  settler  in  Kinkaid  Township,  his 
residence  in  Illinois  covering  a  period  of  seventy- 
four  years.  He  has  watched  the  entire  growth  and 
development  of  the  county,  has  aided  in  its  ad- 
vancement, and  well  deserves  mention  among  its 
honored  pioneers. 

i\\  URRAY  DEAN,  who  is  prominently  con- 
nected with  the  business  interests  of  Ava, 
being  now  engaged  in  milling,  merchan- 
dising and  banking,  was  born  December 
26,  1848,  in  Liberty  (now  Rockwood),  III.  The 
common  schools  afforded  him  his  early  educa- 
tional privileges,  and  later  he  studied  in  the  Chester 
High  School  and  in  an  academy  in  Nashville.  He 
received   his  business  training  as  clerk  in  his  fa- 


ther's store,  and  then  was  employed  as  salesman 
for  John  C.  Clendennen,  of  Rockwood,  until  1872. 
In  that  year  he  traveled  through  the  south,  hand- 
ling nursery'  stock,  and  in  August,  1873,  came  to 
Ava,  where  he  was  made  Superintendent  in  his 
father's  mill,  of  which  he  is  now  proprietor. 

Four  members  of  the  family  became  owners  of 
the  mill  in  1877,  and  later  Murray  and  his  brother 
W.  C.  bought  out  the  other  partners,  running  the 
business  together  until  Jul}',  1893,  when  our  sub- 
ject became  sole  owner.  The  mill  is  supplied  with  a 
full  roller  process  and  the  latest  improved  machin- 
ery, and  has  a  capacity  of  two  hundred  barrels  of 
flour  per  day.  Extensive  shipments  of  the  leading 
brands, "Belle  of  Ava"  and  "White  Lil}',"  are  made 
to  the  south.  Employment  is  furnished  to  fifteen 
men,  and  fifteen  men  are  also  emplo^'ed  in  the 
cooper  shop,  which  is  run  in  connection  with  the 
mill.  The  elevator  has  a  capacity  of  forty  thousand 
bushels,  and  both  it  and  the  mill  are  run  by  steam 
power. 

In  1875,  in  connection  with  his  brother  AV.  C, 
Mr.  Dean  opened  a  general  store  and  continued 
the  same  under  the  firm  name  of  Dean  Brothers 
until  1889,  when  William  Divers  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  firm.  In  1891  our  subject  bought  out 
his  brother,  and  operations  are  now  carried  on 
under  the  firm  name  of  William  Divers  &  Co., 
who  do  a  business  of  §50,000  per  year.  They 
erected  a  three-story  brick  building,  80x50  feet, 
with  a  storeroom  and  warehouse  on  the  lower 
floor  and  a  storeroom  and  offices  on  the  second 
floor,  while  the  third  floor  is  used  as  a  Masonic 
hall  and  is  one  of  the  finest  in  southern  Illinois. 
Murraj'  Dean  is  also  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Dean 
Brothers,  bankers  and   lumber  merchants  of  Ava. 

In  1874  Mr.  Dean  w.is  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Mary  C.  Cheatham,  who  was  born  in  Jackson 
County  in  1856,  and  is  a  daughter  of  Noah  Cheat- 
ham, now  of  Ava.  They  had  nine  children,  eight 
of  whom  are  yet  living,  Sadie,  Homer  Kent,  Ma- 
mie, Dollle,  Maud,  Charles,  James  Lester  and 
Ralph. 

In  1890  Mr.  Dean  erected  his  fine  home,  a  two- 
storj'  and  basement  brick  residence  of  ten  rooms, 
supplied  with  all  modern  covenlences  and  accesso- 
ries, including  hot  and  cold  water,  and  is  heated  by 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


653 


steam.  It  is  elegantly  and  tastefully  furnished 
and  is  ever  open  for  the  reception  of  their  many 
friends.  The  family  is  one  of  the  most  prominent 
in  the  county.  In  politics  Mr.  Dean  is  a  Democrat 
and  has  for  several  terms  served  on  the  A'illage 
Board.  His  wife  is  one  of  the  leading  members  of 
the  Free  Will  Baptist  Church.  A  man  of  good 
business  ability,  sagacious  and  far-sighted,  Mr. 
Dean  has  through  his  own  efforts  won  the  success 
which  has  crowned  his  life,  and  therefore  well  de- 
serves his  prosperity. 


<J1  1^,  K.  TOLER  is  now  serving  as  Deputy 
\/v//  ^^^'^^^  of  Jackson  County.  At  this  writ- 
\^s§  ing,  in  December,  1893,  he  is  numbered 
among  the  residents  of  Carbondale,  but  early  in  the 
following  year  he  expects  to  remove  to  Murphys- 
boro.  He  has  the  honor  of  being  a  native  of  Illi- 
nois, his  birth  having  occurred  in  Moscow,  Union 
County,  on  the  11th  of  May,  1866.  His  father, 
John  W.  Toler,  was  also  born  in  that  county,  where 
the  grandfather,  Erwin  Toler,  settled  in  an  early 
day.  The  latter  was  a  native  of  North'  Carolina, 
and  was  a  farmer  by  occupation.  Tlie  family  is  of 
English  descent.  During  the  Mexican  War,  the 
grandfather  was  a  defender  of  the  country.  Later 
he  removed  to  Murphysboro. 

John  W.  Toler  was  reared  in  this  state,  and  in 
1875  embarked  in  merchandising  in  this  place, 
where  he  continued  for  some  time  as  a  dealer  in 
groceries,  meats  and  hardware.  In  1886,  he  went 
to  Carbondale,  where  he  is  now  engaged  in  the 
grocery  business.  He-  served  as  Postmaster  under 
President  Cleveland's  first  administration.  In  the 
late  war  he  joined  the  Thirty-first  Illinois  Infan- 
try, and  became  Captain  of  Company  D.  He  was 
three  times  badly  wounded,  but  continued  in  the 
service  until  the  close  of  the  war,  when  he  was 
honorably  discharged,  in  the  year  1865.  He  par- 
ticipated in  the  Grand  Review  in  Washington, 
and  then  returned  to  his  home.  For  two  years 
he  carried  on  farming  and  then  came  to  Mur- 
physboro. For  eight  years  he  served  as  Deputy 
Sheriff  under  Hanks  and  Saras,  and  for  a  few 
weeks  after  the  death  of  Mr.  Campbell,  acted  as 


Sheriff.  He  married  Miss  Harriet  Spiller,  a  native 
of  Union  County,  111.,  and  a  daughter  of  William 
Spiller,  a  well  known  farmer  of  that  county'.  The 
death  of  Mrs.  Toler  occurred  in  1886.  In  the  fam- 
ily were  seven  children,  six  sons  and  a  daughter. 

W.  E.  Toler,  whose  name  heads  this  record,  is 
the  eldest.  He  was  reared  in  this  county,  attended 
the  public  schools  of  Murphysboro,  was  graduated 
from  the  high  school,  and  in  1885  went  to  Car- 
bondale, spending  one  year  as  a  student  in  the 
Southern  Illinois  Normal.  He  was  then  for  one 
year  employed  in  the  train  department  of  the  Illi- 
nois Central  Railroad,  after  which  he  was  connec- 
ted with  the  Chicago  and  Texas  Road  for  three 
years.  In  1891,  he  embarked  in  the  butchering 
business  in  Carbondale,  in  which  he  continued 
until  March,  1893,  when  his  market  was  destroyed 
by  fire,  and  he  did  not  rebuild.  On  the  8th  of 
August,  following,  he  was  appointed  Deputy 
Sheriff,  and  has  since  filled  the  position. 

On  the  12th  of  December,  1889,  was  celebrated 
the  marriage  of  Mr.  Toler  and  Miss  Sarah  Chapman, 
a  native  of  this  county.  The  wedding  ceremony 
was  performed  in  Carbondale.  Two  children  now 
grace  the  union,  a  son  and  a  daughter,  Katie  and 
Walter.  They  occupy  a  pleasant  residence  in  Car- 
bondale, which  is  the  property  of  Mr.  Toler.  In 
politics  he  has  been  a  supporter  of  Democratic 
principles  since  attaining  his  majority. 


^^EORGE  HUTHMACHER,  an  enterprising 
[l[  ,_—,  citizen  of  Murphysboro,  who  is  now  serving 
*^\^4  ''■*  Deputy  County  Sheriff  under  his  brother, 
Chailes  C,  whose  sketch  appears  elsewhere  in  this 
volume,  has  spent  his  entire  life  in  Illinois.  He  is 
a  native  of  Sandoval,  was  born  on  the  1st  of  Feb- 
ruary, 1869,  and  is  the  3'^oungest  son  in  a  family  of 
seven  living  children.  With  his  parents  he  came 
to  this  county  during  his  early  infancy,  and  the 
da3's  of  his  boyhood  and  youth  were  spent  in  Grand 
Tower,  where  he  attended  the  public  schools  and 
acquired  his  literary  education.  In  1888-89,  he 
attended  Bryant  &  Stratton's  Business  College  of 
St.  Louis. 

Returning  to  the  home  farm,  Mr.  Huthmacher 
there  remained  until  December,  1890,  when  he  was 


654 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


appointed  first  Deputy  Sheriff  by  his  brother, 
Charles  C,  wlioliad  been  elected  to  office  that  year. 
In  December,  1891,  he  and  a  constable  had  an  en- 
counter with  a  fugitive  from  the  Franklin  County 
Jail,  a  horse  thief.  They  learned  that  he  was  in 
the  Mississippi  bottoms  on  the  Big  Lake,  in  his 
uncle's  house.  Mr.  Iluthmacher  and  the  constable 
went  to  the  place  about  ten  o'clock  in  the  fore- 
noon and  entered  the  house  to  arrest  the  fellow. 
The  thief  pulled  out  a  revolver,  and  after  that  was 
taken  from  him  bj-  Mr.  Iluthmacher,  he  pulled  out 
another.  He  was  then  twice  shot  b}'  the  constable, 
once  in  the  jaw  and  again  in  the  breast.  He  was 
then  captured,  tried  and  convicted,  and  is  now 
serving  a  nine  j-ears'  term  in  the  penitentiary  at 
Joliet.  This  incident  well  indicates  the  bravery 
and  fearlessness  which  ably  fits  our  subject  for  the 
duties  of  his  present  position. 

Mr.  Huthmacher  is  a  stockholder  in  the  Jackson 
County  Building  and  Loan  Association.  He  be- 
longs to  the  Fraternal  Mystic  Circle,  in  which  he  is 
now  serving  as  Treasurer,  and  in  bis  political 
views  is  a  Democrat.  He  has  many  friends 
throughout  the  community,  and  is  well  known  in 
the  county,  which  has  been  his  home  during  the 
greater  part  of  his  life. 


ENRY  HORN  is  prominently  connected 
with  the  business  interests  of  Du  Quoin, 
where  he  is  engaged  in  banking,  merchan- 
dising and  coal  dealing.  He  was  born  in  a 
little  village  near  Cologne,  Germany,  August  2, 
183 1.  His  father  was  a  very  poor  man,  and  Henry 
received  but  limited  educational  privileges,  at- 
tending the  village  school  onlj'  until  twelve  years 
of  age,  when  he  was  forced  to  start  out  in  life  for 
himself.  From  that  early  age  he  has  been  depend- 
ent on  his  own  resources,  and  the  success  of  his 
life,  for  which  he  deserves  great  credit,  is  the  re- 
ward of  his  own  labors.  He  was  first  employed  in 
a  restaurant  as  a  waiter.  In  1800  he  came  to 
America  without  means,  and  worked  for  a  time  in 
the  east.  He  then  emigrated  westward,  locating 
in  the  northern  |)art  of  Illinois,  and  there  re- 
mained until  the  financial  panic  of  1857,  when  he 


lost  what  little  money  he  had  saved.  It  was  then 
that  he  came  to  Du  Quoin,  where,  with  less  than 
$100,  he  established  a  little  business. 

From  that  day  Mr.  Horn  has  prospered,  and  has 
rapidly  won  a  most  handsome  competence.  He 
embarked  in  general  merchandising,  and  when  he 
had  become  well  established  in  that  line,  lie  became 
interested  in  coal  mines.  In  1877  he  established 
the  Du  Quoin  Bank,  in  companj'  with  P.  N.  Pope, 
who  withdrew  from  the  same  some  3ears  ago,  leav- 
ing Mr.  Horn  sole  proprietor.  In  1878,  in  com- 
pany with  JMr.  Pope  and  Judge  Wall,  he  built  the 
St.  Nicholas  Hotel,  but  afterward  sold  his  interest 
in  that  property  to  the  two  partners.  He  is  now 
the  proprietor  of  Horn's  Coalery  Company, one  of 
the  most  extensive  mines  of  this  place,  which  has 
a  capacity  of  one  thousand  tons  per  daj'.  He  is 
also  largelj'  interested  in  stock  farms,  and  in  1884 
he  went  to  England  to  purchase  fine  stock  for  the 
same.  He  has  also  made  two  trips  to  his  native 
country. 

In  1861  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  Mr. 
Horn  and  Miss  Mary  Feanans,  of  Ashley,  111., 
and  to  them  were  born  seven  children,  who  are 
yet  living.  They  have  also  lost  six  children. 
Frank  was  educated  in  the  college  at  St.  Louis, 
and  is  now  cashier  in  the  Du  Quoin  Bank;  Mary, 
who  was  educated  in  Belleville,  111.,  now  has  charge 
of  the  large  mercantile  establishment;  Thomas, 
who  was  educated  at  the  State  University  of  Cham- 
paign, is  the  Superintendent  of  Horn's  Coalery 
Companj';  Minnie,  who  was  educated  ata  convent 
in  St.  Louis,  is  now  Assistant  Cashier  of  the  bank; 
Katie  is  the  wife  of  N.  G.  Park,  a  prominent  drug- 
gist and  the  son  of  Judge  Park,  of  Du  Quoin; 
Lottie  has  completed  her  education  and  is  at  home 
with  her  parents;  while  Henry,  the  youngest,  is 
still  in  school. 

It  will  be  seen  that  Mr.  Horn  has  given  his  chil- 
dren excellent  educational  advantages,  fitting  them 
for  the  practical  duties  of  life,  and  then  thej'  have 
received  the  training  of  actual  business  life  by 
their  labors  in  the  various  fields  mentioned.  Mr. 
Horn  and  his  family  are  members  of  the  Catholic 
Church,  and  when  the  new  house  of  worship  was 
built,  he  donated  the  sum  of  810,000  to  its  erec- 
tion.    He  is  very   generous    and    liberal   toward 


PORTRAIT  AKD  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


655 


those  enterprises  which  are  calculated  to  prove  of 
public  benefit,  and  is  therefore  a  valued  citizen  of 
the  community.  Previous  to  his  trip  to  England 
in  1884  he  was  a  Democrat,  but  while  abroad  he 
saw  the  effects  of  free  trade  upon  the  country,  and 
changing  his  views  in  consequence,  has  since  been 
a  most  stalwart  Republican.  His  success  in  life 
seems'  almost  incredible  when  we  know  that  he 
came  to  this  countrj^  empty-handed,  j-et  neverthe- 
less he  has  become  the  wealthiest  citizen  of  Perry 
Countv.  He  is  still  as  active  in  business  as  when 
he  was  striving  to  get  a  start  in  life,  his  time  be- 
ing never  idly  spent.  His  example  is  well  worthy 
of  emulation,  and  should  serve  to  encourage  others 
who  in  voutb  are  not  endowed  bv  fortune. 


[^  OX.  W.  E.  BROOKINGS,  who  is  Mayor  of  Du 
Quoin,  and  one  of  the  leading  and  wealthy 
business  men  of  this  cit}-,  was  born  in  Faj'- 
ette  County,  Pa.,  on  the  4tb  of  Februar}', 
1849.  His  father,  Richard  Brookings,  was  a  na- 
tive of  Mainland,  born  in  1802,  in  Cecil  County. 
Removing  to  Fayette  County,  Pa.,  he  there  en- 
gaged in  the  coal  and  coke  business  until  the 
spring  of  1857,  when  he  emigrated  westward  and 
took  up  his  residence  on  a  farm  near  Du  Quoin. 
His  time  and  attention,  however,  were  devoted  to 
mercantile  pursuits,  which  he  carried  on  success- 
fully for  a  number  of  j'ears,  accumulating  a  con- 
siderable property.  His  death  here  occurred  on  the 
28th  of  April,  1885.  His  father,  Charles  G.  Brook- 
ings, was  the  son  of  Charles  Brookings,  Sr.,  a  na- 
tive of  England,  and  the  founder  of  the  family  in 
America.  The  mother  of  our  subject  bore  the 
maiden  name  of  Susan  E.  Stevens.  She  was  born 
in  Fayette  County,  Pa.,  and  her  progenitors  were 
genuine  Highland  Scotch.  She  died  in  Du  Quoin 
on  the  1st  of  June,  1891,  and  her  loss  was  deeply 
mourned.  Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Brookings  were 
prominent  people,  and  were  held  in  high  regard 
by  all. 

Maj'or  Brookings  was  the  j'oungest  in  a  family 
of  sis  children,  but  has  onl)'  one  brother  now  liv- 
ing, A.  C,  a  leading  druggist  of  Du  Quoin.  Our 
subject  was  onl}'  eight  j-ears  of  age  when  with  his 


parents  he  came  to  Du  Quoin,  where  he  acquired 
his  education  in  the  public  schools.  His  business 
training  was  received  in  his  father's  store,  where 
he  continued  as  an  employe  until  he  succeeded  to 
the  business  about  1874.  At  his  death  the  father 
left  a  large  estate,  and  with  the  share  which  our 
subject  received  he  began  business  operations,  and 
bj'  his  well  directed  efforts  has  accumulated  much 
valuable  property,  and  is  regarded  as  one  of  the 
wealthy  citizens  of  the  county.  In  connection 
with  his  brother  he  owns  the  Brookings  Block,  on 
Main  Street,  which  is  the  finest  business  block  in 
the  citj-.  He  has  also  been  connected  with  the 
Heat,  Light  and  Power  Company  of  Du  Quoin,  but 
disposed  of  his  interest  ere  entering  upon  his 
duties  as  Mayor  of  the  citv. 

On  the  17th  of  February,  1881,  Mr.  Brookings 
was  united  in  m.irriage  with  Miss  Cornelia  Dry,  of 
Du  Quoin.  Ten  years  later  she  was  called  to  her 
final  rest,  departing  this  life  Marcli  20,  1891.  In 
1893  Mr.  Brookings  was  elected  Mayor  of  Du 
Quoin,  and  is  proving  one  of  the  best  and  most 
popular  mayors  in  the  state,  ever  watchful  of  the 
citj''s  interest  and  anxious  to  promote  its  best  en- 
terprises. With  the  same  fidelity  he  also  served  as 
Alderman  for  two  terms.  He  is  a  man  of  generous 
and  kindly  impulses,  liberal  to  a  fault,  and  is  re- 
garded as  a  whole-souled,  broad-gauged  gentleman, 
who  b}-  an  honorable,  straightforward  career  has 
won  the  confidence  and  warm  regard  of  all  with 
whom  business  or  social  relations  have  brought 
him  in  contact. 


(|^  ON.  WILLIAM  REID,  who  for  thirty  years 
[jji  has  been  Police  Magistrate  of  Du  Quoin, 
/4W^  and  is  one  of  its  influential  and  repiesenta- 
(^/  five  citizens,  was  born  within  six  miles  of 
his  present  home,  on  the  14th  of  August,  1826. 
He  was  one  of  a  family  of  two  sons  and  three 
daughters,  but  is  now  the  only  survivor.  His  fa- 
ther, John  Reid,  was  a  Virginian  by  birth,  and  on 
leaving  the  Old  Dominion  removed  to  Kentucky, 
whence  he  came  to  Illinois,  before  its  admission 
into  the  Union. 

The  grandfather  of  our  subject  was  born  in  Ire- 
land   and    became    quite    prominent.     John  Reid 


656 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


was  also  one  of  tbc  leading  men  of  southern  Illi- 
nois during  the  early  days.  He  served  as  County 
Commissioner,  Justice  of  the  Peace,  and  held  other 
local  offices.  He  was  a  man  of  considerable  force 
of  character,  honorable  and  upright,  and  was  highly 
respected  by  all.  The  year  1846  he  spent  in 
Iowa,  but  after  a  few  montlis  returned  to  Illinois, 
where  he  died  May  10,  18fi().  His  only  brother, 
William  Reid,  was  a  leading  and  well  known 
Methodist  preacher.  The  mother  of  'Squire  Reid 
was  in  her  maidenhood  Susan  Washburn.  She  was 
born  in  Georgia,  and  was  a  daugliter  of  Paul 
Washburn,  a  pioneer  farmer  of  Kaskaskia,  111.  She 
had  two  brothers,  John  AVashburn,  who  served  in 
the  Black  Hawk  AVar,  and  Noah,  who  was  a  soldier 
in  the  late  war.  Her  parents  came  to  Illinois 
when  she  was  only  four  years  of  age.  The  moth- 
er's death  occurred  in  Du  Quoin  in  1868. 

In  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads  William 
Reid  spent  his  boyhood  days.  He  acquired  his 
education  in  the  old-time  log  school  house  of  the 
frontier.  When  he  had  attained  to  man's  estate, 
he  began  dealing  in  stock,  and  became  one  of  the 
most  extensive  stock  dealers  in  the  southern  part 
of  this  state,  but  his  health  failed  him,  and  he  was 
forced  to  la}-  aside  business  cares.  Since  that  time 
his  attention  has  been  given  to  his  official  duties. 

In  1850  Mr.  Reid  married  Miss  Artemisia  Estes, 
a  native  of  Franklin  County,  111.,  where  her  parents 
were  early  settlers.  To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reid  were 
born  eleven  children,  ten  of  whom  grew  to  mature 
years,  while  eight  are  jet  living.  John  died  in 
infanc}'.  Isham  died  at  the  age  of  twent}'-one,  and 
Hiram  died  of  small-pox  at  the  age  of  twenty-one. 
Lurinda  is  the  wife  of  Corydon  McElvain,  of  Du 
Quoin.  Mary  A.  is  the  wife  of  P.  J.  Saunders, 
who  won  notoriety  by  shooting  the  train  robbers 
on  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad  near  Centralia,  for 
which  act  of  bravery  the  railroad  company  pre- 
sented him  with  a  gold  medal,  properly  inscribed, 
and  a  block  of  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad  stock. 
William  F.  resides  in  Du  (Juoin.  Letitia  J.  is  the 
wife  of  N.  A.  Graig,  of  Tuscola,  111.  Asenath  A. 
is  the  wife  of  H.  C.  Jones,  a  conductor  on  an  ele- 
vated railroad  in  Chicago.  Nellie  is  living  with 
her  parents.  George  W.  is  a  graduate  of  the 
Northern  Normal  School,  and  is  an  able  and  pop- 


ular educator,  now  teaching  in  Shawneetown,  111. 
Silas  H.  is  a  graduate  of  the  State  Normal  School 
of  Bloomington,  and  is  now  a  very  able  young  at- 
tornej'  of  Du  Quoin. 

AVhile  living  on  his  father's  farm,  Mr.  Reid 
served  as  a  Justice  of  the  Peace  for  several  years, 
and  was  Police  Judge.  Since  the  city  was  first  or- 
ganized he  has  also  been  overseer  of  the  poo*,  and 
has  been  United  States  Commissioner  for  the  past 
twelve  years.  His  rulings  in  court  are  always 
fair,  and  when  he  makes  a  decision  it  is  usually 
sustained  by  the  higher  courts.  All  respect  him 
for  his  plain,  honest  waj'  of  doing  business  and 
the  honorable,  upright  life  he  has  led.  Both  he 
and  his  wife  are  members  of  the  Christian  Church, 
and  are  numbered  among  the  best  citizens  of  Du 
Quoin  and  Perry  County,  where  for  many  j'ears 
thev  have  made  their  home. 


^-- 


=+ 


OSEPH  ISMERT,  Superintendent  of  the 
Pincknej'ville  Milling  Company,  was  born 
on  the  French  frontier,  September  26,  1853. 
His  father,  John  Ismert,  was  a  miller  by 
trade,  and  accompanied  by  three  brothers,  he  left 
his  native  land  and  sailed  for  America.  He  made 
a  location  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  where  for  some  time 
he  engaged  in  the  operation  of  a  sawmill,  but 
later  returned  to  France,  where  his  death  occurred 
in   1889. 

Mr.  Ismert  of  this  sketah  is  one  of  four  brothers, 
of  whom  John  is  one  of  the  extensive  stockholders 
of  the  Pinckneyville  Milling  Company,  and  is 
manager  of  the  works.  Our  subject,  who  is  the 
youngest,  was  educated  in  his  native  land,  and 
after  coming  to  this  country  learned  the  miller's 
trade  under  his  eldest  brother,  John.  At  the  age 
of  eighteen  he  bade  adieu  to  his  old  home  and 
friends  and  crossed  the  briny  deep  to  the  New 
World,  having  determined  to  seek  a  home  and  for- 
tune in  America.  For  five  years  after  his  arrival 
he  was  employed  in  a  mill  in  Kansas  City,  Kan., 
and  after  leaving  that  place  was  employed  in  dif- 
ferent mills  in  various  towns.  He  spent  six  years 
as  a  miller  in  Freeport,  111.,  and  in  1889,  in  com- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


657 


pany  with  his  brother  John,  he  purchased  stock  in 
the  mill  at  Pinckneyville.  Soon  afterward  be  was 
elected  Superintendent,  which  position  he  is  now 
filling  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  concerned.  The 
mill  has  a  capacit}'  of  four  hundred  barrels  of  flour 
per  day,  is  supplied  with  the  latest  improved  ma- 
chinery- and  is  complete  in  all  its  appointments. 

On  the  30th  of  July,  1882,  Mr.  Ismert  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Maggie  Yogel.  This 
most  estimable  lady  is  a  native  of  St.  Louis.  Their 
union  has  been  blessed  with  a  family  of  five  chil- 
dren, four  sons  and  a  daughter,  namely:  Joseph 
H.,  Leo  M.,  Albert  R.,  C.  R.  and  Maud  G.  They 
are  still  under  the  parental  roof.  The  Ismert 
household  is  the  abode  of  hospitality  and  good 
cheer,  and  the  many  friends  of  the  family  are  al- 
ways sure  to  there  receive  a  hearty  welcome. 

Mr.  Ismert  takes  some  interest  in  civic  societies, 
and  holds  membership  both  with  the  Odd  Fellows' 
lodge  and  the  Knights  of  Pythias  fraternity.  In 
connection  with  his  business  in  this  country,  he 
also  owns  an  interest  in  the  estate  in  France, 
which  was  left  by  his  father,  who  was  a  very 
wealthy  man.  Mr.  Ismert's  life  is  characterized  by 
industry  and  enterprise,  and  his  well  directed  ef- 
forts have  won  him  success  in  his  undertakings. 


<X:»-i-t~i"i"i"i"i"i"i"i"i'^»^'i"i'-H-»»»»-i^X> 

\1i^  R.  SCHULZE,  a  member  of  the  lumber  firm 
\}f^,  of  J.  H.  Schulze  &  Co.,  of  Pinckneyville, 
(^^^  is  a  native  of  the  neighboring  state  of 
1^)  Missouri.  He  was  born  in  Jackson,  on  the 
8th  of  February,  1857,  and  is  a  son  of  the  late 
Rev.  J.  H.  Schulze.  His  father  was  a  German  by 
birth  and  came  to  this  country  when  a  young 
man,  landing  in  New  Orleans,  whence  he  made  his 
way  to  Chester,  111.  He  became  a  minister  of  the 
German  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  and  as  such 
was  stationed  at  .Jackson,  Mo.,  where  our  subject 
was  born.  He  afterwards  preached  at  various 
pl.ices  in  Illinois,  including  Vandalia,  Red  Bud 
and  Nashville.  In  1865  he  came  to  Pinckney- 
ville, where  for  three  years  he  engaged  in  minis- 
terial work,  and  also  carried  on  a  saw  and  grist 
mill.  After  three  years  he  retired  from  the  min- 
istry and  devoted  the  remainder  of  his    days  to 


business  pursuits.  In  1872  he  built  the  large  flour- 
ing mill  now  owned  by  the  Pinckneyville  Milling 
Company,  but  in  that  enterprise  met  with  heary 
losses.  He  was  also  interested  in  coal  mining. 
Later  in  life  he  recovered  his  lost  possessions,  be- 
coming a  wealth}'  man.  His  death  occurred  Au- 
gust 20,  1893.  He  was  a  prominent  and  progress- 
ive citizen,  a  good  business  man,  and  lived  an 
honorable,  upright  life,  well  worthy  of  emulation. 
He  was  married  to  Miss  Fredericka  Miller,  who 
was  also  a  native  of  Germany.  She  is  still  living, 
and  is  interested  with  her  son  in  business. 

Mr.  Schulze  of  this  sketch  was  the  third  in  or- 
der of  birth  in  a  family  of  four  children  who 
grew  to  mature  years.  The  eldest,  George,  went 
away  from  home  in  ISfs,  and  has  never  been 
heard  from  since  that  time.  Rosa  is  the  wife  of 
Rev.  Philip  Skacr,  a  Methodist  Episcopal  preacher, 
living  on  a  farm  near  Nokomis,  111.  Cora  is  the 
wife  of  William  Harris,  a  farmer  residing  near 
Du  Quoin. 

In  the  public  schools  of  Pinckneyville  H.  R. 
Schulze  acquired  his  early  education,  which  was 
supplemented  by  a  course  of  study  in  the  Central 
\Vesle3-an  College  of  Warrenton,  Mo.  At  the  age 
of  nineteen  he  became  associated  with  his  father 
in  business,  and  continued  as  his  partner  until  his 
father's  death.  For  a  few  years  previous  to  that 
time  he  had  the  entire  care  and  management  of 
the  business,  for  Mr.  Schulze,  Sr.,  was  in  poor 
health,  and  the  entire  responsibility  rested  upon 
the  son. 

In  May,  1887,  our  subject  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Catherine,  daughter  of  P.  Gruner 
a  wealthy  hardware  merchant  of  Pinckneyville. 
B}'  the  union  of  the  young  couple  have  been  born 
three  interesting  children.  The  parents  are 
highly  respected  people  of  this  community,  where 
they  have  many  warm  friends  and  agreeable  ac- 
quaintances. 

Mr.  Schulze  exercises  his  right  of  franchise  in 
support  of  the  Republican  party.  He  and  his 
wife  are  both  members  of  the  Methodist  Episco- 
pal Church,  in  which  he  serves  as  Trustee,  and 
they  take  an  active  interest  in  church  and  be- 
nevolent work.  He  is  also  connected  with  the 
building  and    loan    association  of  Pinckneyville, 


658 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


and  has  extensive  lumber' interests.  His  trade 
along  that  line  is  constantly  increasing,  and  a 
good  business  alread}'  yields  him  a  handsome  in- 
come, which  is  well  deserved. 

vf^^RED  LE  PERE,  who  resides  on  section  16, 
^r^'  Ora  Township,  Jackson  County,  has  the 
/ils  honor  of   being  a  native  of  St.  Clair  Coun- 

ty, 111.,  his  birth  having  occurred  October  24,  1853. 
The  family  is  of  German  origin.  His  father,  George 
J.  Le  Pere,  was  born  in  Germany  in  1818,  and  when 
a  young  man  of  eighteen,  emigrated  to  America. 
He  was  reared  on  a  farm  and  followed  agricultural 
pursuits  through  life.  He  remained  with  his  par- 
ents until  he  had  attained  his  majoritj\  Soon  af- 
terward he  was  married  in  St.  Clair  County  to  Miss 
Wagner,  who  died  leaving  a  daughter,  Sopiiia,  now 
the  wife  of  George  Weigand,  of  Georgetown,  St. 
Clair  County,  111. 

In  1847  Mr.  Le  Pere  married  Maria  E.  Bertner, 
and  of  their  children  we  note  Ihe  following:  Mar- 
garet, who  was  born  August  26,  1848,  married 
William  Schuchardt,  by  whom  she  had  a  daughter, 
Catherine;  after  the  death  of  her  first  husband  she 
married  Fred  ZoUer,  and  with  their  three  children, 
Lizzie,  Michael  and  AVilliam,  they  reside  on  Four 
Mile  Prairie,  in  Perry  County;  Louisa,  born  Ko- 
vember  26,  1850,  is  the  wife  of  Andrew  Rosenber- 
ger,  by  whom  she  had  seven  children:  Andrew, 
John,  Louisa,  Lena,  August,  Lizzie  and  Jacob; 
Fred  is  the  subject  of  this  sketch;  Catherine,  born 
October  23,  1856,  is  the  wife  of  Henry  Heisner,  of 
Pulaski  County,  111.;  Mary,  born  April  11,1858, 
is  the  wife  of  Charles  Heisner,  of  Perry  County, 
by  whom  she  has  four  children ;  Lizzie,  born  No- 
vember 12,  1861,  is  the  wife  of  Howard  Weather- 
ford,  of  Perry  County,  by  whom  she  has  five  chil- 
dren; Caroline,  born  July  23,  1860,  is  the  wife  of 
John  Schwartzcope,aud  with  their  two  children  they 
reside  in  Perrj'  County;  George,  born  March  11, 
1865,  married  Caroline  Troop,  and  with  his  wife 
and  son,  Edgar,  resides  in  Jackson  County;  Peter, 
born  February  27,  1867,  is  living  in  Denver,  Colo. 

The  father  of  this  family'  was  a  member  of  the 
Lutheran  Church,  and  died    in    St.  Clair  County 


August  10,  1866.  His  wife  was  born  in  Germany, 
and  when  six  j'ears  of  age  emigrated  with  her  par- 
ents to  St.  Clair  County,  where  she  received  a  good 
education  in  the  English  and  German  languages. 
She  united  with  the  church  at  an  earl3'  age  and 
continued  a  consistent  member  throughout  hfe. 
At  her  husband's  death  she  was  left  with  a  large 
family  of  small  children  and  with  only  limited 
means,  but  in  a  true  Christian  spirit  she  took  up 
her  life  work  and  nobly  and  successfully  accom- 
plished her  purpose.  She  removed  to  tlie  farm 
now  occupied  bj'  our  subject  and  there  reared  her 
children.  Slie  also  gave  a  home  to  two  children 
of  her  deceased  sister  and  to  her  aged  mother  and 
brother,  making  their  last  da^-s  happy  and  com- 
fortable. The  poor  and  needy  ever  found  in  her 
a  friend,  and  a  life  of  unselfish  devotion  to  otiiers 
won  her  the  love  of  all  who  knew  her.  She  passed 
away  February  6,  1876,  and  her  loss  was  deeply 
mourned. 

Mr.  Le  Pere  of  this  sketch  remained  with  his 
mother  and  aided  her  in  all  possible  ways  until  she 
was  called  to  the  home  beyond.  He  then  purchased 
the  interest  of  the  other  heirs  in  the  farm  which 
he  now  owns.  Here  he  has  made  a  pleasant  and 
comfortable  home,  well  improved  in  every  respect. 
His  early  years  were  passed  in  hard  work,  but  he 
is  now  surrounded  bj'  a  comfortable  competence  as 
the  result  of  his  own  efforts. 

On  the  28th  of  October,  1877,  Mr.  Le  Pere 
wedded  Mary  E.  Williamson,  daughter  of  Henry 
E.  and  Ann  E.  Williamson.  Her  father  was  born 
in  Perry  County-,  111.,  October  9,  1832,  and  was 
married  November  9,  1854,  to  Ann  Bartlett,  who 
was  born  in  New  York,  October  3,  1838,  and  was 
a  daughter  of  John  Bartlett,  who  is  still  living  in 
Levan  Township,  Jackson  County,  at  the  advanced 
age  of  ninety-four.  When  young,  his  father  re- 
moved with  his  wife  to  where  he  now  lives,  and 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Williamson  spent  their  married  lives 
upon  a  farm  adjoining  that  of  our  subject.  They 
had  three  children:  John  B.,  born  September  8, 
1855;  Mary  E.,  born  September  23,  1858;  and  one 
who  died  in  infancy.  Henry  E.  Williamson  was 
for  three  years  and  fifteen  days  a  soldier  in  the 
Union  army  in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  enlisting 
in  the  Eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry.  He  saw  severe 


Jr 


(^'V.A-A^ 


\jkAKk     VAaaXu 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


661 


service,  and  his  health  was  permanently  impaired 
during  that  time. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Le  Pere  were  born  four  chil- 
dren: Laura  A.,  born  August  17,  1878;  Willie 
E.,  March  24,  1880;  John  P.,  January-  29,1884; 
and  Bertha  E.,  November  16,  1886.  Mr.  Le  Pere 
seems  to  have  inherited  his  mother's  energy  and 
industry  and  emulates  her  generosity'  and  kind- 
ness. He  is  a  prominent  member  of  the  Odd  Fel- 
lows'society  of  Ava.  His  father  was  an  old  line 
Whig,  a  warm  admirer  of  Henry  Clay,  and  on  the 
organization  of  the  Republican  party  he  joined  its 
ranks.  Our  subject  is  also  an  earnest  supporter  of 
its  principles,  having  been  an  active  member  of  the 
part}'  since  attaining  his  majority.  He  has  labored 
constantl}'  for  its  success  and  has  long  served  on 
the  Central  Committee.  For  some  j'ears  he  has 
held  the  oflice  of  School  Director  in  his  district, 
proving  a  warm  friend  to  the  cause  of  education. 


B.  MINTON,  master  mechanic  of  the 
Mobile  &  Ohio  Railroad  at  Murphysboro, 
claims  Virginia  as  the  state  of  his  nativ- 
ity. He  was  born  near  Max  Meadows, 
Wythe  County,  October  12,  1852,  and  is  a  son  of 
E.  H.  and  Mary  (Richer)  Minton.  The  grandpar- 
ents on  both  sides  were  natives  of  Virginia.  The 
Mictons  were  of  English  descent.  The  maternal 
grandlather,  E.  B.  Richey,  was  a  farmer  of  Vir- 
ginia, served  in  the  War  of  1812,  and  died  in 
1856. 

The  father  of  our  subject  was  reared  in  the 
Buckeye  State,  and  after  his  marriage  located  in 
Wythe  County,  Va.  Later  he  removed  to  Charles- 
ton, Tenn.,  where  he  engaged  in  farming  and  gen- 
eral merchandising,  continuing  that  business  until 
the  latter  part  of  1860.  He  then  started  for  Indi- 
ana, in  order  to  bring  his  old  mother  back  to  his 
home,  but  he  never  returned,  for  death  overtook 
him,  and  he  passed  away  in  the  Hoosier  State  Feb- 
ruary 12,  1861.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Presby- 
terian Church,  and  his  wife  belonged  to  the  Bap- 
tist Church.  She  died  in  Cleveland,  Tenn.,  Januaiy 
4,  1889,  at  the  age  of  sixty-seven. 

Our  subject  is  their  only  child.     He  was  reared 
24 


in  Tennessee  from  the  age  of  six  years,  and  was 
principallv  educated  in  private  schools.  In  1867 
he  entered  the  machine  shops  of  the  East  Tennes- 
see, Virginia  &  Georgia  Railroad  Company  at 
Knoxville,  where  he  served  a  three  j'ears'  appren- 
ticeship, continuing  there  until  1875.  In  1870 
he  was  made  fireman,  and  after  eighteen  months 
became  engineer,  running  between  Bristol,  Va.,  and 
Chattanooga,  Tenn.  In  1875  he  went  to  Jackson, 
Tenn.,  and  became  foreman  of  the  roundhouse  and 
shops  of  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad,  remaining 
there  until  1890. 

In  Cleveland,  Tenn.,  Februarj'  2,  1875,  Mr. 
Minton  married  Miss  Mary  McNeil}',  who  was 
born  and  reared  in  that  state.  The}'  have  two 
children,  Robert  and  Edward.  Socially,  he  is  con- 
nected with  the  Masonic  fraternity  as  a  Knight 
Templar  Mason,  and  also  belongs  to  the  Ancient 
Order  of  United  Workmen  and  the  Modern  Wood- 
men of  America.  In  politics  he  is  a  supporter  of 
the  Democracy. 

While  in  Jackson,  Tenn.,  Mr.  Minton  was  a 
member  of  the  Brotherhood  of  Locomotive  En- 
gineers, and  was  Chief  of  the  local  department. 
He  was  also  interested  in  real  estate  and  in  the 
building  and  loan  association.  In  1889  Mr. 
Clark,  who  was  President  of  the  Illinois  Central 
Railroad,  became  President  of  the  Mobile  &  Ohio, 
and  by  him  Mr.  Minton  was  solicited  to  become 
master  mechanic  of  the  St.  Louis  Division.  He 
accepted,  and  in  consequence  came  to  Murphys- 
boro. He  has  the  entire  charge  of  the  mechan- 
ical department  of  this  division,  with  about  two 
hundred  and  fifty  employes  under  him,  includ- 
ing seventy-five  men  in  the  car-sliops.  There  is 
also  a  roundliouse  with  ten  stalls.  His  division 
of  the  road  is  from  St.  Louis  to  Cairo,  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  miles. 

Mr.  Minton  was  one  of  the  organizers  and 
builders  of  the  Murphysboro  Street  Railway,  and 
is  now  one  of  its  Directors  and  its  Secretary.  He 
aided  in  organizing  the  City  National  Bank,  and 
is  also  one  of  its  Directors.  In  1893  he  was  elected 
Alderman  from  the  Third  Ward  on  the  Democratic 
ticket,  and  is  Chairman  of  the  finance  committee. 
He  is  a  skilled  and  practical  mechanic  and  en- 
gineer, and  his  excellent   business   and  executive 


662 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


abilitj'  has  won  him  his  present  important  posi- 
tion, which  he  is  filling  with  great  credit.  He  is 
an  accommodating  and  genial  gentleman,  and  Mur- 
physboro  numbers  him  among  her  best  citizens. 


11^  R.  H.  P.  HUNT.SINGER  is  the  leading 
)))  ph3-sician  and  surgeon  of  Pincknej'ville, 
and  his  reputation  is  not  confined  alone 
to  this  place,  for  he  is  widely  and  favor- 
abl}'  known  throughout  thecount3'.  He  was  born 
near  Niles,  Mich.,  January  3,  1845,  and  is  a  son  of 
John  Huntsinger,  who  was  born  in  Greenville, 
Darke  Count}',  Ohio.  The  grandfather,  Henry 
Huntsinger,  was  a  native  of  South  Carolina,  and 
was  a  farmer  bj'  occupation.  In  early  life  he  went 
to  Darke  County,  Ohio,  and  subsequently  to  Mich- 
igan. The  founder  of  the  family  in  America 
was  Enoch  Huntsinger,  a  native  of  Germany,  who 
crossed  the  Atlantic  prior  to  the  Revolution  and 
located  in  South  Carolina,  where  at  one  time  he  was 
an  extensive  slave-holder.  He  lived  to  be  more 
than  one  hundred  years  old,  and  died  near  Niles, 
Mich. 

The  Doctor's  father  was  also  an  agriculturist.  He 
had  several  brothers  who  served  in  the  late  war, 
and  all  were  well-to-do  farmers.  In  1857  he  came 
with  his  father's  family  to  Illinois,  locating  near 
Greenville,  Bond  County,  where  his  father  died  in 
1875.  He  had  married  Kittie  Pettit,  who  was  born 
near  Columbus,  Ohio,  and  who  was  a  daughter  of 
Amos  Pettit,  a  native  of  the  Buckeye  State,  and 
an  attorney  of  considerable  note,  who  died  in 
Ohio.  He  had  several  brothers  who  were  promi 
nent  in  the  political  world.  His  sons,  Henr}-  and 
Amos,  were  attornej's,  and  removed  to  Iowa,  where 
the  former  became  quite  prominent  in  politics, 
serving  several  terms  in  the  Iowa  Legislature. 
Mrs.  Huntsinger  died  in  Greenville  in  1864.  The 
Doctor  was  the  fourth  in  her  familj-  of  seven  chil- 
dren. His  brother  Benjamin  F.  was  a  .soldier  of 
the  late  war,  who  served  in  the  rank  of  .Second 
Lieutenant,  and  is  now  a  leading  and  prosperous 
farmer  of  Peoria  Countv,  111.;  John  C.  is  engaged 
in  railroading  in  Hot  .Springs,  Ark.;  Charles  A.  is 
a  railroad  man  of  St.  Louis;  Francis  B.  is  connected 


with  the  railroads  and  makes  his  home  in  Pine 
Bluff,  Ark.;  Mary  E.  is  the  wife  of  F.  R.  Jones,  of 
St.  Louis;  Martha  A.  is  the  wife  of  Judge  Richard 
Bran,  of  Mound  City,  Kan.,  who  was  First  Lieu- 
tenant in  the  late  war,  and  has  been  County  Judge 
for  many  years  in  Kansas. 

Our  subject  was  a  youth  of  twelve  3-ears  when 
his  parents  removed  to  Bond  County,  111.,  where 
he  was  reared  upon  the  home  farm,  receiving  such 
educational  privileges  as  the  common  schools  of 
the  neighborhood  afforded.  He  was  a  youth  of 
onl}'  sixteen  when  the  Civil  War  broke  out,  but  at 
the  first  call  for  volunteers  he  tendered  his  ser- 
vices, and  in  July,  1861.  was  enrolled  as  a  member 
of  Company  C,  Twenty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry. 
He  participated  in  many  important  engagements, 
including  the  siege  of  Island  No.  10,  New  Madrid, 
Corinth,  luka,  Yicksburg,  Jackson,  Mission  Ridge, 
New  Hope  Church,  Kenesaw  Mountain,  Atlanta, 
and  was  with  Sherman  on  his  triumphal  u.arch  to 
the  sea.  He  was  also  in  the  last  hard  fought  bat- 
tle of  Bentonville,  and  at  the  battle  of  Dallas,  Ga., 
be  received  a  sabre  wound.  He  was  taken  pris- 
oner, but  was  left  on  the  field  for  dead  until 
after  the  Union  troops  had  regained  the  ground, 
when  he  was  sent  to  the  hospital.  A  few  weeks 
later  he  was  again  able  to  take  his  place  in  the 
ranks,  and  was  promoted  to  Sergeant  and  Second 
Lieutenant  for  meritorious  conduct  on  the  field  of 
battle.  His  term  of  service  having  expired,  he 
veteranized  and  served  until  the  close  of  the  war, 
or  for  a  period  of  more  than  four  years.  During 
that  time  he  was  never  absent  from  his  regiment, 
save  when  confined  in  the  hospital  by  his  wound. 
After  participating  in  the  Grand  Review  at  Wash- 
ington, the  most  brilliant  military  pageant  ever 
seen  in  the  Xew  World,  he  was  sent  to  Louisville, 
Ky.,  where  he  was  discharged  in  August,  1865. 

Returning  to  his  home,  the  Doctor  engaged  in 
clerking  for  a  time  and  then  spent  two  years  in 
school  in  Jacksonville.  Later  he  took  up  the 
study  of  medicine,  and  was  graduated  from  Rush 
Medical  College  of  Chicago  in  1875,  after  which 
he  practiced  for  four  years  in  the  West  Side  Free 
Dispensary  of  that  city.  In  the  spring  of  1879  he 
came  to  Pinckney ville,  and  during  the  period 
which  has  since  elapsed  he  has  built  up  ope  of  the 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


663 


largest  practices  in  southern  Illinois,  «nd  has  won 
a  reputation  of  which  he  ma}'  be  justly  proud. 

In  February,  1883,  was  celebrated  the  marriage 
of  the  Doctor  and  Miss  M.  E.  Baird,  daughter  of 
A.  P.  Baird,  a  prominent  farmer  of  this  locality. 
She  is  a  lady  of  culture  and  refinement  and  pre- 
sides with  grace  over  tlieir  hospitable  home.  They 
have  one  child,  Clara  D. 

Dr.  Huntsinger  served  as  President  of  the  Pen- 
sion Board  from  1888  until  1892.  He  was  Chair- 
man of  the  Republican  Central  Committee  for  six 
years,  and  does  all  in  his  power  to  advance  his 
part3-'s  interest,  for  he  is  a  warm  advocate  of  its 
principles.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Edu- 
cation for  several  3'ears,  and  is  now  President  of  the 
Southern  Illinois  Medical  Association,  and  a  mem- 
ber of  the  American  Medical  Association.  He  is  a 
Knight  Templar  Mason,  and  has  been  Secietary  of 
the  blue  lodge,  and  was  also  Captain  of  the  Hosts 
in  the  chapter.  He  is  also  a  prominent  member  of 
the  Grand  Army  post.  He  was  prominent  in  the 
organization  of  the  Pinckneyville  Electric  Light 
Company,  and  from  the  beginning  has  been  its 
Secretary.  He  owns  a  fine  farm  and  much  valua- 
ble property  in  the  city,  and  is  numbered  among 
the  well-to-docitizens  of  Pinckneyville.  His  ca- 
reer is  an  honorable  and  upright  one.  He  is  a 
skilled  physician,  w^as  a  valiant  defender  of  the 
Union  during  the  late  war,  and  is  a  prominent  and 
progressive  citizen,  wlio  well  deserves  representa- 
tion in  the  history  of  his  adopted  country. 

^EORGE  W.  COX,  M.  D.,  a  practicing  phy- 
sician and  surgeon  of  Murphysboro,  .and  a 

member  of  the  Board  of  Pension  Examiners. 

was  born  in  Kentucky,  December  26,  1846.  His 
father  was  also  born  in  that  state,  but  the  grand- 
parents came  from  Virginia  and  North  Carolina  re- 
spectively. From  Kentuck3'the  father  removed  to 
Illinois  when  a  young  man,  subsequently  returning 
to  his  native  state.  In  1848,  however,  he  located 
permanently  in  Somerset  Township,. Jackson  Coun- 
ty, 111., where  in  the  midst  of  the  forest  he  hewed  out 
a  farm  of  two  hundred  acres.  He  was  a  successful 
farmer,  and  a  man  of  enterprise  and  industry.    He 


is  now  living  a  retired  life  in  Murphysboro,  at  the 
age  of  seventy.  At  one  time  he  served  as  County 
Treasurer,  and  was  Assessor  of  .Jackson  Countj'  for 
four  years.  He  belongs  to  the  Methodist  Episco- 
pal Church  South.  His  wife,  who  bore  the  maiden 
name  of  Elizabeth  A.  Pool,  was  born  in  North 
Carolina,  of  English  descent,  and  when  a  maiden 
of  eight  years  went  to  Kentucky,  where  she  was 
reared.  Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cox  were  born  nine 
children,  six  of  whom  are  3'et  living,  namely:  Dr. 
George  W.;  Viola,  wife  of  F^zekiel  Clark,  of  Mur- 
physboro; Nettie,  wife  of  Daniel  Elliott,  of  Arkan- 
sas; Belle,  wife  of  William  Phelps,  of  this  place; 
Di-.  Logan  Cox,  who  is  a  practicing  phj'sician  of 
Kansas;  and  Hamilton,  who  is  living  in  Murphys- 
boro. 

We  now  take  up  the  personal  historj'  of  our 
subject,  who  is  so  widelj'  and  favorably  known  in 
this  community'  that  he  needs  no  special  iniroduc- 
tion  to  our  readers.  He  was  here  reared  upon  his 
father's  farm,  attended  the  common  schools,  later 
spent  one  year  in  the  Southern  Illinois  Normal 
Univcrsit}'  at  Carbondale,  and  afterward  was  for 
two  3'ears  a  student  in  Washington  Seminar3'  of 
Richview,  111.  This  completed  his  literary  edu- 
cation. He  then  embarked  in  teaching  at  the  age 
of  twenty-one,  and  for  twent3'-seven  months  he 
taught  school  in  Randolpii,  Jefferson  and  Wash- 
ington Counties. 

During  vacations,  our  subject  studied  medicine 
under  Dr.  Downey,  of  Richview,  111.,  for  three 
years,  and  in  the  winter  of  1874-75  attended  a 
course  of  lectures  at  Rush  Medical  College,  of 
Chicago.  He  then  engaged  in  practice  for  three 
3ears  near  Mt.  Vernon,  111.,  after  which  he  en- 
tered tlie  Ohio  Medical  College,  of  Cincinnati, 
from  which  he  was  graduated  in  the  spring  of 
1878,  with  the  degree  of  M.  D.  Immediately 
afterward  he  opened  an  office  in  Murphysboro, 
and  continued  to  practice  until  the  fall  of  1887, 
when  he  entered  .Jefferson  Medical  College,  of 
Plnladelphia,  Pa.  He  was  graduated  therefrom 
the  following  spring,  having  taken  a  post-graduate 
course.  He  studied  skin  diseases  in  the  Philadel- 
phia hospital  and  was  graduated  under  Prof.  J.  V. 
Sliumaker.  He  was  also  a  student  at  Bellevue 
Medical  College  and  Hospital,  New  York,  in  1892. 


664 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPinCAL   RECORD. 


He  makes  a  specialty  of  surgery,  and  is  surgeon 
for  the  Big  Muddy  Coal  and  Iron  Company. 

In  1880  the  Doctor  married  Miss  Millie  Jones, 
by  whom  he  had  one  son,  Arthur  Cox.  Subse- 
quently in  1888.  he  was  married  in  Philadelphia, 
to  Miss  Eva  Taylor,  a  native  of  the  Empire  State. 
Mrs.  Cox  is  a  member  of  the  Methodist  Church, 
and  is  a  lady  possessed  of  many  excellencies  of 
character,  which  have  won  her  high  regard  in  this 
communit}'. 

In  1880  Dr.  Cox  was  elected  Coroner  on  the 
Democratic  ticket,  and  for  two  terms  he  was 
County  Physician.  He  belongs  to  the  Southern 
Illinois  Medical  Association,  is  an  active  member  of 
the  State  Medical  Association,  and  holds  member- 
ship with  the  Alumni  Association  of  the  Ohio 
Medical  College.  He  h.as  served  as  examiner  for 
different  insurance  companies,  and  is  also  Treas- 
urer of  the  Board  of  Pension  Examiners.  The 
Doctor  has  spared  neither  pains  nor  expense  in 
perfecting  himself  for  his  profession  and  has  justly 
won  a  high  reputation  among  his  professional 
brethren,  while  from  the  public  he  receives  a  lib- 
eral patronage.  Socially,  he  early  joined  the  Odd 
Fellows'  societ}',  and  he  is  also  connected  with  the 
Ancient  Order  of  United  Workmen. 


♦^^1 


USTIN  NAUSLEY  is  a  prominent  and 
well  known  farmer  residing  on  section  5. 
14  Elkville  Township,  Jackson  County,  and 
a  representative  of  one  of  the  honored 
pioneer  families  of  this  community.  Away  back 
in  the  early  days,  when  St.  Louis  was  a  trading 
post,  and  Brownsville  the  most  important  town  in 
Illinois.  Adam  Nausley  and  his  wife,  Frances,  par- 
ents of  our  subject,  emigrated  from  Columbus, 
Tenn.,  and  located  in  Jackson  County,  111.  The 
trip  was  made  in  1825.  On  a  flat-boat  tliey  floated 
down  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  Rivers,  from  which 
they  disembarked  at  Bennett's  Landing,  below 
Grand  Tower.  From  that  point  thej-  continued 
their  journey  and  at  length  made  a  location  be- 
tween Carbondale  and  the  Big  Muddj'  River.  In- 
dians were  still  in  the  neighborhood,  and  bears 
and  wolves  were  numerous.     In  1830  they  settled 


in  Elk  Prairie,  and  later  removed  to  a  point  seven 

miles  to  the  southwest.  The  father  was  a  farmer, 
and  followed  that  occupation  throughout  his  en- 
tire life.  Upon  their  farm  in  this  community  he 
and  his  estimable  wife  spent  their  last  days,  and  in 
their  declining  years  they  were  surrounded  bj-  all 
the  comforts  and  man}"  of  the  luxuries  of  life,  for 
their  earnest  and  untiring  effort.*  had  brought  to 
them  a  most  comfortable  competence. 

Austin  Nausle\'  was  born  sixty-two  years  ago, 
and  is  a  typical  pioneer,  a  man  of  more  than  aver- 
age intelligence  and  ability,  and  one  of  the  leading 
citizens  of  this  community.  By  Indefatigable  in- 
dustry, economy  and  perseverance,  he  has  accumu- 
lated a  valuable  propertj-,  comprising  four  hun- 
dred acres  of  good  land  and  an  extensive  sawmill 
plant.  He  carries  forward  to  a  successful  comple- 
tiou  whatever  he  undertakes,  and  has  therefore 
worked  his  way  upward  to  a  position  of  affluence. 

In  1853,  Mr.  Nausle}-  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Mary  S.,  daughter  of  Philip  Glotfelty, 
a  pioneer  of  Jackson  Count}-.  Seven  children 
were  born  of  their  marriage,  of  whom  four  are 
still  living:  Edward,  Philip.  Eliza  and  Sudie.  The 
first-named  was  born  on  the  old  homestead  in  1854, 
and  married  Miss  Sarah  A.  McGowan,  daughter  of 
Coleman  and  Catherine  McGowan.  They  have 
one  child,  Gussie  E.,  who  was  born  in  1886. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Xausley  are  members  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church,  and  are  people  whose  sterling  w'orth 
and  many  excellencies  of  character  have  gained 
them  the  high  regard  of  all.  The  well  spent  life 
of  our  subject  has  won  him  universal  confidence 
and  esteem, and  it  is  with  pleasure  that  we  present 
to  our  readers  this  record  of  his  life. 


?'***+r= 


i)HOMAS  B.  THOMAS,  dealer  in  dry  goods, 
>^>\  cloaks,  boots  and  shoes,  is  one  of  the  lead- 
ing  merchants  of  Murphysboro,  and  an  en- 
terprising and  public-spirited  citizen.  A  native 
of  Wales,  he  was  born  August  15,  1857,  and  is  a 
son  of  D.  B.  Thomas,  whose  sketch  appears  else- 
where in  this  work.  At  the  age  of  seven,  he  ac- 
companied his  father  on  his  emigration  to  Amer- 
ica, and  in  April,  1870,  he  reached    Murphj-sboro, 


PORTRAIT  ASTi  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


665 


His  home  has  since  been  in  Jackson  County,  and 
those  who  have  known  him  from  boj'hood  are 
numbered  among  his  stanchest  friends,  a  fact 
which  indicates  a  well  spent  life.  He  was  educated 
in  the  public  schools  of  Mt.  Carbon,  and  in  1874 
began  clerking  for  E.  B.  Pellet,  a  general  merchant 
of  Murph3-sboro,  with  whom  he  continued  until 
1878.  He  was  then  in  the  employ  of  Samuel  Des- 
berger  for  six  months,  and  afterward  was  with  A. 
C.  Bryden  &  Co.,  dealers  in  general  merchandise, 
until  1883.     In  that  j-ear  Mr.  Bryden  failed. 

Soon  afterward  Mr.  Thomas,  iu  connection  with 
Messrs.  Chapman  and  Kent,  purchased  Mr.  Bryden 's 
stock  and  carried  on  the  business  under  the  firm 
name  of  W.  C.  Kent  &  Co.,  until  the  spring  of 
1886,  when  Mr.  Thomas  retired  and  entered  into 
partnership  with  W.  P.  Hubble.  They  purchased 
a  new  stock  of  dry  goods  and  boots  and  shoes  and 
opened  a  store  iu  the  Kennedy  Block,  where  they 
continued  until  1887,  when  they  removed  to  the 
preseut  location.  The  following  j'ear  our  subject 
bought  out  his  partner  and  has  since  been  alone  in 
business.  He  enjoys  a  most  excellent  trade,  and 
his  enterprise  and  industrj-  have  made  him  one  of 
the  leading  merchants  of  Murphj-sboro. 

In  1882,  Mr.  Thomas  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Mariah  Kane,  a  native  of  Missouri,  and 
a  sister  of  John  R.  Kane,  whose  sketch  appears 
elsewhere  in  this  work.  Their  union  was  blessed 
with  eight  children,  of  whom  live  are  living: 
Leonard,  Aritus,  Willis,  Thomas  B.  and  May. 

In  1881,  Mr.  Thomas  and  Mr.  Chapman  pur- 
chased one  hundred  and  forty  acres  of  laud  at 
Yergennes  Station,  and  from  it  secured  enough 
timber  to  pay  for  the  propertj".  Then  prospecting, 
thej'  fouiid  upon  it  a  four  and  a-half  foot  vein  of 
coal,  and  sold  the  place  for  *25  per  acre,  thus  realiz- 
ing considerable  profit.  In  1892,  our  subject  built 
the  Thomas  Block,  45x75  feet,  on  Broad  Street. 
His  store  at  the  northwest  corner  of  the  square  is 
44x50  feet.  He  was  also  one  of  the  organizers  of 
the  Cit}'  National  Bank,  and  a  member  of  the  first 
Board  of  Directors.  He  has  since  resigned  that 
position,  however,  but  is  yet  a  stockholder.  He 
was  an  organizer  of  theSoutliern  Illinois  Building 
and  Loan  Association,  and  has  been  its  Treasurer 
from    the   beginning.     He  is  connected  with  the 


Cripple  Revenge  Threshing  Company,  and  is  its 
Treasurer  and  Director.  Whatever  he  undertakes 
he  carries  forward  to  a  successful  completion,  and 
hence  his  business  career  has  been  a  prosperous 
one.  He  is  now  the  possessor  of  a  handsome  com- 
petence, and  in  his  various  enterprises  he  has  aided 
mateiially  in  the  advancement  of  the  city's  inter- 
est. He  lielongs  to  the  Odd  Fellows'  society  of 
Mt.  Carbon,  and  exercises  his  right  of  franchise  in 
support  of  the  Democracy. 


***•{••{•? 


eHARLES  C.  HUTHMACHER,  one  of  the 
self-made  men  of  Murphysboro,  who  is  now 
serving  as  Sheriff  of  Jackson  County,  was 
born  in  Marion  County,  111.,  December  25,  1859. 
He  is  a  son  of  Charles  F.  Huthniacher,  a  native  of 
Baden  Badeu,  German j-,  and  a  shoemaker  'oy  trade, 
who  came  to  America  when  a  young  man.  He  lo- 
cated in  Ohio,  and  thence  removed  to  Central 
Cit3-,  111.,  where  he  worked  at  his  trade.  After- 
wards he  followed  the  same  pursuit  in  Sandoval, 
111.,  and  carried  on  a  hotel.  He  married  Josephine 
Lienert,  a  native  of  Canton  Zurich,  Switzerland, 
who  came  with  her  mother  to  America,  and  located 
in  the  Buckeye  State.  In  March,  1869,  Mr.  Huth- 
macher  removed  to  Grand  Tower,  built  a  hotel 
and  purchased  a  farm.  His  death  there  occurred 
in  September,  1875,  when  only  forty-one  j'ears  of 
age.  He  then  served  as  Supervisor  and  Alder- 
man, and  was  a  supporter  of  the  Democratic  party. 
His  widow  is  yet  living  in  Murphysboro. 

Our  subject  is  the  eldest  of  seven  children,  all 
of  whom  are  yet  living.  At  the  age  of  ten  he  ac- 
companied his  parents  to  Grand  Tower,  and  at- 
tended its  public  schools.  His  father  was  carrying 
on  a  meat  market  at  the  time  of  his  death  in  1875. 
Charles  assumed  its  management,  caiTying  on  busi- 
ness along  that  line  for  about  six  j-ears.  He  then 
sold  out,  and  in  connection  with  his  brother 
August  purchased  an  improved  farm  of  three  hun- 
dred and  sixty-nine  acres,  a  mile  south  of  Grand 
Tower  which  they  operated  until  1890,  placing  it 
under  a  high  state  of  cultivation. 

Mr.  Hutiimacher  was  married  in  Grand  Tower 
in  September,  1889,  the  lad^-  of  his  choice  being 


666 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Miss  Emma  Schulze,  a  native  of  Chicago,  and  a 
daughter  of  C.  Schulze,  a  merchant  of  Grand 
Tower.  They  have  three  children,  Mabel,  Ralph 
and  George.  Since  1890,  they  have  resided  in 
Murphysboro,  for  in  that  j'car  Mr.  Iluthmacher 
was  nominated  and  elected  County  Sheriff,  and  in 
December  took  the  oath  of  otlice  and  entered 
upon  the  discharge  of  his  duties.  In  November, 
1893,  he  went  to  California  to  capture  the  mur- 
derer. Miller,  whom  he  brought  from  Stockton  to 
this  place.  While  in  Grand  Tower,  our  subject 
served  as  City  Treasurer  for  two  years,  and  was 
also  a  member  of  the  School  Board. 

Socially,  Mr.  Iluthmacher  is  connected  with  La- 
Fayette  Lodge  No.  657,  A.  F.  &  A.  M.,  of  which 
he  is  Past  Master,  and  served  as  representative  to 
the  Grand  Lodge.  He  is  also  a  member  of  the 
Knights  of  Pythias.  In  politics  he  is  a  prominent 
Democrat,  was  a  member  of  the  County  Demo- 
cratic Central  Committee,  and  in  1892  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  State  Democratic  Committee. 


l(S),  ^JiM)^  .@j 

(®^ ""^^^^' ^ 

R.  SILVEY,  M.  D.,  is  a  practicing  physi- 
cian and  surgeon  of  Murphysboro,  who  is 
rapidly  winning  a  prominent  place  in  his 
profession.  He  has  the  honor  of  being  a 
native  of  Illinois,  his  birth  having  occurred  near 
Xenia,  August  26,  1858.  His  father,  G.  W.  Silvey, 
was  born  in  Greene  Count}-,  Pa.,  and  the  grand- 
father, Fred  Silve3%  was  a  native  of  German}-,  but 
he  became  a  Pennsylvania  farmer,  and  spent  his 
last  days  in  the  Keystone  State.  The  father  was 
reared  as  a  farmer  and  cooper.  In  Pennsylvania 
he  married  Melissa,  daughter  of  Isaac  Ross,  a  black- 
smith, of  that  state,  where  she  was  born  and 
reared.  With  his  family,  G.  W.  Silvey  emigrated 
to  Wayne  County,  111.,  w-liere  he  worked  at  his 
trade  of  coopering  and  bought  and  improved  a 
farm,  becoming  a  successful  agriculturist.  During 
the  gold  excitement  he  went  to  Pike's  Peak,  and 
spent  six  years  near  Denver  and  Silver  City.  He 
then  returned  to  his  farm,  but  of  late  years  he  has 


been  living  with  his  children,  as  does  his  wife. 
They  had  eight  children,  seven  of  whom  grew  to 
mature  years,  while  six  yet  abide.  Mr.  Silvey  is  a 
Democrat  in  politics,  and  in  religious  belief  is  a 
Baptist. 

In  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads  our  subject 
was  reared.  He  attended  the  common  schools  un- 
til eighteen  years  of  age,  when  he  entered  Hamil- 
ton College  at  McLeansboro,  111.,  there  spending 
three  terms.  He  then  took  up  the  study  of  law 
under  Lewis  Edwards,  but  did  not  find  it  to  his 
taste,  and  so  abandoned  it.  He  next  engaged  in 
teaching  school  for  two  terms  in  Hamilton  Coun- 
ty, and  in  1880  went  to  Texas,  teaching  school  in 
San  Antonio  and  Ennis.  He  traveled  all  over  that 
state,  and  on  the  return  trip  hunted  through  north- 
ern Texas.  In  1883,  we  again  find  him  in  Xenia, 
but  the  same  year  he  removed  to  Pomona,  111., 
where  he  purchased  a  shop  and  carried  on  black- 
smithing  and  wagon-making  for  about  two  years 
through  the  summer  months,  while  in  the  winter 
he  taught  school. 

In  the  meantime  the  Doctor  took  up  the  study 
of  medicine  with  A.  M.  Lee,  M.  D.,  and  for  several 
years  practiced  with  his  preceptor,  and  also  car- 
ried on  a  drug  store  owned  by  Mr.  Lee.  In  1887, 
he  entered  the  College  of  Physicians  and  Surgeons 
in  St.  Louis,  and  was  graduated  in  1889,  with  the 
degree  of  M.  D.  He  embarked  in  practice  in  Po- 
mona, where  he  did  a  good  business  until  the  spring 
of  1892,  the  time  of  his  removal  to  Murphysboro. 
He  now  has  a  fine  city,  country  and  office  practice, 
for  his  skill  and  ability  are  recognized,  and  a  lib- 
eral patronage  now  rewards  him. 

The  Doctor  holds  membership  with  the  Odd 
Fellows'  lodge  of  Mt.  Carbon,  has  filled  the  various 
chairs,  and  is  also  a  member  of  the  Forresters.  He 
likewise  belongs  to  the  .Soutiiern  Illinois  Medical 
Association.  Since  twenty-two  years  of  age  he 
has  been  a  member  of  the  Baptist  Church.  He  is 
a  prominent  worker  in  church  and  Sunday-school, 
and  is  now  serving  as  Deacon.  Turning  from  the 
public  to  the  private  life  of  the  Doctor,  we  notice 
a  household  of  four  members.  He  was  married 
April  14,  1887,  in  Pomona  Township,  to  Miss 
Laura  E.,  daughter  of  H.  H.  Etherton,  a  prominent 
farmer  of  Jackson  County.     The  lady  was  born  in 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


667 


the  county-,  and  was  educated  in  Carbondale.  Two 
living  children  grace  their  union.  Ira  G.  and 
Verah  M.  Algia  H.,  the  second  in  order  of  birth, 
died  at  the  age  of  about  two  j-ears. 

l^jOBERT  W.  S.  WHEATLEY.  the  leading 
il^f^  lawj-er  of  Du  Quoin,  is  attornej-  for  the  St. 
tL  \V  Louis,  Alton  ife  Terre  Haute  Railroad  Com- 
'^p)pan3',  and  is  ex-Grand  Master  of  the  Odd 
Fellows  of  the  state.  He  has  the  honor  of  being  a 
nativfe  of  Illinois,  his  birth  having  occurred  in  St. 
Clair  County,  August  19, 1850.  His  father,  Warren 
Wheatley,  was  born  in  Tuscarawas  County,  Ohio, 
in  1828,  and  the  grandfather,  Mordecai  AYlieatley, 
was  one  of  the  pioneers  of  the  Buckeye  State.  He 
was  a  blacksmith  and  wagon-maker  by  trade  and 
was  prominent  in  the  work  of  the  Methodist 
Church.  He  had  two  brothers,  Isaac  and  Robert, 
both  of  whom  were  active  in  church  work,  while 
the  latter  was  the  founder  of  the  Christian  Church 
in  Du  Quoin.  The  grandfather  of  our  subject  was 
one  of  the  earliest  pioneers  of  Perry  County  and 
was  a  man  of  more  than  average  ability.  He  died 
in  1880,  respected  bj-  all  who  knew  him. 

Warren  Wheatley  was  a  farmer,  carpenter  and 
merchant.  During  the  late  war  he  enlisted  in  the 
service  of  his  country,  November  1,  1861,  as  a 
member  of  Companj-  I,  Forty-ninth  Illinois  In- 
fantry, and  was  appointed  to  a  position  in  the 
commissar3-  department  of  the  Seventeenth  Army 
Corps,  in  which  he  served  until  the  close  of  the 
struggle.  He  was  one  of  the  best  known  men  of 
that  corps,  and  was  known  by  all  as  "  Hardshell," 
a  name  given  to  his  b^'  Gen.  John  A.  Logan  on 
account  of  his  giving  so  much  hardtack  to  the 
soldiers.  This  name  clung  to  him  throughout  life. 
He  was  a  personal  friend  of  Gen.  John  A.  Logan, 
and  was  on  intimate  terms  with  General  Grant. 
Our  subject  now  has  in  his  possession  valuable 
ordei-s  and  friendlv  communications  from  the  great 
General,  and  in  1883,  when  they  met  in  St.  Louis, 
Mr.  Wheatle}-  showed  Grant  an  important  order  ' 
signed  bj-  him  during  the  great  conflict.  The  Gen-  i 
eral,  looking  at  it,  said,  "  Hardshell,  I  am  going  to  , 
sign  that  order  again  for  you,"  and  so  saying  be   i 


placed  his  name  and  the  date  on  the  ffice.  Gen- 
eral Leggett  also  spoke  of  Mr.  Wheatley  in  terms 
of  highest  praise  in  friendly  missives,  as  well 
as  in  general  orders,  as  did  General  Logan  and 
others  prominent  in  the  war.  Mr.  Wheatley  died 
in  Du  Quoin,  January  9,  1891,  after  an  honorable 
and  well  spent  life.  He  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Rachel  Stewart,  a  native  of  Jefferson ville, 
Ind.,  and  a  daughter  of  Robert  Stewart,  a  wagon- 
maker  b}'  trade,  and  one  of  the  pioneers  of 
Perry  Count}'.  The  lady  died  in  September,  1884. 
There  were  two  sons  and  one  daughter  in  the  fam- 
ily. James  W.  is  a  resident  of  Du  Quoin.  The 
daughter  became  the  wife  of  R.  B.  French  and  the 
mother  of  two  children  now  living.  Maude  and 
Guy.     She  is  deceased. 

Mr.  Wheatlev  of  this  sketch  spent  his  early  boy- 
hood da^'s  under  the  paternal  roof  in  the  usual 
manner  of  farmer  lads  and  attended  the  common 
schools  until  seventeen  years  of  age,  when  he  de- 
cided to  engage  in  the  practice  of  law  and  entered 
the  office  of  Col.  R.  R.  Town,  of  Du  Quoin.  In 
1871,  on  attaining  his  majorit}-,  he  was  admitted 
to  the  Bar,  and  his  advancement  from  the  start  has 
been  marked.  He  served  for  several  years  as  Cit}' 
Attorney  of  Du  Quoin,  and  was  for  man}-  j-ears 
an  attorney  for  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad  and 
the  St.  Louis,  Alton  lir  Terre  Haute  Railroad.  As 
an  advocate  he  has  few  equals  in  southern  Illinois. 

In  1884,  Mr.  Wheatley  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Lottie  B.  Farnan,  who  belongs  to  one  of 
the  prominent  families  of  Randolph  County.  They 
have  two  sons,  Frank  P.  and  Lary  B.  Mr.  AVheat- 
ley  has  taken  quite  a  prominent  part  in  politics, 
and  is  one  of  the  most  noted  political  orators  of 
southern  Hlinois.  He  has  never  been  a  politician 
in  the  sense  of  office  seeking,  having  many  times 
refused  to  become  a  candidate,  yet  he  is  a  warm 
advocate  of  the  Republican  principles.  In  the 
circles  of  the  Odd  Fellows'  society  he  is  very  prom- 
inent, and  in  1891  retired  from  the  office  of  Grand 
Master  of  the  state,  which  position  he  filled  with 
jnarked  ability.  When  he  entered  the  office,  he 
found  much  dissatisfaction  in  the  order  in  differ- 
ent parts  of  the  state,  but  by  his  wise  counsel  he 
brought  harmony  out  of  discord  and  the  frater- 
nity is  now  in  most  excellent  working  condition. 


668 


PORTEAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


In  1891,  he  was  elected  representative  to  the  Sov- 
ereign Grand  Lodge,  which  position  he  is  still  fill- 
ing. He  is  also  a  member  of  the  Knights  of  P}-- 
thias  fraternitj'  and  is  a  Royal  Arch  Mason. 


— f^^-»— 


-#l- 


^    TENRY  CLAY  BROWN.     Among  the  many 

I  I  native-born  citizens  of  Randolph  County 
I  who  are  yet  residing  here,  engaged  in 
agricultural  pursuits,  we  may  mention  our 
subject,  who  was  born  near  Shiloh  Hill,  April  14, 
1851.  He  is  the  third  in  a  famil}'  of  four  boys 
and  one  girl,  whose  parents  were  James  M.  and 
Rebecca  (Simons)  Brown.  The  father  was  born  in 
Kentucky.  May  16,  1811,  and  lived  in  Ohio  during 
his  younger  daj's;  the  mother  was  born  in  Greene 
County,  111.,  and  was  a  daughter  of  Edward  Simons. 
For  man}'  3'ears  James  M.  Brown  was  an  engineer 
on  a  river  steamer,  and  in  1842  purch.ased  from  A. 
B.  Rodgers  a  farm  near  Shiloh  Hill,  which  con- 
tinued to  be  his  home  until  1856.  Afterward  he 
superintended  the  building  .and  equipment  of  a 
mill  at  Liberty  Landing  (now  Rockwood),  serving 
as  President  of  the  compan  v  and  as  chief  engineer. 
About  1860,  he  disposed  of  the  mill  and  purchased 
the  farm  on  section  17,  township  8,  range  5,  where 
our  subject  now  lives. 

In  the  fall  of  1869,  James  M.  Brown  went  to 
Texas,  hoping  by  a  change  of  climate  to  recuperate 
his  health.  He  remained  through  the  winter,  and 
then  returned  to  Rockwood,  where  his  death  oc- 
curred January  14,  1874.  His  wife  was  born 
August  19,  1820,  and  dep.arled  this  life  July  3, 
1866.  They  were  married  July  25,  1841,  in  St. 
Louis,  and  soon  afterward  came  to  take  possession 
of  their  new  home  near  Shiloh  Hill. 

The  subject  of  the  sketch  gained  the  rudiments 
of  his  education  at  Ebenezer  school  in  the  summer 
of  1856,  and  the  following  winter  attended  the 
school  at  Libert}-  Landing,  remaining  there  for 
ten  }-ears.  In  the  winter  of  1868-69,  he  took  a 
course  in  the  Christian  Brothers'  College  at  St. 
Louis.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time,  in  connec- 
tion with  his  brother,  he  embarked  in  agricultural 
pursuits  upon  the  farm  where  he  now  resides.  Dur- 
ing the    time  from   1872  to  1874,  he  resided    in 


Rockwood,  but  continued  lip  operate  the  farm  as 
before.  In  the  last  named  year,  he  purchased  a 
steam  threshing  machine,  the  first  ever  seen  in  this 
part  of  the  count}-,  and  it  was  a  sight  that  drew 
beholders  for  miles  around.  The  following  year 
he  and  his  brother  purchased  another  machine, 
which  they  operated  in  partnership  for  many  years. 
December  23,  1869,  Henry  C.  Brown  married 
Annie,  a  daughter  of  Montraville  Vickers,  whose 
biography  appears  elsewhere  in  this  work.  To  this 
couple  have  been  born  six  children,  of  whom  Lewis 
E.,  Eunice  E.  and  an  unnamed  infant  all  died 
when  quite  young.  Alfred  C.  was  born  Novem- 
ber 29,  1874;  James  A.,  August  15,  1881,  and  Fred 
W.,  March  12,  1890.  In  politics,  Mr.  Brown  is  a 
stanch  Democrat,  as  was  his  father  before  him.  He 
has  held  the  office  of  School  Director,  and  takes  a 
great  interest  in  all  things  pertaining  to  education 
and  schools.  He  resides  in  a  fine  large  two-story 
house,  which  embellishes  his  splendid  farm  of  one 
hundred  and  eighty  broad  and  fertile  acres,  divided 
about  equally  in  bluflf  and  bottom  land.  In  addi- 
tion to  that  property,  he  owns  about  two  hundred 
acres  in  Jackson  County,  most  of  which  is  under 
his  personal  supervision. 


y,^,  LEXANDER  BARBER.  The  honest  dis- 
^Ol  charge  of  every  trust  reposed  in  his  hands, 
i  the  unusual  ability  shown  Ln  different  di- 
rections, and  the  interest  he  has  taken  in 
the  advancement  of  measures  for  the  good  of 
Randolph  County,  have  caused  Alexander  Barber 
long  since  to  be  classed  as  one  of  the  leading  citi- 
zens of  this  part  of  the  state.  Our  subject  is  a 
native  of  Jackson  County,  this  state,  where  his 
birth  occurred,  near  Campbell  Hill,  April  22,  1842. 
He  is  the  son  of  Alexander  and  Caroline  (Harri- 
son) Barber,  and  a  grandson  of  Alexander  Bar- 
ber. The  latter  was  a  native  of  Ohio,  who, 
upon  coming  to  Illinois  in  1804,  settled  near  Ellis 
Grove,  and  for  forty-eight  consecutive  years  served 
as  Justice  of  the  Peace  in  Randolph  County. 

Orphaned  in  childhood  by  his  father's  death,  our 
subject  made  his  home  with  his  grandfather,  and 
with  his  mother,  who  had  married  again.     When 


'MV'll?4fffi 


RES      jC     C[    0        lie     BROWN       SEC      (      IP      R     o      P/   IJ      OiPH      Cu      III 


=*      ^-^    ""Xr- 


1?^ 


,fe 


nF 


-5PCV/J,5EC     iGbEGOGIIIAT      JAit-     OT-I     (U.ILL 


^iiflt^^ 


RrsinEMCE  OF    CAPT     A  LEX  A  N  D  FR   B  ARBtR    ROCKWOO  D,  RAMP  -  P-i  CO   ILL 


PORTRAIT  ANT)  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


671 


but  nineteen  years  of  age,  he  enlisted  in  Company 
H, Twentj'-second  Illinois  Infanti-3',June  25,  1861, 
for  three  j-ears.  He  was  on  detached  service  at 
the  headquarters  of  Generals  Morgan  and  Sheri- 
dan during  the  last  eighteen  months  in  the  army, 
and  was  discharged  at  Camp  Butler,  111.,  July  7, 
1864.  Seven  months  later,  February  16,  1865,  he 
re-enlisted  in  Company  F,  Second  United  States 
Veteran  Volunteers,  in  General  Hancock's  Corps, 
and  served  for  one  3'ear.  He  was  on  dutj-  along 
with  said  corps  at  the  prison  at  the  time  of  the 
execution  of  ^frs.  Surratt,  one  of  the  conspirators 
to  the  assassination  of  President  Lincoln  in  1865, 
in  Washington.  D.  C.  He  suffered  from  sickness  a 
great  deal  dur  jg  the  time  in  the  army,  but  man- 
aged to  keep  1  p  with  his  comrades. 

November  11,  1869,  Mr.  Barber  married  Theo- 
docia,  daughter  of  Alfred  G.  and  Frances  (Cor- 
nelius) McCormack,  natives  of  Pennsj-lvania  and 
Kentuek}'  respectivelj'.  The  father  was  a  grand- 
son of  Colonel  Crawford,  who  was  burned  at  the 
stake  by  the  Indians,  a  fact  well  known  in  the  his- 
tory of  the  day.  Theodocia  Barber  was  born  Au- 
gust 15,  1847,  near  Chester,  111.,  whither  her  par- 
ents had  moved  about  1836.  Of  this  union  have 
been  born  nine  children:  Herbert,  who  died  in  in- 
fancy in  1872;  Clar.i  A.,  born  June  17,  1873;  Xina 
M.,  September  10,  1875;  Willard  S.,  June  10,  1877; 
Gertie  L.,  May  15,  1879;  Joel  E.,  February  10, 
1881;  Everett  C,  January  26,  1884;  Josie  F.,  No- 
vember 21,  1886;  and  Benjamin  Harrison,  January 
29,  1889.  Mrs.  Barber  is  a  member  of  Methodist 
Episcopal  Church,  and  Nina  and  Gertie  are  iden- 
tified with  the  Presb^yterian   denomination. 

Politically,  Mr.  Barber  is  a  true-blue  Republican 
and  boldlj'  expresses  his  opinion  without  fear  or 
favor.  He  has  lived  through  some  very  exciting 
times  here, and  a  volume  could  be  filled  with  inter- 
esting reminiscences  of  his  eventful  career.  So- 
cially he  is  a  Mason,  but  is  not  affiliated  with  any 
lodge  now,  there  being  none  in  Rockwood.  He  has 
held  many  township  offices,  including  those  of 
Constable,  Police  Magistrate,  Justice  of  the  Peace, 
and  also  served  as  Deputy  under  the  administra- 
tion of  Sheriff  Daniel  Gerlach.  He  is  also  Notary 
Public.  The  duties  of  his  vaiious  positions  he 
has  discharged  with  satisfaction  to  his  constituents 


and  with  credit  to  himself.  He  is  now  making  his 
home  on  a  tract  of  land  comprising  fort^y-eight 
acres  adjoining  the  village  of  Rockwood,  and  with 
his  family  occupies  a  large  two-story  house  set  in 
the  midst  of  well  kept  grounds. 


aHARLES  BROWN.  One  of  the  finest  farms 
,  in  Jackson  County  lies  on  section  16,  De- 
■  gognia  Township.  The  owner,  a  progress- 
ive agriculturist,  is  a  native  of  Randolph  Coun- 
t3%  this  state,  having  been  born  near  Sbiloh  Hill. 
March  17,  1853,  on  the  old  homestead,  where 
his  father,  a  retired  river  engineer,  was  residing 
at  that  time.  For  further  details  pertaining  to  the 
famih'  history  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  bio- 
graphical sketch  of  H.  C.  Brown  on  another  page 
of  this  volume. 

When  our  subject  was  a  child,  his  father,  James 
Brown,  sold  his  section  of  land  lying  near  Shiloh 
Hill  for  $12,000,  which  in  those  days  was  consid- 
ered a  large  sum  for  a  farm.  The  family  then 
moved  to  Rockwood,  where  the  father  took  a 
prominent  part  in  the  building  of  a  large  mill  at 
that  place.  Attending  school  at  Rockwood  until 
the  spring  of  1869,  Charles  then  entered  the  South- 
ern Illinois  College,  at  Carbondale,  and  was  pres- 
ent at  the  laying  of  the  corner-stone  of  tlie  South- 
ern Illinois  Normal  School.  In  the  fall  of  1869 
he  entered  the  Christian  Brothers'  College  in  St. 
Louis,  but  at  the  end  of  the  first  month  returned 
home.  A  week  or  two  later  he  went  back  to  St. 
Louis  and  took  a  course  in  Brj-ant  &  Stratton's 
Business  College,  where  he  continued  until  the 
spring  of  1870. 

Immediatel3'  upon  his  return  to  Rockwood, 
Mr.  Brown  began  farming,  and,  although  he  was 
not  3'et  of  age,  he  has  since  been  self-supporting 
and  independent.  Inheriting  a  fine  tract  of  land 
from  his  father,  he  now  has  a  magnificent  farm 
of  two  hundred  and  sixt3--two  acres  l3ing  in  the 
bottoms  of  Degognia  Township,  Jackson  County, 
one  of  the  richest  bodies  of  land  on  the  continent. 
From  the  bluffs  along  which  the  farm  lies  a  beau 
tiful  view  ma3'  be  had  of  the  river,  to  which  the 
estate   extends.     Wheat,   corn   and    potatoes   are 


672 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


the  principal  crops,  the  last-named  being  especially 
profitable  owing  to  the  extreme  richness  of  the 
soil.  The  farm  is  stocked  with  a  fine  grade  of 
Holstein  and  Jersey  cattle,  Poland-China  hogs 
and  Cotswold  sheep.  One  of  the  curiosities  of 
the  place  is  an  old  stone  watering  trough  that  has 
stood  the  frosts  of  at  least  ninety  winters,  and  in 
all  probability  has  been  there  for  a  much  longer  pe- 
riod. When  purchased  by  the  father  of  our  subject, 
many  years  ago,  it  was  then  quite  old.  Several 
Indian  mounds  on  the  place,  from  which  have 
been  turned  up  many  flint  tools  and  Indian  grave 
stones,  are  also  of  interest. 

July  2,  1884,  Charles  Brown  married  Miss  Belle 
P.,  daughter  of  Benjamin  and  Margaret  A.  (Clen- 
denin)  Richards,  the  former  a  native  of  Stafford- 
sliire,  England,  and  the  latter  of  Randolph  Coun- 
ty, 111.  The  maternal  grandparents  of  Mrs.  Brown 
were  John  H.  and  Mary  Clendenin,  early  settlers 
of  Randolph  County,  who  came  hither  from  Ken- 
tucky. Benjamin  Richards  was  born  July  8,  1828, 
and  came  to  America  about  1840.  On  the  14th 
of  September,  1858,  he  married  Miss  Clendenin, 
who  was  born  April  29,  1842.  In  June,  1886,  he 
moved  with  his  family  to  Delphos,  Kan.,  where  he 
now  resides.  He  and  his  wife  were  the  parents  of 
twelve  children,  six  sons  and  six  daughters,  of 
whom  the  following  survive:  Cora,  Belle,  Will- 
iam S.,  John  H.,  Nettie,  Bertha,  Lottie  and  Joseph 
B.  Mrs.  Brown,  the  second  in  order  of  birth,  was 
born  December  16,  1862,  and  by  her  marriage  has 
become  the  mother  of  one  child,  Cora,  born  Feb- 
ruary 5,  1889. 

In  politics  a  Republican,  Mr.  Brown  is  now 
serving  his  second  term  as  Supervisor  of  Degognia 
Township,  and  for  more  than  five  years  has  been 
School  Trustee.  He  is  not  an  office-seeker,  but  the 
offices  in  this  case  have  sought  the  man.  In  poli- 
tics the  four  brothers  of  the  family  are  strangely 
divided,  one  being  a  Prohibitionist,  another  a 
Democrat,  the  third  a  Republican,  and  the  fourth 
a  "Wheeler,"  as  the  Populists  are  called  in  Ar- 
kansas. Socially,  our  subject  is  a  leading  mem- 
ber of  the  Independent  Order  of  Odd  Fellows, 
and  served  as  a  delegate  to  the  last  two  state  con- 
ventions of  that  fr.a tern ity  in  Springfield,  and  will 
officiate  in   the  same  capacity   in  the  fall  of   1894. 


He  affiliates  with  Rockwood  Lodge  No.  351.  With 
his  wife,  he  enjoys  the  respect  of  all  who  know 
him,  and  is  regarded  as  a  progressive  farmer  and 
public-spirited  citizen. 


-5- 


^>^^<i 


V.  NETTLETON  is  prominent  in  both 
business  and  official  circles  in  Du  Quoin, 
being  one  of  the  enterprising  and  wide- 
awake citizens,  to  whom  the  citj'  owes  its  prosper- 
ity and  progress.  He  is  now  manager  of  the 
Union  Coal  Company,  and  occupies  the  position 
of  City  Clerk  of  Du  Quoin.  A  native  of  Missouri, 
he  was  born  in  Ste.  Genevieve,  October  24, 
1856.  His  father,  Gilbert  Netlleton,  was  a  native 
of  New  Hampshire,  and  in  an  early  day  emigrated 
to  Missouri.  In  1858  he  came  to  Du  Quoin.  In 
Missouri,  he  had  been  extensively  engaged  in  mer- 
chandising, and  was  also  interested  in  lead  mining. 
His  death  here  occurred  in  1863.  The  Nettletons 
came  from  good  old  Puritan  stock. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  bore  the  maiden  name 
of  Juliet  E.  Pratte.  She  was  born  in  Missouri,  and 
her  father,  Bernard  Pratte,  was  one  of  the  most 
prominent  men  in  the  lead  and  zinc  districts  of 
that  state.  He  was  of  French  descent,  and  his 
grandfather,  who  was  a  Frenchman  by  birth,  at 
one  time  owned  all  of  the  Iron  Mountains.  His 
descendants  did  much  to  develop  the  mineral  re- 
sources of  that  localit}^  and  Felix  Valle,  brother- 
in-law  of  Mrs.  Nettleton,  was  one  of  the  most  ex- 
tensive operators  in  the  lead  and  zinc  districts  of 
Missouri.  The  mother  of  our  subject  died  in  1870. 
In  the  family  were  the  following  children:  Charles, 
who  died  in  Des  Moines,  Iowa;  Bernard  Pratte, 
who  died  in  Pullman,  111.,  where  he  was  engaged 
in  business;  Mary,  who  lives  in  Du  Quoin;  Celeste, 
wife  of  Judge  G.  W.  Wall,  of  Du  Quoin,  who  is 
now  Judge  of  the  Appellate  Court;  and  Emma, 
wife  of  Capt.  Daniel  Robinson,  a  retired  army  offi- 
cer, now  living  in  Highland  Park. 

When  our  subject  was  a  youth  of  fifteen  j^ears, 
he  started  out  in  life  for  himself,  going  to  Cairo, 
where  he  secured  a  position  as  clerk  in  the  store 
of  C.  O.  Patier  &  Co.  A  year  later  he  went  to 
Beaucoup,  where  he  was  connected  with  the  in- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


673 


terests  of  Judge  Wall  and  W.  K.  Murphy.     He 

was  afterwards  eraplo3'ed  by  a  firm  in  St.  Louis  in 
the  coal  business,  and  in  1878  he  returned  to  Du 
Quoin,  where  he  embarked  in  merchandising.  In 
that  line  of  trade  he  continued  for  three  years, 
since  which  time  he  has  been  connected  with  the 
Union  Mines,  owned  bj'  Judge  Wall  and  J.  M. 
Browning,  holding  the  responsible  position  of  man- 
ager. 

In  1878,  Mr.  Nettleton  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Ilattie  G.  Ward,  daughter  of  J.  B.  Ward,  a 
prominent  merchant  and  ex-County  Superintend- 
ent of  Schools  of  Perry  County.  They  have  four 
children  3'et  living,  and  have  lost  one,  Charles  Eu- 
gene, who  died  in  infancy.  The  others  are,  Eva, 
Celest,  Mabel  Geitrude,  John  Gilbert  and  Felix 
Bernard. 

Mr.  Nettleton  takes  considerable  interest  in 
civic  societies,  and  is  a  leading  member  of  the 
Knights  of  Pythias  and  Odd  Fellows'  lodges.  In 
the  former  he  holds  the  office  of  Keeper  of  the 
Records  and  Seals.  In  politics  he  is  a  Democrat, 
and  has  held  the  position  of  Citj'  Clerk  for  eight 
years.  His  long  continued  service  in  that  office  is 
certainly  a  high  testimonial  of  his  ability  and 
fidelity  to  dut}'  and  the  confidence  reposed  in  him 
by  his  fellow-townsmen.  He  has  also  been  man- 
ager in  the  gas  works  since  their  establishment, 
and  in  his  business  trusts  he  manifests  the  same 
faithfulness  that  is  displaced  in  his  official  career. 


"^■"^^  J.  McELVAIN  is  a  member  of  the  well 
known  law  firm  of  Smith,  McElvaiu  &  Her- 
bert, and  since  January,  1889,  has  served 
jjas  Master  in  Chancery.  He  was  born  in 
Perry  County,  111.,  March  20,  1849.  His  grand- 
father, Robert  McElvain,  was  a  native  of  the  Key- 
stone State,  and  removed  thence  to  Kentucky.  He 
afterwards  became  one  of  the  earl}'  settlers  of  this 
count}',  and  subsequently  went  to  Perry  Count}', 
where  he  spent  his  last  days,  dying  at  the  age  of 
seventy  years.  In  religious  belief  he  was  a  Pres- 
byterian.    His  father  was  a  native  of  Scotland. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  Josepli  H.  McElvain, 
was  born  in  Kentucky,  and  accompanied  his  parents 


to  this  state.  He  followed  agricultural  pursuits, 
and  obtaining  land,  cleared  and  developed  a  fine 
farm,  upon  which  he  still  makes  his  home.  In 
early  life  he  was  a  Whig  in  politics,  but  since  the 
organization  of  the  party  has  been  a  stalwart  Re- 
publican. He  married  Esther  Lipe,  a  native  of 
North  Carolina,  and  a  daughter  of  Jonas  Lipe, 
who  became  one  of  the  early  settlers  of  Jackson 
County,  and  then  removed  to  Perry  County,  where 
he  spent  his  last  days.  He  was  a  Baptist  in  re- 
ligious belief  and  was  of  German  descent.  Unto 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  McElvain  were  born  eleven  children, 
who  reached  mature  years,  while  ten  are  yet  liv- 
ing. Three  brothers  served  in  the  Civil  War. 
Ephraim  and  Corydon  were  members  of  the  Eighty- 
first  Illinois  Infantry,  both  were  captured  at  the 
battle  of  Guntown,  and  for  ten  months,  or  until 
the  close  of  the  war,  were  incarcerated  at  Ander- 
son ville.  Daniel  was  First  Lieutenant  in  the  Thir- 
ty-fifth Missouri  Infantry  and  served  throughout 
the  entire  struggle. 

R.  J.  McElvain,  whose  name  heads  this  sketch, 
was  reared  upon  his  father's  farm  until  seventeen 
years  of  age,  and  then  spent  one  year  as  a  student 
in  the  vSouthern  Illinois  Normal  at  Carbondale, 
after  which  he  embarked  in  teaching,  following 
that  profession  for  four  years  in  Jackson  and 
Perry  Counties.  During  that  period  he  spent  his 
leisure  hours  in  studying  law  under  Col.  James  H. 
Nunes  and  Judge  Parks,  having  determined  to 
make  the  legal  profession  his  life  work.  In  1878, 
he  was  admitted  to  practice  at  the  Illinois  Bar  in 
Du  Quoin.  He  continued  practice  there  and  in 
Perry  until  1881,  when  he  entered  the  law  depart- 
ment of  McKendree  College,  from  which  he  was 
graduated  in  1882,  with  the  degree  of  LL.B.  At 
that  time  he  was  a  resident  of  Jackson  County, 
having  removed  to  Elkville  in  1874. 

In  January  of  that  year,  in  Elkville,  Mr.  Mc- 
Elvain was  united  in  marri.age  with  Miss  Mary  A., 
daughter  of  George  Schwartz,  who  came  from 
Pennsylvania  to  this  county  and  is  numbered 
among  its  earliest  settlers.  Mrs.  McElvain  was 
born  in  Elkville,  and  is  a  member  of  the  Christian 
Church.     They  have  one  child,  Robert  J.,  Jr'. 

Socially,  Mr.  McElvain  is  connected  with  Leon- 
idas   Lodge  No.  87,  K.  P.,  and  Leonidas  Division 


674 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


No.  7,  Uniformed  Rank.  For  three  yeare  he  has 
served  as  District  Deputy,  and  has  been  Represent- 
ative to  the  Grand  Lodge.  Frequently  he  has 
been  called  upon  to  serve  in  public  positions.  In 
1880,  he  was  nominated  on  tbc  Republican  ticket 
for  State's  Attorne_v,  but  failed  to  secure  the  elec- 
tion. In  1884,  however,  he  was  elected  to  that 
office,  being  the  only  Republican  that  won.  Com- 
ing to  Murphysboro,  he  here  opened  a  law  office 
and  entered  upon  the  discharge  of  his  official  du- 
ties, which  he  continued  until  December,  1888. 
In  Januar}',  1889,  he  was  appointed  Master  in 
Cbancer3',and  in  March  following,  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  firm  of  Smith,  McElvain  &  Herbert.  In 
1878  and  1879,  he  served  as  Count}'  Supervisor 
from  Elk  Township,  and  for  one  year  was  Chair- 
man of  the  Board.  For  four  years  past  he  has 
been  Chairman  of  the  Count}'  Republican  Central 
Committee,  and  has  done  effective  and  faithful 
service  in  the  interests  of  his  party. 


4^ 


-r^m-r 


■^> 


^I^  ON.  GEORGE  W.  WALL,  of  Du  Quoin, 
ifjj)  Judge  of  the  Appellate  Court  of  Illinois, 
ss^  was  born  in  Chillicothe,  Ohio,  April  22, 
(^  1839,  and  is  a  son  of  George  T.  Wall,  who 
was  born  in  Rhode  Island,  April  14,1810.  The 
name  Wall  is  of  Irish  origin,  and  from  the  Emerald 
Isle  the  ancestors  came  to  this  countr}'  more  than 
a  centurj'  and  a-half  ago.  The  grandfather  of  the 
Judge,  Benah  Wall,  was  a  pioneer  manufacturer 
of  cotton  goods.  The  father  of  our  subject  was  a 
physician,  and  in  1840,  when  his  son  was  a  5'ear 
old,  came  to  Du  Quoin.  He  was  then  in  limited 
circumstances,  but  became  one  of  the  wealth- 
iest citizens  of  Perrj'  County.  Here  his  remain- 
ing days  were  passed,  and  his  death  occurred  in 
January,  1892.  He  married  Maria  Adams,  a  native 
of  Hartford,  Conn.,  and  a  daughter  of  General 
Adams.     Her  death  occurred  in  1848. 

The  Judge  acquired  his  early  education  in  the 
schools  of  Du  Quoin,  later  attended  McKendree 
'  College,  of  Lebanon,  111., and  before  he  was  twent}' 
years  of  age  was  graduated  from  the  Michigan 
State  Universit}',  in  1858.  AVishing  to  enter  the 
legal  profession  and  make  the  practice  of  law  his 


life  work,  he  began  studj'ing  in  the  office  of  Cyrus 
G.  Simmons,  of  Cairo.  Subsequentl}'  he  took  a 
course  in  the  Cincinnati  Law  School,  was  admitted 
to  the  Bar  in  1859,  and  then  commenced  practice 
in  Du  Quoin.  He  has  been  honored  with  a  num- 
ber of  prominent  positions  in  this  state.  He  was 
a  member  of  the  Constitutional  Convention  in 
1862,  and  in  1864  was  elected  State's  Attorney  for 
the  Third  Judicial  District.  In  1870,  he  served  as 
a  member  of  the  Constitutional  Convention,  and 
in  August,  1877,  he  was  elected  Circuit  Judge. 
To  that  office  he  was  re-elected  in  June,  1879,  in 
1885  and  1891.  In  1879,  he  was  assigned  to  the 
Appellate  Court  at  Mt.  Vernon,  where  he  con- 
tinued until  1885,  when  he  was  assigned  to  the 
same  court  at  Springfield,  and  b}'  successive  as- 
signments has  been  on  the  Bench  in  the  capital 
city  continuoush'  since.  To-da}-  he  is  considered 
the  most  able  .Judge  of  his  .age  in  Illinois,  a  repu- 
tation which  lias  been  trul}-  won  bj-  merit. 

In  1862,  Mr.  Wall  wedded  Miss  Celeste  E.  Net- 
tieton,  daughter  of  a  former  prominent  merchant 
of  this  place.  Of  their  children,  Willard  is  now 
Cashier  of  the  First  National  Bank  of  Murphys- 
boro, and  Charles  H.  is  Superintendent  of  the 
Union  Coal  Mines  of  Du  Quoin.  There  are  also  two 
}-ounger  sons  and  a  daughter.  Through  business 
interests,  and  as  the  result  of  his  extensive  law 
practice.  Judge  Wall  has  accumulated  one  of  the 
largest  private  fortunes  in  southern  Illinois.  3-et  he 
has  not  only  gained  wealth,  but  has  also  won  a 
reputation  at  the  Bench  and  Bar  which  is  scarcel_v 
equaled  in  the  state. 

,|^^EY.  JOSEPH  SCHNEIDER,  Rector  of  St. 

[ii^  Brunos  Catholic  Church  of  Pinckneyville, 
^\\\  is  a  native  of  Germany,  his  birth  having 
^0  occurred  in  Bavaria,  in  1852.  His  father, 
George  Schneider,  was  a  well-to-do  German  farmer. 
Joseph  received  his  classical  education  in  the  city 
of  Wurzburg,  and  then  came  to  America,  contin- 
uing his  studies  at  St.  Vincent  College  in  West- 
moreland County,  Pa.  There  he  studied  philoso- 
phv  and  theology,  and  when  his  education  was 
completed,  he  was  ordained  as  a  priest  of  the  Cath- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


675 


olic  Church  by  Archbishop  Kenriok  in  St.  Louis 
for  the  diocese  of  Alton. 

Father  Schneider  was  then  sent  to  Pinckney- 
ville,  Perr}-  Count}',  to  act  as  a  substitute  for  Fa- 
ther Krug,  who  was  at  that  time  traveling  in  Eu- 
rope for  his  health.  FatiierKrug  did  not  improve 
as  it  was  hoped  he  would  do,  and  on  his  death  our 
subject  became  iiis  successor  as  Rector  of  St.  Brunos 
Catholic  Church.  He  is  an  untiring  and  inde- 
fatigable worker,  and  has  done  much  to  build  up 
the  church  in  this  place.  Since  coming  here  he 
has  established  the  school,  which  was  started  in 
1887,  and  is  under  the  direction  of  Sisters.  A  fine 
new  parsonage  has  also  been  built.  It  is  one  of 
the  very  best  residences  in  the  city. 

Aside  from  his  church  in  Pinckneyville,  Mr. 
Schneider  has  charge  of  a  parish  ten  miles  nortii 
of  this  place.  There  is  a  congregation  of  thirty 
families,  and  the  little  church  is  in  working  order. 
The  church  property  in  Pinckneyville  is  valued  at 
$10,000,  and  the  greater  part  of  it  was  secured 
through  the  instrumcntalit}-  of  Father  Schneider. 
He  is  a  most  agreeable  gentleman,  well  informed 
on  all  general  subjects.  He  has  traveled  exten- 
sivel}'  in  foreign  lands,  and  a  retentive  memorj' 
enables  him  to  converse  well  on  what  he  has  seen. 
He  has  the  respect  and  esteem  of  his  parishioners, 
and  is  held  in  high  regard  throughout  the  entire 
community. 

T.  FALLON,  grain  dealer  of  Du  Quoin, 
was  born  in  Pinckneyville,  Perry  County, 
on  the  22d  of  April,  1860,  and  in  the  com- 
munity where  his  entire  life  has  been  spent  is 
widelj'  and  favorably  known.  His  father,  Robert 
Fallon,  was  a  native  of  Ireland,  born  in  1808,  and 
he  came  to  this  country  with  his  parents  when  a 
lad  of  eight  years,  the  family-  locating  in  Pennsyl- 
vania, where  he  grew  to  manhood.  In  1844  he 
came  to  the  west  to  try  his  fortune  on  the  broad 
prairies  of  Illinois,  and  took  up  his  residence  at 
old  Du  Quoin.  By  trade  he  was  a  blacksmith,  but 
later  eng.aged  in  farming  near  Pinckne3'ville.  He 
entered  the  army  during  the  Civil  War  as  a   vet- 


erinary surgeon  of  the  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry. 
Later  in  life  he  engaged  in  the  milling  business. 
His  death  occurred  in  1880,  at  the  age  of  seventy- 
two  years.  He  married  Rebecca  Flora,  a  native  of 
Pennsylvania,  and  she  still  survives  him,  living  in 
Du  Quoin,  at  the  age  of  seventj'-five. 

Our  subject  was  the  j^oungest  in  a  family  of 
eleven  children,  having  seven  brothers  and  three 
sisters,  of  whom  foiu-  brothers  and  two  sisters  are 
yet  living.  R.  V.  is  a  merchant  of  Pinckneyville; 
W.  F.,  who  was  a  Captain  in  the  Sixth  Illinois  Cav- 
alry, and  lost  his  health  during  his  service,  is  now 
living  in  Du  Quoin;  D.  C,  who  follows  farming 
near  Pinckneyville,  w.as  one  of  the  boys  in  blue  of 
Company  D,  Thirteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  and  was 
taken  prisoner;  George  T.,  who  served  his  coun- 
try as  a  member  of  the  Thirteenth  Illinois  Infan- 
try, was  taken  prisoner;  he  lost  his  health  in  the 
service,  and  died  from  the  effects  of  his  army  life 
in  1877;  and  W.  II.,  a  physician,  went  to  Kansas 
and  later  to  Colorado,  where  he  died  in  1888. 

We  now  take  up  the  personal  history  of  F.  T. 
Fallon,  who  actpured  his  education  in  the  common 
schools,  and  when  it  was  completed,  became  inter- 
ested with  his  father  and  brother  in  the  milling 
business.  In  1882  he  became  connected  with  Hal- 
liday  Brothers  at  their  salt  works  in  .St.  .John,  and 
for  three  years  was  employed  in  their  store  at  that 
place.  He  then  went  upon  the  road,  traveling  in 
their  interest  for  seven  years,  or  until  February, 
1882,  when  he  bought  the  mill  and  elevator  at  Du 
Quoin,  succeeding  P.  N.  Pope,  who  had  established 
the  business  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  be- 
fore. 

In  1888  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  Mr.  Fal- 
lon and  Miss  Minnie  E.  Bowman,  who  was  the 
youngest  of  five  sisters.  Her  father,  Andrew  Bow- 
man, was  formerlj' a  leading  merchant  of  Tamaroa, 
but  died  during  the  early  childhood  of  Mrs.  Fal- 
lon. She  is  a  most  charming  and  estimable  lady, 
and  has  many  friends  throughout  the  community. 
One  son  graces  their  union,  Bernard  Bowm.an,  a 
bright  little  fellow  of  four  years. 

Mr.  Fallon  is  a  prominent  member  of  the  Knights 
of  Pythias,  in  which  he  is  now  serving  as  Prelate 
and  Vice-Chancellor.  He  is  also  connected  with 
the  Masonic  fraternity,  and  in  politics  is  a  stanch 


676 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


Republican.  He  is  one  of  the  most  pleasant  and 
popular  young  business  men  of  southern  Illinois, 
and  few  of  the  younger  citizens  of  Du  Quoin  are 
more  widely  or  favorably  known  than  he. 


Qi 


-^"^ 


^ 


EF.  A.  CHAPMAN  is  one  of  the  enterpris- 
ing, prominent  and  successful  business  men 
"  of  Murphysboro,  who  since  1866  has  made 
his  home  in  this  city,  and  has  watched  with  inter- 
est its  progress  and  development.  He  has  ever 
borne  his  part  in  the  work  of  advancement,  and 
has  materially  aided  in  its  upbuilding.  His  name 
therefore  deserves  an  honored  place  in  the  record 
of  the  county,  and  with  pleasure  we  present  his 
sketch  to  our  readers. 

Mr.  Chapman  was  born  in  Lincolnshire,  En- 
gland, January  3,  1852,  and  his  father,  John  Chap- 
man, was  a  farmer  of  that  country,  who  in  1859> 
accompanied  by  his  family,  came  to  America, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  to  New  York  on  the  steamer 
"City  of  Washington."  He  first  located  in  Odin, 
111.,  afterward  was  employed  in  the  shops  of  the 
Illinois  Central  Railroad  at  Centralia,  and  in 
March.  1866,  came  to  Jackson  County.  He  kept 
a  log  boarding  house  in  Mt.  Carbon,  and  also  en- 
gaged in  farming.  In  1867,  he  went  to  Grand 
Tower,  and  engaged  in  the  hotel  business  until  his 
death,  which  occurred  several  years  later.  He 
married  Elizabeth  Chapman,  but  though  they  bore 
the  same  name,  they  were  not  relatives.  Her  peo- 
ple were  originally  from  Scotland,  but  she  was 
born  and  died  in  England.  Mr.  Chapman  was  a 
second  time  married.  By  the  first  union  there 
were  three  children :  Anne  and  E.  F.  A.,  of  Mur- 
phj'sboro.  and  John,  who  died  in  Carbondale. 

Our  subject  was  a  lad  of  seven  when  he  came  to 
America.  Since  the  age  of  eight  years  he  has 
made  his  own  way  in  the  world.  He  worked  for 
his  board,  with  the  privilege  of  attending  school. 
In  1866,  he  came  with  bis  father  to  this  county, 
and  remained  at  home  until  sixteen  years  of  age, 
when  he  entered  Christian  Brothers'  College  of 
St.  Louis  and  completed  the  commercial  course. 
He    then  secured  a  position  as  book-keeper  with 


the  firm  of  A.  C.  Brj'den  &  Co.,  merchants  of  Grand 
Tower,  with  whom  he  continued  until  1879,  when 
he  took  charge  of  their  store  in  Mt.  Carbon.  A 
few  months  later  he  removed  this  to  Murphysboro, 
and  continued  to  carry  on  the  store  until  an  as- 
signment was  made  by  the  firm.  He  also  had 
charge  of  the  store  owned  by  the  Carbondale  Coal 
and  Coke  Company,  at  Cartersville,  111.,  for  seven 
months. 

After  a  time  Mr.  Chapman  returned  to  Grand 
Tower,  and  took  charge  of  the  mercantile  business 
of  his  old  employers  at  that  place.  In  1884,  in 
connection  with  W.  C.  Kent,  he  bought  out  Bry- 
den  &  Co.,  and  under  the  firm  name  of  W.  C.  Kent 
<fe  Co.  carried  on  business.  There  was  also  an- 
other partner,  T.  B.  Thomas,  who  later  retired,  and 
the  firm  became  Kent  &  Chapman.  In  1889.  E.  A. 
G'Sell  bought  out  Mr.  Kent's  interest,  and  the 
firm  of  Chapman  &  G'Sell  is  now  one  of  the  lead- 
ing mercantile  firms  of  the  city.  Their  store  is 
located  at  No.  32  West  Walnut  Street,  is  23x70" 
feet,  and  two  stories  in  height,  with  a  basement. 
They  carry  a  large  line  of  general  merchandise, 
and  receive  from  the  public  a  liberal  patronage, 
which  is  constantly  increasing. 

In  Grand  Tower,  in  Julj-,  1874,  Mr.  Chapman 
wedded  Miss  Eugenia  A.  G'Sell,  who  was  born  in 
New  Mexico,  and  is  a  daughter  of  Antoine  G'Sell, 
a  native  of  Alsace,  France,  who  died  in  St.  Louis. 
They  have  six  children:  Charles,  Andrew,  E.  Liz- 
zie, William,  Mary  and  Ethel. 

Mr.  Chapman  is  a  member  of  St.  Andrew's  Cath- 
olic Church,  and  in  politics  is  a  Democrat.  For  a 
number  of  years  he  has  been  School  Trustee  of 
Murphj-sboro  Township.  In  1889-90  he  served  as 
Alderman  of  the  Second  Ward,  and  was  an  advo- 
cate of  the  water  works,  the  electric  light  and  sew- 
erage systems  which  were  established  during  that 
time.  The  best  interests  of  the  city  have  ever 
found  in  him  a  friend,  and  his  labors  have  been 
untiring  for  the  promotion  of  the  general  welfare, 
lie  was  one  of  the  corporators,  and  became  a 
Director  and  Secretary  of  the  old  St.  Louis  Cen- 
tral Railroad.  He  also  served  as  Paymaster  for 
the  division  between  Pinckneyville  and  Murph3's- 
boro.  This  is  now  known  as  the  Cairo  Short  Line, 
and  Mr.  Chapman  is  still  a  Director.     He  has  been 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


677 


interested  in  the  development  of  the  coal  lands  in 
this  region,  and  owns  several  acres.  He  also  has 
business  propertj'  in  Murphysboro.  and  a  pleasant 
residence  on  North  Cherry  Street. 

R.  I,EWIS  DYER  was  for  many  years  a 
leading  physician  of  southern  Illinois,  and 
an  array  surgeon  of  marked  abilitj'.  He  was 
an  orator  of  more  than  local  note,  a  man 
of  excellent  education,  broad  views  and  clear  and 
forcible  intellect.  He  was  born  in  Shaftsbur^', 
Bennington  County,  Vt.,  February  24,  1807. 
Dating  back  to  the  time  when  the  little  band  of 
exiles  left  England  and  crossed  the  Atlantic  to 
find  a  place  where  they  could  worship  God  accord- 
ing to  the  dictates  of  their  own  conscience,  to  the 
time  when  the  Pilgrims  landed  on  Plymouth  Rock, 
the  ancestry  of  the  D\er  famih'  in  America  can  he 
traced.  Fifteen  years  later  we  learn  of  William 
and  Mary  Dyer,  of  Boston,  who  were  direct  de- 
scendants of  Sir  James  Dyer,  an  eminent  English 
lawyer,  who  came  from  an  ancient  and  honorable 
family  of  Somersetshire.  In  1656  members  of  the 
Society  of  Friends  arrived  in  Massachusetts  and 
their  persecution  was  begun  by  the  Puritans. 
Mary  Dyer  became  a  member  of  that  sect  and  an 
active  worker  therein,  and  was  sentenced  to  be 
hung,  but  pardon  was  offered  her  if  she  would  re- 
nounce her  faith.  This  she  refused  to  do,  and  was 
hung  on  Boston  Common.  The  Doctor  is  one  of 
her  direct  descendants,  and  the  same  fidelity  which 
led  her  to  face  even  death  is  found  again  in  him. 
Henry  Dyer,  father  of  our  subject,  was  born  in 
North  Kingston,  R.  I.,  and  with  his  father  and 
brothers  aided  in  the  defense  of  the  Colonies  dur- 
ing the  Revolution.  One  brother,  Charles,  was  a 
Captain  in  the  regular  service,  and  all  were  faith- 
ful and  true  soldiers,  who  bravely  defended  their 
country  and  struggled  for  its  freedom.  When  the 
desired  result  was  accomplished,  Henry  Dyer  set- 
tled in  Bennington  County,  Vt.,  where  he  followed 
farming.  He  was  an  influential  and  prominent 
citizen,  a  lover  of  peace,  and  frequently  decided 
for  his  neighbors  contentions  whicli  arose  between 
them,  and  thus  avoided  bringing  the  matter  into 


court.  He  was  honored  and  respected  by  all  who 
knew  him.  His  death  occurred  on  his  farm,  near 
Manchester,  Yt.,  at  the  advanced  age  of  ninety- 
six.  His  wife,  who  bore  tlie  maiden  name  of  Sa- 
rah Coy,  was  a  native  of  Connecticut,  who  came 
of  an  industrious,  upright  family.  Her  advan- 
tages in  early  life  were  few,  but  she  -was  a  practi- 
cal, enterprising  woman,  possessed  of  considerable 
force  of  character,  and  did  much  good  in  the 
world,  teaching  her  children  to  walk  in  the  paths 
of  righteousness,  and  aiding  in  many  benevolent 
and  charitable  works.  She  died  in  her  seventieth 
year,  and  her  loss  was  mourned  b3'  all  who  knew 
her. 

In  the  Dyer  family  were  seven  .sons  and  three 
daughters.  Moses,  the  eldest,  was  a  Methodist 
clergyman;  Dennis,  David  and  Daniel  were  farm- 
ers, and  Rev.  Heman  Dyer,  D.  D.,  was  a  prominent 
divine.  He  was  graduated  from  Ken\'on  College, 
in  which  he  was  afterwards  a  teacher,  and  Secre- 
tary .Stanton  was  among  his  pupils.  He  became  a 
noted  Episcopal  preacher,  and  the  degree  of  D.  D. 
was  conferred  upon  him  by  Washington  College 
of  Connecticut  and  Kenyon  College.  In  1845  he 
was  elected  President  of  the  Western  University  of 
Pennsylvania,  and  in  1860  was  chosen  Bishop  of 
Kansas,  but  declined  to  accept  the  honor.  He  has 
declined  the  rectorship  of  several  leading  churches 
and  for  many  j-ears  past  has  resided  in  New  York 
City,  where  he  h."is  been  officially  connected  with 
the  Evangelical  Knowledge  Society,  representing, 
as  it  does,  a  large  portion  of  the  Protestant  Epis- 
copal Church.  Although  he  is  quite  wealth}'  him- 
self, men  of  wealth  in  that  city  have  twice  paid 
the  expenses  of  himself  and  family  on  a  trip  to 
Europe.  His  memoirs  have  been  published  under 
the  title  of  "The  Record  of  an  Active  Life."  The 
sisters  of  Dr.  D3-er  grew  to  womanhood.  One  be- 
came the  wife  of  John  March,  an  Elder  in  the 
Presbyterian  Church  and  a  brother  of  Alden 
March,  M.  D.,  President  of  the  Albany  Medical 
College. 

The  boj'hood  da^'s  of  the  Doctor  were  spent  on 
the  home  farm,  and  his  literary  education  was  ob- 
tained in  an  academy  of  Manchester,  Vt.  In  1828 
he  was  graduated  from  Berkshire  Medical  College, 
of  Massachusetts,  organized   under  the  charter  of 


678 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Williams  College,  and  for  about  two  years  engaged 
in  practice  in  Arlington,  Yt.,  after  which  he  spent 
several  years  in  Gloversville,  N.  Y.  He  then 
made  a  visit  to  the  west  and  spent  some  time  in 
the  home  of  his  brother,  Rev.  Heman  Dj'er,  then 
one  of  the  instructors  in  Kenyon  College,  Ohio, 
and  while  there  the  Trustees  appointed  him  phy- 
sician of  Kenj'on  College  and  also  of  the  Theo- 
logical Seminarj'  of  the  Diocese  of  Ohio.  Thus 
he  served  for  several  years,  but  desiring  a  larger 
field  for  practice  he  resigned  and  located  at  Mt. 
Vernon,  Ohio,  where  he  shared  an  office  with  the 
Hon.  Columbus  Delmo,  then  one  of  the  foremost 
men  in  the  state,  and  afterwards  Secretary  of  the 
Interior  under  President  Grant. 

While  engaged  in  practice  there  the  Doctor  also 
edited  a  Wiiig  paper  and  was  a  member  of  the 
Ohio  Whig  Conventiou  which  was  called  to  con- 
sider what  action  should  be  taken  consequent  upon 
the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  Compromise.  Dr. 
Dyer  there  said:  "Let  the  repeal  stand,  but  never 
admit  another  slave  state  into  the  Union."  In 
1855  he  removed  to  Iowa,  but  the  severe  winters 
proved  detrimental  to  the  health  of  his  wife  and 
daughter  and  he  sought  a  more  genial  climate,  re- 
fusing, in  consequence,  to  accept  a  professorship  in 
the  Keokuk  Medical  College.  Selecting  southern 
Illinois  for  his  future  home,  he  located  in  Du 
Quoin,  where  he  has  since  resided.  When  the 
late  war  broke  out  he  took  a  leading  part  in  rais- 
ing troops,  and  many  a  young  officer  owed  his 
commission  to  the  efforts  of  the  Doctor  in  his  be- 
half. Dr.  Dyer  was  then  quite  well  advanced  in 
j-ears  and  intended  not  to  go  to  the  front,  but 
upon  the  personal  request  of  Governor  Yates  he 
accepted  the  position  of  Surgeon  of  the  Eighty- 
first  Illinois  Infantry,  and  two  years  later  was 
made  Surgeon-in-chief  of  his  division.  His  labors 
were  arduous,  but  he  filled  the  position  with 
marked  ability  and  distinction. 

In  justice  to  the  Doctor  we  will  give  an  outline 
of  an  incident  in  his  army  life.  During  the  early 
part  of  his  service  he  was  ordered  by  one  of  the 
officers  to  secure  two  barrels  of  whiske}'  with  his 
supplies.  Now,  Dr.  Dyer  has  alwa3's  been  a  tem- 
perance man,  3et  he  does  not  object  to  the  use  of 
intoxicating   liquors    as   a  medicine,  and  he  has 


alwa3^s  prescribed  them  when  he  thought  it  neces- 
sarj'.  But  at  that  time  he  knew  that  two  bar- 
rels of  whiskey  were  not  required,  and  his  old 
Puritanic  views  came  to  the  front  and  he  flatl}' 
refused  to  order  the  whiskey.  Tliis  did  not  suit 
the  officer  nor  the  men  who  had  hoped  to  drink 
the  liquor,  and  secretly-  a  petition  was  prepared 
and  signed  and  forwarded  directly  to  Washing- 
ton, demanding  his  removal  for  refusing  to  obey 
orders. 

This  fact  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
Doctor,  he  went  directly  to  the  headquarters  of 
General  Grant  and  stated  what  had  come  to  his 
knowledge  and  asked  him  what  an  innocent  and 
honorable  man  should  do  to  vindicate  himself. 
General  Grant  issued  an  order  to  General  Mc- 
Pherson  to  convene  a  court  of  inquiry  forthwith 
to  investigate  the  matter,  but  before  the  court 
was  convened  the  order  came  from  Washington 
dismissing  him  from  the  service.  Hearing  of  this 
he  went  at  once  to  headquarters,  and  ripping  his 
shoulder  straps  off,  flung  them  to  the  ground  and 
requested  to  be  put  in  the  ranks  until  he  was 
vindicated,  but  instead  of  this  being  done  he  was 
placed  in  the  surgeon's  department  until  the 
court  of  inquiry  had  convened,  but  wlien  it  did 
the  testimony  not  only  exculpated  him,  but 
brought  to  light  a  foul  conspiracy  to  ruin  an  in- 
nocent man.  The  Doctor  was  at  once  re-instated 
and  his  career  as  an  army  surgeon  was  a  most 
brave  and  honorable  one. 

After  the  war,  a  history  of  the  Illinois  troops 
being  called  for  bj'  act  of  the  Legislature,  Dr. 
Dyei-  was  assigned  to  the  duty  of  writing  the  his- 
tory of  his  command,  which  he  did  in  a  most  cred- 
itable stj-le.  He  continued  his  practice  in  Du 
Quoin  and  served  for  about  ten  years  as  Pension 
Examining  Surgeon,  and  after  the  establishment 
of  the  Board  he  was  appointed  President  thereof. 
While  sitting  on  the  Board  he  received  a  message 
asking:  "Will  you  accept  the  position  of  phy- 
sician to  the  Southern  Illinois  Penitentiary.'"  He 
replied  in  the  affirmative,  and  served  in  that  po- 
sition for  three  years,  when  he  resigned  and 
retired  to  private  life. 

In  the  organization  of  the  Southern  Illinois 
Medical  Association  the  Doctor  was  a  leading  fac- 


J^vv.-*-^ 


#*^i 


K 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


681 


tor,  and  served  as  its  President  for  one  term  and 
as  its  Treasurer  for  thirteen  years,  resigning  the  po- 
sition November  16,  1893.  For  years  he  has  been 
one  of  the  most  noted  men  of  this  section  of  the 
state.  He  is  a  man  of  culture,  broad  views  and 
great. activity,  and  now,  though  nearing  his  nine- 
tieth year,  he  is  more  energetic  than  half  of  the 
men  a  quarter  of  a  century  his  junior,  and  his 
mind  is  as  active  and  clear  as  it  was  fifty  years 
ago.  In  the  Presbyterian  Church  he  has  been  an 
influeuti.ll  man  for  years.  He  is  also  prominent 
in  the  Grand  Arm^-  of  the  Republic  and  was  the 
first  commander  of  the  Du  Quoin  Post,  serving  in 
that  capacity  for  several  years.  His  life  has  been 
well  and  worthily  spent,  and  now,  the  possessor  of 
an  ample  fortune,  he  is  living  in  ease  and  comfort. 


l^^ROF.  STEPHEN  G.  HOLCOMB,  the  efficient 
and  capable  Principal  of  the  Percy  schools, 
who  is  widelj'  recognized  as  a  successful  in- 
[  structor,  claims  Randolph  County  as  the 
place  of  his  nativity,  his  birth  having  here  occurred 
on  the  2d  of  March,  1860.  He  is  the  eldest  child 
of  R.  J.  and  .Susan  (Wright)  Holcomb,  who  were 
early  settlers  of  this  community-.  The  former  is  a 
native  of  Pike  County,  111.  His  father  died  when 
he  was  quite  voung,  and  he  then  came  with  his 
mother  to  Randolph  County,  where  he  was  reared 
and  educated.  He  took  up  farming  as  his  life 
work  and  has  always  followed  that  pursuit.  He 
married  Miss  'Wright,  who  came  of  an  old  Virgin- 
ian famih".  Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Holcomb  are  now 
living  and  enjov  good  health. 

Our  subject  received  his  primary  education  in 
the  district  schools  of  his  native  county,  which  he 
attended  through  the  winter  season,  while  in  the 
summer  months  be  aided  in  the  labors  of  the  field. 
He  remained  upon  the  home  farm  until  nineteen 
years  of  age,  when  he  entered  the  high  school  of 
Sparta,  there  pursuing  his  studies  for  one  year.  At 
the  age  of  twenty  he  began  teaching  in  the  district 
schools,  and  was  thus  employed  for  eight  years, 
when  he  accepted  the  position  of  Principal  of  the 
schools  of  Baldwin,  where  he  remained  for  five 
j-ears.  He  then  made  a  prospecting  trip  to  Colo- 
rado, and  after  his  return  to  Illinois,  in  February, 
1892,  he  completed  an  unexpired  term  of  school 
25 


near  Bajdwin.  His  next  employment  was  of  a  dif- 
ferent nature.  He  became  clerk  of  a  dry-goods 
store  in  Baldwin,  and  continued  thus  engaged  un- 
til September,  1893,  when  he  was  chosen  Principal 
of  the  Percy  schools.  This  position  he  is  now  filling, 
being  ably  assisted  in  his  work  by  his  wife,  who  is 
also  an  excellent  instructor.  During  the  months 
of  vacation,  he  usually  clerks  in  a  drug  store  in 
Baldwin.  In  former  years  he  took  one  course  of 
medical  lectures  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  but  concluded  to 
abandon  medicine  and  cling  to  his  chosen  profes- 
sion, that  of  teaching. 

On  the  3d  of  September,  1884,  Mr.  Holcomb  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Quint  Hurst,  whose 
parents  were  natives  of  Virginia,  and  thence  re- 
moved to  Randoli)h  County.  111.  Her  death  oc- 
curred January  27,  1886,  and  on  the  13th  of  Au- 
gust, 1889,  Mr.  Holcomb  wedded  Miss  Ella  Cox, 
who  came  of  a  family  of  South  Carolina.  She  was 
called  to  the  home  beyond  July  9,  1890.  On  the 
14th  of  July,  1892,  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of 
Mr.  Holcomb  and  Miss  Josie  Dagner,  a  daughter 
of  Henry  and  Mary  (Harrison)  Dagner,  of'  Red 
Bud,  111.  One  child  graces  this  union,  Wallace 
Penn,  who  is  the  pride  and  joy  of  the  household. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Holcomb  are  both  recognized  as 
among  the  leading  and  most  successful  teachers  of 
Randolph  Count}',  and  the  schools  of  Percy  have 
been  brought  to  a  high  standard  of  excellence 
through  their  untiring  labors.  With  the  Baptist 
Church  they  hold  raembei-ship.  Mr.  Holcomb  is  a 
member  of  Kaskaskia  Lodge  No.  86,  A.  F.  &  A.  M., 
and  also  belongs  to  Baldwin  Lodge  No.  797,  I.  O. 
O.  F.  He  takes  quite  an  active  interest  in  political 
affairs,  and  supports  the  men  and  measures  of  the 
Democratic  party.  He  is  prominentlj'  spoken  of 
for  the  office  of  County  .Superintendent,  aud  should 
he  be  chosen  to  that  position,  we  feel  no  hesitancy 
in  saying  that  he  will  prove  a  capable  and  efficient 
officer.  Those  who  have  known  him  from  boj'hood 
are  numbered  among  his  stanchest  friends,  a  fact 
which  indicates  an  honorable  and  well  spent  life. 

->-?>-c-^ 

■  ABRIEL  S.  JONE.S.     Probably  no  resident 

-  in  Randolph  Count}'  is  more  worthy  of  rep- 

1    resentation  in  this  Record  than  Mr.  Jones, 

who  was  born  here  in  1818,  when  Illinois  was  a 


682 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


territory.  He  has  pursued  a  course  which,  has  re- 
sulted in  securing  for  him  the  hearty  respect  of 
those  who  know  him.  Having  witnessed  the  de- 
velopment of  the  state  from  a  wilderness  to  the 
site  of  thriving  towns  and  highly  cultivated  farms, 
he  has  also  contributed  to  this  work  and  has  been 
an  important  factor  in  the  growth  of  Chester. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  who  also  bore  the  name 
of  Gabriel,  was  a  native  of  Virginia,  and  came  to 
Illinois  November  17,  1817.  The  journey,  which 
was  made  overland  to  Illinois,  was  interrupted 
suddenly  at  Percy,  when  tlieaxle  tree  of  the  wagon 
broke.  The  family  was  compelled  to  stop  for  a 
time  and  the  elder  Mr.  Jones  was  induced  to  remain 
during  the  winter  and  teach  school.  In  the  spring 
of  the  following  year  he  was  appointed  Colonel  of 
the  State  Militia,  he  having  been  a  soldier  in  the 
War  of  1812.  He  was  a  very  prominent  man  in 
his  community,  and  had  the  honor  of  filling  the 
positions  of  Mayor,  County  Clerk,  County  Com- 
missioner and  Deputy  United  States  Marshal  in 
1820,  and  served  as  Colonel  in  the  Black  Hawk 
War  in  1832.  In  1824  he  represented  his  district 
in  the  Legislature,  being  elected  on  the  Whig  ticket. 
He  met  his  death  November  9,  1864,  in  a  cyclone, 
at  which  time  his  house  was  blown  down, and  many 
lives  were  lost  in  that  locality. 

The  maiden  name  of  our  subject's  mother  was 
Elizabeth  Tillotson.  She  was  born  in  Virginia, 
and  died  in  Nashville,  this  state,  in  1844.  Of 
her  family  of  eight  children,  our  subject  was  the 
fourth  in  order  of  birth,  and  is  the  only  survivor 
of  the  family.  He  remained  upon  the  home  farm 
near  Steeleville,  this  county,  until  reaching  his 
sixteenth  year,  in  the  meantime  having  received  a 
fair  education  in  the  district  school.  On  coining 
to  Chester  in  1834,  he  began  life  on  his  own  ac- 
count as  clerk  in  the  general  store  of  Holmes, 
Swanwick  &  Co.,  with  whom  he  remained  until 
1840,  and  then  removing  to  Nashville,  opened  up 
a  store  of  his  own,  continuing  to  make  that  place 
his  home  until  1839. 

The  date  of  our  subject's  marriage  with  Miss 
Elizabeth  Cox  was  November  12,  1839.  Mrs. 
Jones  is  the  daughter  of  Richard  Cox,  a  native  of 
England,  who  came  to  the  United  States  when  a 
boy.     By  her  union  with  our  subject  she  became 


the  mother  of  three  children,  viz.:  Eunice,  now  the 
wife  of  A.  A.  Anderson,  of  Chester;  Ann  M.,  Mrs. 
A.  G.  Jones,  now  residing  in  Delphos,  Kan.,  and 
Richard,  a  book-keeper  in  the  city  of  New  York. 
Mrs.  Elizabeth  Jones  departed  this  life  in  Chester 
in  1855.  The  lad}-  whom  our  subject  married  in 
1858  was  Mrs.  Lucinda  M.  Hildreth,  «ee  Stone.  By 
this  marriage  have  been  born  two  children,  Mary, 
the  wife  of  George  Neville,  City  Treasurer  of  Ches- 
ter and  attorn ey-at-law,  and  Paul  G.,  a  merchant 
in  Chester.  Our  subject  is  still  engaged  in  the 
mercantile  business  in  this  city,  and  is  highly  es- 
teemed by  all  who  know  him. 

Mr.  Jones  relates  many  an  interesting  anecdote 
of  life  during  pioneer  times,  and  tells  how  he  trav- 
eled six  miles  to  school  in  order  to  gain  a  knowl- 
edge of  reading,  writing  and  arithmetic.  He  has 
always  been  activel}'  interested  in  all  that  pertains 
to  the  welfare  of  his  native  county,  and  as  a  keen 
politician  keeps  himself  well  informed  in  regard  to 
party  movements,  and  votes  with  the  Republican 
party.  Socially  he  is  a  member  of  Chester  Lodge 
No.  72,  A.  F.  &  A.  M.,  and  is  also  connected  with 
the  Herman  G.  Reynolds  Commandery. 


s-gi^^i&^^ig^ie^ig-gis^-Si:^ 


"^YlOHN  MARSHALL  HOLT,  who  resides  on 
section  15,  Vergennes  Township,  Jackson 
Count}-,  well  deserves  mention  among  the 
_  prominent  farmers  of  this  community.  His 
life  record  is  as  follows:  He  was  born  in  Land 
Grove,  Vt.,  September  7,  1831,  and  is  a  son  of  Jo- 
seph and  Hannah  (Peabody)  Holt,  who  were  also 
natives  of  the  Green  Mountain  State.  The  father 
was  a  farmer  and  carpenter.  Emigrating  west- 
ward, he  located  on  Tuthill's  Prairie,  Jackson 
County,  111.,  in  the  fall  of  1835,  and  some  years 
later  purchased  a  farm  on  section  16,  Vergennes 
Township,  now  known  as  the  old  Holt  homestead. 
He  removed  thither  in  1840, and  made  it  his  home 
until  1874,  when  called  to  the  home  beyond.  His 
wife  passed  away  in  1868.  They  had  fourteen 
children:  Cynthia,  wife  of  Valentine  Keath,  of 
Perry  County;  Maria,  wife  of  B.  Walker,  of  Perry 
Count}';  Caroline,  wife  of  L.  Sweetland;  Charlotte, 
wife  of  John  Mecum,  of   Perry    Connty;  Putnam, 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


683 


who  died  in  Vermont;  Joseph,  who  married  Sarah 
J.  Mecum  and  lives  in  Perry  County;  La  Fayette, 
who  married  Martha  Hodge  for  liis  first  wife,  and 
afterward  wedded  Margaret  Holt  and  died  in  1891; 
Minerva,  who  became  the  wife  of  John  Macglou- 
chin,  and  after  his  death  married  John  Roundtree, 
but  is  DOW  deceased;  ]>ucinda,  deceased  wife  of 
Charles  Warner,  of  St.  Louis;  Mary,  who  died  in 
childhood;  Luc^^  A.,  wife  of  John  Coply,of  Alton; 
De  Witt,  who  married  Margaret  Pool;  and  Louisa, 
wife  of  Marshall  Nichols.  The  parents  were  mem- 
bers of  the  Methodist  Church,  and  in  politics  Mr. 
Holt  was  a  Democrat  until  1864,  after  which  he 
supported  the  Republican  party.* 

Our  subject  attended  the  subscription  schools  of 
his  native  state,  and  remained  at  home  until  his 
marriage,  September  7,  1853,  to  Emily  Tuthill. 
In  1855  he  purchased  his  p;esent  farm  of  one 
hundred  acres,  and  has  made  it  his  home  since  1857. 
Mrs.  Holt  is  a  daughter  of  John  and  Nancy  (Ar- 
nold) Tuthill.  Her  father  was  a  native  of  Ver- 
mont, but  after  his  marriage  lived  in  New  York 
for  many  years.  The  children  of  the  family  were: 
Sarah  B.,  wife  of  John  Helm;  Eliza  A.,  wife  of 
James  Brown;  Nancy  W.,  wife  of  James  McClure; 
Caroline,  wife  of  Frank  Campbell;  Samuel,  who  died 
at  the  age  of  ten;  Laura,  wife  of  George  McClure; 
Mary,  who  died  at  the  age  of  fifty-two;  Daniel; 
PhcBbe,  wife  of  Andrew  Young;  Mrs.  Holt;  and 
Jane,  wifeof  Constantine  Murphy.  The  father  was  a 
farmer  and  also  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  half- 
bushel  measures.  In  1856  he  came  with  his  family 
to  Jackson  County',  accompanied  by  four  brothers 
and  two  sisters:  John,  Daniel,  Cephus,  Russell; 
Hannah,  wife  of  F.  Lovejoy,  and  Sallie,  wife  of 
Thomas  Ross.  Judge  Richard  Tuthill,  of  Chicago, 
is  a  son  of  Daniel.  The  father  of  Mrs.  Holt  died 
March  20,  1859,  at  his  home  on  Tuthill's  Prairie, 
and  his  wife  passed  awaj'  in  1851.  He  was  a  Dem- 
ocrat in  politics  and  a  soldier  in  the  Black  Hawk 
War.  Both  were  members  of  the  Methodist  Church, 
and  were  highl\'  respected  people. 

To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Holt  were  born  eight  children. 
William  A.,  born  August  2,  1855,  was  married 
December  3,  1884,  to  Julia  Moore,  and  has  four 
children:  Marshall,  Ruby,  Homer  and  Eula  B.; 
Ella  M.,  born  February  6,  1857, is  the  wifeof  John 


Quigly,  and  has  five  children:  Lillian,  Ira,  Logan, 
John  and  Gertrude;  Ora  L.,  born  February  14, 
1859,  is  the  wife  of  William  Cathe}',  of  Montana, 
and  their  children  are  Earl,  Eunice  and  Gerald; 
Lucretia  J.,  born  April  18,  1861,  is  the  wife  of 
Austin  Spencer,  by  whom  she  has_  four  children: 
Lee,  Bertha,  Blanche  and  Merwin;  they  also  lost 
two  children.  Jennie  was  born  September  28,  1863, 
and  is  at  home;  Plurbe  Y.,born  January  29,  1866, 
died  at  the  age  of  six  years;  Myrtle  E.,  born  Feb- 
ruary 26,  1868,  is  the  wife  of  James  Campbell,  and 
has  one  child,  Wilda;  Emily  E.,  born  October  12, 
1872,  is  the  wife  of  Moses  Quigley,  and  has  a 
daughter.  Myrtle. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Holt  are  members  of  the  Methodist 
Church,  and  in  politics  he  has  always  been  a  Re- 
publican. He  and  his  wife  now  have  a  pleasant 
home  on  their  farm,  which  is  the  abode  of  hospit- 
ality and  good  cheer.  They  have  many  friends 
throughout  the  community,  and  by  all  who  know 
them  are  held  in  the  highest  regard. 


FERDINAND  GRAH  is  one  of  the  old  and 
honored  citizens  of  Randolph  County,  and 
has  accomplished  much  good  in  his  life. 
He  is  a  native  of  Prussia,  and  was  born  June  22, 
1821.  His  parents,  Daniel  and  Caroline  (Mueller) 
Grab,  emigrated  to  America  in  1847,  and  after 
some  months  spent  in  St.  Louis,  came  to  Ran- 
dolph Count}',  locating  in  township  7,  range  6, 
uj>on  the  farm  now  owned  by  our  subject. 

The  latter  is  the  eldest  of  a  family  of  five  chil- 
dren. In  his  native  land,  Germany,  he  attencfed  the 
common  schools  and  worked  in  the  machine  shops 
until  coming  with  his  parents  to  the  New  World. 
During  their  residence  in  St.  Louis  he  was  engaged 
in  a  blacksmith  shop,  and  he  continued  to  reside 
with  them  until  their  death,  which  occurred  when 
he  was  thirty-three  years  old.  At  that  time  he  took 
possession  of  the  old  homestead  and  began  to  work 
for  himself.  The  place  comprises  two  hundred  and 
forty  acres  of  fine  land,  which  he  has  improved 
and  cultivated  until  it  is  classed  among  the  best 
farms  in  the  township.  Here  he  raises  stock  and 
the  cereals,  from  which  he  derives  a  good  income. 


684 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


In  1847,  he  enlisted  in  the  Mexican  War  under 
General  Price,  but  had  served  only  ton  months 
when  it  came  to  a  close  and  he  then  returned  to 
his  home. 

In  1855  Mr.  Grah  and  Miss  Mary  Herbertz  were 
united  in  marriage.  The  lad3'  was  a  native  of 
Germany,  but  at  tlie  time  of  her  marriage  was  re- 
siding in  Chester,  islie  has  borne  her  husband  ten 
children,  as  follows:  Mena,  who  became  the  wife 
of  William  Pickett,  and  died  in  1878;  Tillie,  who 
married  W.  C.  Wall,  and  makes  lier  home  in  St. 
Louis;  Caroline,  who  is  the  wife  of  AVill  Gelike, 
and  also  lives  in  St.  Louis;  Annie,  the  wife  of  An- 
drew Cushman,  residing  in  Arkansas;  Emma,  who 
is  at  home;  Fred,  who  married  Clem  Tindall;  Au- 
gust, who  married  Mary  Tindall;  Mary,  Mrs.  Fred 
Shilling,  of  Perry  Count}',  111.;  William  and  Ran- 
dolph, both  of  whom  are  unmarried.  Mr.  Grah 
and  his  family  are  members  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church,  and  are  highly  respected  in  both  religious 
and  social  circles.  In  politics  our  subject  is  rather 
conservative,  and  alwaj's  supports  the  man  whom 
he  thinks  most  competent  for  the  position. 


^*+-i'*(^^\**t*C 


W^  ILLIAM  A.  JAMES,  M.  D.,  is  one  of  the 
leading  physicians  of  Randolph  Count}'. 
He  makes  his  home  in  Chester  and  is 
prominent  in  the  medical  fraternitj'  and  the 
business  circles  of  this  part  of  Illinois.  Born  in 
Monroe  County,  this  state,  November  10,  1854,  he 
IS  the  son  of  Austin  and  Caroline  E.  (Walker)  James, 
the  former  a  native  of  Monroe  County,  and  the 
latter  born  in  Iowa. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  who  departed  this 
life  November  18,  1892,  in  his  sixty-ninth  year, 
was  a  lifelong  resident  of  Monroe  County  and  one 
of  its  most  prominent  and  energetic  citizens.  He 
was  the  second  child  of  James  A.James,  who,  with 
his  father,  Joseph  Austin  James,  made  Monroe 
County  his  home  in  1803.  Austin  Jnmes  was 
born  in  that  county  December  30,  1823,  and  was 
quite  young  when  he  accompanied  his  father  on 
his  removal  to  Harrisonville,  where  he  received 
his  early  education.  Later  he  attended  St.  Mary's 
College,  in  Perry  County,  Mo.,  and  in  his  seven- 


teenth year  became  a  student  in  the  St.  Louis 
University.  After  his  graduation  he  remained 
for  some  time  under  the  parental  roof,  and  wiien 
he  attained  his  majority,  went  west  to  Iowa,  where 
he  entered  the  mines. 

During  the  second  j-ear  of  the  Mexican  War,  in 
1847,  Austin  James  became  a  member  of  tlie  Sixth 
Illinois  Regiment,  and  with  his  company  marched 
to  the  City  df  Mexico  by  the  way  of  New  Or- 
leans and  Vera  Cruz.  Upon  the  return  of  the 
regiment  he  received  his  honorable  discharge  at 
Alton,  whereupon  he  began  farming  at  Harrison- 
ville. In  1849  he  purchased  the  old  homestead, 
consisting  of  nine  hundred  acres  of  the  most  fer- 
tile bottom  land  in  the  count}'.  By  his  energy 
and  zeal  he  placed  the  entire  tract  under  the  best 
cultivation  and  erected  all  of  the  needful  farm 
buildings. 

A)n'il  14,  1852,  Austin  James  married  IMIss  Car- 
oline E.  Walker,  and  of  the  six  children  born  of 
their  union  the  following  five  are  living:  Ben- 
nett, William,  Mary,  Thomas  and  Carrie.  Frank, 
the  fourth  child,  was  accidentally  killed  many 
years  ago.  During  his  entire  life  Austin  James 
was  an  unswerving  and  consistent  Democrat,  and 
cast  his  first  vote  for  Lewis  Cass  in  1848.  His 
zeal  and  activity  in  the  support  of  that  party's 
principles  merited  to  such  an  extent  the  recogni- 
tion of  his  party  that  he  was,  in  1864,  1872  and 
1882,  elected  to  the  Legislature,  representing  first 
the  Third  Senatorial  District,  and  later  the  Forty- 
eighth.  His  legislative  record  showed  at  all  times 
that  he  was  an  active  and  useful  member  of  com- 
mittees and  always  honorably  represented  his  con- 
stituents. In  1888  he  was  elected  by  the  people 
of  Monroe  County  to  represent  them  on  the 
County  Board,  and  was  serving  his  second  term 
in  that  capacity  when  his  death  occurred.  He 
was  a  devoted  and  affectionate  husband,  a  kind 
and  loving  father,  a  true  and  sincere  friend,  ever 
ready  to  aid  and  assist  the  poor,  and  possessed 
the  generosity  and  hospitality  of  a  well  bred 
southern  gentleman.  His  wife,  tlie  mother  of  our 
subject,  is  still  living  and  makes  her  home  in  Har- 
risonville. 

The  subject  of  tliis  sketch  was  one  in  a  family  of 
four  sons  and  two  daughters,  and  received  a  good 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


685 


education  in  tlie  schools  near  his  home.  Being 
desirous  of  gaining  a  more  thorough  Ivnowledge 
of  men  and  things,  he  went  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in 
1875,  and  completed  a  course  of  study  in  the 
Christian  Brothers'  Academy.  After  receiving 
his  diploma  he  taught  school  for  three  terms,  and 
with  his  earnings  was  enabled  to  carry  out  the 
ambition  of  his  life,  and  attended  medical  lectures 
in  St.  Louis.  He  was  graduated  in  1881  from  the 
St.  Louis  Medical  College,  and  returning  to  Har- 
rison ville,  111.,  engaged  in  the  practice  of  his 
profession  for  twelve  yeai-s.  In  the  spring  of 
1893  he  came  to  this  citj'  and  now  has  a  patron- 
age that  extends  far  beyond  the  limits  of  Chester. 
The  lad}-  who  became  the  wife  of  our  subject, 
in  August,  1881,  was  known  in  her  maidenhood  as 
Mar\^  L.  Horine.  She  was  born  in  Waterloo,  this 
state,  and  was  a  daughter  of  M.  T.  Horine.  To 
them  has  been  born  one  child,  a  daughter,  Jessie 
C,  to  wliom  the}'  are  giving  a  good  education  in 
the  city  schools.  In  his  political  relations,  the 
Doctor  alwa3^s  votes  with  the  Democratic  party, 
and  sociall}'  is  a  prominent  member  of  the  Monroe 
Countj-  Medical  Society.  He  is  now  the  phj-sician 
of  the  Soutliern  Illinois  Penitentiary. 


> 


UKE  f4ENDR0N,  whose  real  name  is  John 

kBaptiste  (iendron,  is  a  representative  of  one 
of  the  oldest  families  in  the  oldest  settle- 
ment in  the  great  west.  His  father's  name,  Luke, 
was  given  to  him  at  first  as  a  nickname,  but  after- 
ward became  the  name  b}'  which  he  is  now  gener- 
ally known.  His  father  dj'ing  when  our  subject 
was  but  twelve  years  old,  he  had  to  help  his  mother 
run  the  farm,  and  consequently  his  education  was 
almost  entirely  neglected.  His  paternal  grandfa- 
ther, John  Baptiste  Gendron,  was  born  in  Kaskas- 
kia  in  a  very  early  day,  his  father  having  come 
here  from  Canada,  whither  he  had  jfreviousl}-  emi- 
grated from  France.  The  mother  of  our  subject 
was  Odeille  Tullier,  also  a  representative  of  one  of 
the  earliest  families.  Her  death  occurred  some  time 
in  the  early  '50s. 

Our  subject  was  born  October  IG,  1824,  in  Old 


Kaskaskia,  at  a  time  when  it  was  the  western  me- 
tropolis, a  city  of  some  fifteen  thousand  souls. 
Here  he  made  his  home  until  some  years  after  at- 
taining his  majority,  when  he  moved  to  the  rich 
farming  lands  near  tlie  town  and  began  the  life  of 
an  agriculturist,  which  has  been  his  occupation 
ever  since.  In  the  year  1846  he  married  Mary 
Rayome,  who  died  of  cholera  in  the  fall  of  1849, 
when  that  dread  scourge  was  raging  in  the  valley. 
Of  this  marriage  two  children  were  born,  both  of 
whom  are  deceased. 

The  second  marriage  of  Mr.  Gendron  united 
him  with  Mrs.  Sophie  (Buatte)  Roach,  whose  for- 
mer husband  died  about  the  time  of  Mrs.  Gend- 
ron's  death.  Of  this  uuion  were  born  eighteen 
children,  of  whom  seven  are  now  living.  Mrs. 
Sophie  Gendron  departed  this  life  Januarj-  30, 1877, 
and  her  bodj-  was  interred  in  the  old'  Kaskia  church 
yard;  it  was  later  moved  to  the  new  cemetery  es- 
tablished by  the  state  on  the  hills  across  the  river, 
on  the  site  of  old  Ft.  Gage.  Our  subject  was  a  tliird 
time  married  February  16,  1878,  his  wife  being 
Louise  Derousse,  a  daughter  of  Peter  K.  Derousse, 
a  member  of  one  of  the  oldest  families  of  Kaskas- 
kia. Of  this  marriage  have  been  born  four  chil- 
dren, all  boys.  The  three  surviving  are,  John, 
AUie  and  Edmond. 

Mr.  Gendron 's  home  is  an  old  fashioned  house, 
pleasantly  situated  on  a  tract  of  one  hundred  and 
sixty  acres  of  as  fine  farming  land  as  may  be  found 
in  the  state.  After  two  hundred  years'  cultiva- 
tion no  perceptible  diminution  can  be  discerned 
in  its  fertilitj',  and  that  without  fertilization  of 
any  kind.  Like  all  of  the  old  French  on  the  Island, 
Mr.  Gendron  and  his  family  are  members  of  the 
Roman  Catholic  Church.  AVhen  a  boy  of  fourteen 
he  carried  the  molds  used  in  making  the  bricks  of 
which  the  old  church  was  constructed,  and  which 
are  now  being  incorporated  into  the  walls  of  the 
new  edifice;  it  is  being  erected  some  three  miles 
south  of  the  old  town,  which  will  soon  have  been 
swept  into  the  stream  of  the  "Father  of  Waters." 

Since  castiug  his  first  vote  our  subject  has  been 
a  stanch  Democrat,  as  are  most  of  the  dwellers  on 
the  Island.  He  served  as  School  Trustee  for  six 
years,  when,  tiring  of  the  ollice,  he  resigned.  ^Many 
are  the  interesting  recollections  of  Mr.  Gendron  of 


686 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


the  early  times,  when  Kaskaskia  was  the  center  of 
western  civilization  and  furnished  nianj-  of  the 
noted  men  of  pioneer  days. 


=4.^.4.4.^.^.^-5.= 


^1  Ife  D.  HARRIS,  one  of  the  honored  citizei 
\/\jli  *^^  Jackson  County,  who  successfully  ca 
^^^      ries  on  farming  on  section  35,  Carbonda 


D.  HARRIS,  one  of  the    honored  citizens 

car- 
bon dale 

Township,  was  born  in  Saline  County,  111.,  Sep- 
tember 16,  1820,  and  is  a  son  of  Richard  and 
Hannah  (Tanner)  Harris.  Her  grandfather, .Sam- 
uel Tanner,  was  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution.  Both 
parents  were  natives  of  North  Carolina,  and  the 
father  was  a  soldier  in  the  War  of  1812.  They 
were  married  in  Kentucky,  and  in  1820  emigrated 
to  Saline  County,  111.,  then  a  part  of  Gallatin 
County,  becoming  honored  pioneers  of  that  lo- 
cality, where  tliey  resided  until  1830,  when  they 
removed  to  Williamson  County  and  began  open- 
ing up  another  wild  farm.  Mr.  Harris  died  in 
1835,  but  his  wife  long  survived  him,  passing  away 
in  1874.  She  was  a  member  of  the  Baptist  Church. 
In  politics  be  was  a  Democrat.  Seven  of  their 
fourteen  children  are  yet  living. 

Upon  the  home  farm  our  subject  was  reared  to 
manhood,  and  for  about  three  months  in  the  year 
he  usually  attended  school,  his  education  being 
thus  acquired.  He  also  learned  the  carpenter's 
trade  in  his  youth,  and  followed  it  for  some  years. 
On  the  29th  of  December,  1840,  he  married  Miss 
Sarah  Maria  Robertson,  who  has  indeed  been  a 
faithful  companion  and  helpmate  to  him  on  life's 
journej'.  She  was  born  in  Saline  County,  111., 
and  her  parents,  Mark  and  Mary  (Burns)  Robert- 
son, were  natives  of  Alabama.  The  father  was  a 
farmer  by  occupation  and  served  in  the  AVar  of 
1812  under  General  Jackson.  The  maternal  grand- 
father was  a  native  of  Scotland,  and  was  a  rela- 
tive  of  Robert  Burns,  the  poet. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Robertson  were  married  in  Ala- 
bama, thence  removed  to  Tennessee,  and  about 
1819  settled  on  wild  laud  in  .Saline  County,  111. 
In  1832  the^'  went  to  Gallatin  Country,  and  in 
1835  removed  to  Tazewell  County,  where  the  death 
of  the  father  occurred  in  1836.  His  wife  sur- 
vived him  until  1861.  They  were  the  parents  of 
ten  children,  three  of  whom  are  yet  living:  Mark, 


of  Wright  County,  Mo.,  who  was  a  soldier  in  the 
Black  Hawk  War,  and  for  twelve  years  has  been  a 
Presiding  Elder  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church; 
William,  of  Franklin  County;  and  Mrs.  Harris, 
who  was  born  October  1,  1822. 

Oursubject  and  his  wife  began  their  domestic  life 
upon  an  unbroken  tract  of  laud,  but  he  soon  made  it 
a  productive  farm.  In  April,  1855,  they  took  up 
their  residence  in  Carbondale,  Jackson  County, 
where  Mr.  Harris  followed  carpentering  for  nine- 
teen years.  He  enlisted  May  16,  1861,  in  Com- 
panj'  K,  Eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry.  He  was  pro- 
moted to  be  Corporal  and  afterward  to  be  Sergeant. 
He  was  first  sent  to  Mound  City,  111.,  thence  to 
Cairo,  and  from  thereon  to  the  front.  He  was  one 
of  the  advance  guard  at  Ft.  Heniy,  and  took  part 
in  the  battles  of  Ft.  Donelson,  Pittsburg  Landing 
and  Jackson.  He  was  detailed  to  run  a  fleet  on  the 
Mississippi  River  under  General  Elliott,  and  had 
tiiree  rams  in  that  fleet — "Queen  of  the  West," 
"Lancaster"  and  "Monarch."  He  was  never  cap- 
tured or  wounded,  and  was  honorably  discharged 
June  7,  1864,  in  Springfleld. 

Mr.  Harris  then  returned  to  his  home  in  Carbon- 
dale,  and  continued  to  engage  in  carpentering  until 
1874,  when  he  removed  to  his  farm,  which  he  has 
since  greatly  improved.  He  owns  one  hundred  and 
six  and  two-thirds  acres  cf  land,  of  which  seventy 
acres  are  under  the  plow.  He  has  recently  erected 
a  comfortable  residence  in  Carbondale  at  a  cost 
of  $1,500.  Though  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Harris  have 
never  had  any  children,  they  have  cared  for  and 
reared  Belle  Mitchell  from  childhood.  Both  are 
faithful  members  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church,  and  he  has  served  as  Trustee  and  Steward. 
He  has  also  been  Superintendent  of  the  Sunday- 
school.  He  has  never  chewed  tobacco  but  once, 
and  forty-two  years  have  passed  since  he  has 
tasted  liquor  as  a  beverage.  His  life  has  indeed 
been  an  honorable  one  and  is  well  worthy  of  emu- 
lation. Sociall3',  he  is  a  Ro3'al  Arch  Mason,  and 
has  been  Treasurer  of  the  blue  lodge.  He  also 
belongs  to  the  Grand  Army  post  of  Carbondale. 
In  politics  he  is  a  stalwart  Republican,  and  he 
has  served  as  Alderman  of  Carbondale. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Harris  have  a  large  circle  of 
friends    and    acquaintances,   and    are    highly    re- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


687 


garded  by  all.  On  the  29th  of  December,  1890, 
they  celebrated  tlieir  golden  wedding,  for  fifty 
3'ears  had  passed  since  they  started  out  on  life's 
journey  together.  The  following  poem  was  writ- 
ten in  commemoration  of  the  event: 

Just  fifty  j'ears  ago,  dear  wife. 

Since  you  and  I  were  wed. 
To-day's  our  golden  wedding  day. 

Where  can  the  years  have  fled? 

Am  I  that  shy  and  awkward  youth. 

Are  you  that  maiden  fair, 
Witii  silver  threads  among  the  curls 

That  once  was  golden  hair? 

I  never  can  forget  tlie  day 

That  made  you  all  my  own. 
Your  lips  like  tempting  cherries  ripe, 

Your  cheeks  like  roses  blown. 

Your  sweet  eves  shining  bright  as  stars 

In  fancy  yet  I  see. 
And  you  that  day  tlian  all  the  world 

Were  dearer  far  to  me. 

And  yet,  dear  heart,  I  know  that  I 

Love  better  far  to-da}'. 
Than  e'en  I  loved  that  maiden  fair, 

The  wife's  that's  old  and  gray. 

And  I  will  praj-  that  you  and  I 

May  walk  life's  golden  sands 
Until  we  reach  that  better  place. 

The  house  not  made  with  hands. 


ei 


OL.  E.  A.  WELLS,  an  enterprising  and  pro- 
gressive citizen  of  Murph3sboro,  and 
Treasurer  of  the  Egyptian  Real  Estate  and 
Collecting  Agency,  has  the  honor  of  being  a  na- 
tive of  Illinois.  He  was  born  August  13,  1858,  near 
Du  Quoin,  which  localitv  was  the  birthplace  of  his 
father,  Ferdinand  Wells.  His  grandfather,  Lewis 
Wells,  was  born  in  North  Carolina,  and  in  1815, 
with  his  father,  Lewis  Wells,  Sr.,  settled  in  Perry 
County.  He  became  one  of  its  honored  pioneers 
and  a  prominent  and  successful  farmer.  He  served 
in  the  War  of  1812,  and  died  in  Perry  County. 
His  wife  was  a  relative  of  Zacharj'  Taylor. 

The  father  of  our  subject  was  reared  in  his  na- 
tive countj^,  and  in  1862  entered  the  country's 
service    as  Sergeant  of   Company    K,   Eighty-first 


Infantry.  He  participated  in  eighteen  battles,  in- 
cluding the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  the  Red  River  ex- 
pedition and  the  Mobile  campaign.  When  the 
war  was  over,  he  resumed  farming  in  Perry  Coun- 
ty, and  in  1872  went  to  Grand  Tower,  where  lie 
engaged  in  the  hotel  business  in  connection  with 
agricultural  pursuits  until  1885.  He  then  em- 
barked in  merchandising  in  Ava,  and  in  1887  came 
to  Murphysboro.  Here  his  wife  died  in  that  year, 
and  in  1889  he  married  a  lad3- f rom  Kankakee.  In 
1891  he  was  appointed  a  guard  of  tlie  Southern 
Illinois  Penitentiary,  where  he  remained  until 
March,  1893.  He  is  now  living  in  Kankakee.  He 
is  a  highly  respected  man  and  takes  a  prominent 
part  in  tlie  work  of  tlie  Grand  Array  of  the  Re- 
public. 

Ferdinand  Wells  first  wedded  Mary  C.  Rees,  a 
native  of  Perry  Count}-,  and  a  daughter  of  Judge 
E.  T.  Rees,  one  of  the  pioneers  of  that  count}-,  who 
removed  thither  from  Kentucky.  He  served  in 
the  Black  Hawk  War,  and  beciime  an  extensive 
and  successful  farmer.  For  many  years  he  was  Jus- 
tice of  the  Peace;  and  was  also  Associate  Judge  of 
Perry  County.  His  death  occurred  there  in  1877. 
His  son  Lj^curgus,  of  Du  Quoin,  was  a  Captain  in 
the  late  war,  and  his  brother  R.  G.,  now  of  Idaho, 
was  a  Lieutenant;  another  brother,  John,  was  a 
Colonel  and  was  killed  while  leading  his  men  at 
the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  He  was  also  in  the  Mexi- 
can War.  The  great-grandfather  of  our  subject, 
Hampton  Rees,  w-as  one  of  the  early  settlers  of 
Perr}-  Count}',  and  for  him  Rees  Creek  was  named. 
The  familj-  was  of  Welsh  descent,  and  the  Wells 
family  was  of  Scotch  lineage. 

Colonel  Wells  has  one  brother,  W.  D.,  now  City 
Marshal  of  Ava.  Our  subject  was  reared  m  Perr}- 
County  and  Grand  Tower,  and  after  attending  the 
common  schools  was  a  student  in  the  De  Soto 
Teachers'  Institute.  He  received  a  teacher's  cer- 
tificate in  1876,  but  did  not  begin  teaching  until 
two  years  later.  In  January,  1879,  he  won  the 
highest  standing  for  cadetship  in  a  class  of  seven- 
teen competitors  and  immediately  entered  AVest 
Point,  where  he  continued  for  a  3-ear.  He  then 
returned  home,  and  for  three  terms  taught  school 
near  Du  (^uoin.  In  December,  1882,  he  was  ap- 
pointed Deput}-  Sheriff  b}'  M.  A.  Ross,  and  after  a 


688 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


four  years'  term  was  elected  on  the  Republican 
ticket  as  Sherifif  by  the  largest  majority  that  had 
been  given  for  years.  He  did  faithful  service  in 
the  office  and  had  some  arduous  duties  to  perform. 

In  1886  Mr.  Wells  wedded  Miss  Sudie  Childs, 
daughter  of  James  Childs,  of  Kansas  Citj',  Mo. 
They  have  four  children,  Joseph  V.,  Edward  A., 
Lulu  and  Emma.  In  December,  1890,  Mr.  Weils 
became  connected  with  the  Egyptian  Real  Estate, 
Collection  and  Investment  Company,  of  which  he 
has  since  been  Treasurer.  He  is  also  interested 
in  farming  lands  in  Carbondale  and  Pomona 
Townships,  and  owns  considerable  city  property  in 
Murphj'sboro. 

Colonel  Wells  takes  great  interest  in  civic  so- 
cieties. In  1883  he  joined  the  Odd  Fellows' lodge 
at  Mt.  Carbon,  and  has  filled  all  its  offices.  He 
was  one  of  the  organizers  of  Jackson  Camp  No. 
113,  S.  v.,  served  as  its  Captain  during  the  first 
two  terms,  and  in  August,  1890,  attended  the 
state  encampment,  where  he  was  appointed  Major 
to  fill  a  vacancy.  He  was  then  elected  a  member 
of  the  Division  Council  of  Illinois,  and  at  the  en- 
campment in  Jacksonville,  in  1890,  was  elected  a 
delegate  to  the  national  encampment  by  a  very 
flattering  majority.  At  the  encampment  in  Deca- 
tur, in  1891,  he  was  elected  without  opposition  as 
delegate-at-large  to  tiie  national  encampment  at 
Minneapolis,  was  Chairman  of  the  delegation,  and 
had  the  honor  of  seconding  the  nomination  of 
Marvin  E.  Hall  for  commander-in-chief.  In  1892, 
at  the  state  encampment  in  Bushnell,  he  was 
elected  Division  Commander  of  Illinois,  and  at- 
tended the  national  encampment  at  Helena,  Mont., 
where  he  took  a  prominent  stand  to  uphold  the 
Sons  of  Veterans'  Guards.  He  is  a  member  of  the 
Knights  of  P3'tliias  and  the  Uniformed  Rank,  and 
at  the  organization  of  the  Sixth  Regiment  of  the 
Illinois  Brigade  in  East  St.  Louis,  in  1889,  was 
elected  its  Colonel,  and  has  served  as  such  con- 
tinuously since.  He  attended  the  Supreme  Lodge 
in  Milwaukee  in  1890,  and  the  brigade  encamp- 
ment in  Springfield,  111.,  in  1891.  In  1890  he 
became  Senior  Colonel  of  the  Illinois  Brigade, 
and  in  1892  he  attended  the  Supreme  Lodge 
at  Kansas  Cit^',  Mo.,  at  the  head  of  his  regi- 
ment.    He  has  risen  in  rank  through  zeal  and  effi- 


ciencjs  and  has  become  prominent  throughout  the 
country  in  connection  with  his  work  in  the  various 
civic  organizations.  For  years  he  has  been  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Count)'  Republican  Committee,  has  been 
Chairman  of  the  executive  committee,  and  has 
three  times  served  as  a  delegate  to  the  state  con- 
ventions. 


^^  EORGE  W.  STALEY.  Among  the  thriving 
(l[  (^--.  establishments  of  which  Chester  possesses 
^^iijl  her  due  proprotion  ma}'  be  numbered  the 
tailoring  establishment  conducted  by  the  gentle- 
man whose  name  introduces  this  sketch.  Mr. 
Staley  launched  out  in  this  business  in  1875,  and 
since  that  time  he  has  grown  in  popularity  and 
has  acquired  an  enviable  reputation  as  a  man  of 
honor  and  excellent  judgment. 

August  12,  1816,  our  subject  was  born  in  Jeffer- 
son County,  Va.,  to  Peter  and  Christiana  (Krepps) 
Staley.  The  father,  who  was  a  millwright  by  trade, 
was  the  son  of  Stephen  Staley,  of  German  descent, 
while  on  his  maternal  side  his  ancestors  came  from 
Holland.  Our  subject's  father  dying  when  he  was 
a  lad  of  eight  years,  he  was  not  permitted  to  attend 
school  much  after  that  time,  and  being  obliged 
to  earn  his  own  living,  apprenticed  himself  to 
learn  the  tailor's  trade. 

Having  heard  such  glowing  accounts  of  the  coun- 
try further  west,  our  subject  in  1837  went  to  Ohio, 
where  he  remained  a  short  time  in  Cincinnati,  and 
the  same  year  came  to  Randolph  County.  Settling 
in  Kaskaskia,  he  opened  a  shop  and  commenced  to 
work  at  his  trade,  continuing  thus  engaged  for  ten 
years.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time  he  embarked 
in  the  general  mercantile  business  in  the  same 
place,  and  was  there  residing  when,  in  November, 
1867,  he  sustained  a  heavy  loss  by  the  burning  of 
his  store  and  stock  of  goods,  on  which  he  carried 
but  little  insurance. 

In  1870,  the  date  of  Mr.  Staley 's  advent  into 
this  city,  he  formed  a  partnership  with  Charles 
AYassell,  and  for  four  j'ears  they  continued  to  cany 
on  a  merchant  tailoring  establishment.  At  the 
end  of  that  time  he  disposed  of  his  interest  in  the 
business  to  his  partner,  and  in  the  fall  of  the  sue- 


^. 


yi^" 


%~ 


M 


^^ 


PORTEAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


691 


ceeding  year  opened  a  shop  of  his  own,  which  he 
is  conducting  at  the  present  time. 

June  1,  1843,  C4eorge  W.  Slaley  and  Miss  Har- 
riet L.  Feainan  were  united  in  marriage.  Mrs., 
Staley  was  born  in  Kaslcaskia,  tliis  county,  and  was 
a  daughter  of  Jacob  and  Sarah  Fearaan.  Their 
union  was  blessed  by  the  birth  of  seven  children, 
of  wliom  two  sons  and  two  daughters  are  still  liv- 
ing, viz.:  Clarence  L.,  who  is  in  the  insurance  busi- 
ness; William  M.,  who  is  at  present  engaged  in  the 
mills  of  H.  C.  Cole  &  Co.;  Laura,  who  is  the  wife 
of  Abel  Jones,  and  Hattie  L.,  who  is  keeping  house 
for  her  father.  Mrs.  Staley,  who  was  a  most  estima- 
ble woman,  departed  this  life  December  9,  1889. 

Our  subject  is  a  Democrat  in  politics,  and  sup- 
ports that  party  not  only  b}'  his  ballot,  but  also  by 
his  influence  and  the  presentation  of  his  party's 
principles  to  his  acquaintances.  He  has  been 
called  upon  by  his  fellow-townsmen  to  represent 
them  in  various  positions  of  trust,  and  for  tvvelve 
j'ears  served  as  Alderman  of  Chester.  Socially,  he 
is  a  member  of  Kaskaskia  Lodge  No.  86,  A.  F.  &  A. 
M.,  of  which  he  was  Master  for  over  a  quarter  of  a 
century.  He  is  connected  with  Herman  G.  Rey- 
nolds Chapter  No.  84,  R.  A.  M.,  and  Randolph 
Council  No.  44,  and  is  also  an  influential  member 
of  Cyrine  Comraandery  No.  23,  at  Centralia. 


(i]  RA  GILBERT,  one  of  the  honored  pioneers  of 
|{  Monroe  County,  now  lives  on  section  35, 
/il  township  4,  range  9  west.  From  a  very  early 
day  he  has  been  identified  with  the  history  of  this 
community.  He  has  seen  it  in  its  primitive  con- 
dition, when  the  land  was  wild  and  when  wolves 
howled  around  the  cabin  door.  He  has  borne  his 
part  in  the  work  of  transformation  and, develop- 
ment, and  therefore  well  deserves  representation 
in  this  volume. 

Mr.  Gilbert  was  born  in  Chittenden  Count}', 
Vt.,  March  4,  1810,  and  is  a  son  of  Eli  and  Susan 
(Gale)  Gilbert.  When  he  was  four  years  of  age 
his  parents  removed  to  New  York,  locating  first  in 
Seneca,  and  afterward  in  Geneva,  where  the  father 
worked  at  his  trade  of  a  clothier  for  about  two 
years.     He  then  took  his  famil}'  to  Ohio,  and  spent 


the  succeeding  ten  years  of  his  life  in  Washington 
County.  There  he  bought  some  school  land,  and 
Ira  Gilbert  also  entered  a  tract  of  eighty  acres.  In 
1839  the  family  removed  to  Jefferson  County,  111., 
where  land  was  purchased  and  entered,  and  there 
the  father  spent  his  remaining  days.  His  death 
occurred  October  7,  1879.  His  wife,  who  bore  the 
maiden  name  of  Susanna  Gilbert,  and  was  born 
October  13,  1792,  died  July  11,  1865.  They  had 
a  family  of  seventeen  children,  of  whom  six  sons 
and  a  daughter  are  yet  living.  Mr.  Gilbert  be- 
came one  of  the  extensive  farmers  of  Jefferson 
County,  111.  In  politics  he  was  first  a  Whig,  and 
afterward  a  Republican.  He  and  his  wife  were 
members  of  the  Universalist  Cliurch,  and  were 
highly  respected  citizens. 

Our  subject  accompanied  his  parents  on  their 
various  removals,  and  aided  his  father  in  the  line 
of  work  in  which  he  was  engaged.  At  the  age  of 
eighteen  years  he  entered  the  eighty-acre  tract 
above  mentioned,  this  being  during  the  adminis- 
tration of  Andrew  Jackson.  He  was  then  work- 
ing for  O.  R.  Loring,  of  Belpre,  Ohio,  receiving  a 
salary  of  110  per  month.  In  November,  1830,  he 
married  Salome  Dils,  a  native  of  Parkersburg,  W. 
Va.,  and  a  daughter  of  John  Dils,  who  was  a 
saddler  by  trade.  In  1838  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gil- 
bert came  to  Illinois  and  took  up  their  residence  in 
Monroe  County,  where  he  entered  from  the  Gov- 
ernment one  hundred  and  twenty  acres  of  wild 
land,  upon  which  he  yet  resides,  although  the  im- 
proved farm  of  to-day  bears  little  resemblance  to 
the  uncultivated  tract  of  that  time.  Altogether 
he  has  entered  about  two  hundred  and  ninety 
acres.  He  has  led  a  busy  and  useful  life,  and  suc- 
cess has  crowned  his  efforts.  At  one  time  he 
owned  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  acres  of  valu- 
able land,  but  recently  sold  one  hundred  and  ten 
acres. 

In  1889  Mr.  Gilbert  was  called  upon  to  mourn 
the  loss  of  his  wife,  who  died  on  the  13tli  of  June. 
She  was  a  most  estimable  lady,  and  was  held  in 
high  regard  by  all.  They  were  the  parents  of  five 
children,  four  of  whom  are  yet  living:  Layina, 
wife  of  Andrew  Netzel,  of  Nebraska;  Mar}',  wife 
of  Eli  Roy,  of  Mt.  Vernon,  111.;  Diantha,  wife  of 
Sylvester  Haynes,  a  resident  of  California;  and 


692 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Affa,  wife  of  William  Dinan.     They  reside  witb 
her  father. 

Mr.  Gilbert  has  followed  farming  and  stock- 
raising,  and  is  also  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of 
cheese.  The  success  of  his  life  has  been  achieved 
through  his  own  efforts,  and  his  labors  in  former 
years  now  enable  him  to  be  surrounded  by  com- 
forts and  luxuries.  He  belongs  to  the  Universalist 
Church,  as  did  his  wife.  In  politics  he  is  a  stal- 
wart Republican.  His  career  has  been  an  upright, 
honorable  one,  and  he  has  the  confidence  and  good 
will  of  all  witli  whom  business  or  social  relations 
have  brought  him  in  contact.  His  example  is  in- 
deed worthy  of  emulation. 

>S^ZEKIEL  C.  KERR  and  BROTHERS,  resi- 
jfe)  dents  of  lot  2G,  second  sub-division,  Kaskas- 
'lL=^  kia  Point,  Randolph  County.  Ezekiel  is  a 
native  of  Penns3'lvania,  and  was  born  in  York 
County,  December  28,  1848.  He  is  a  son  of  James 
and  Elizabeth  (Krall)  Kerr,  both  natives  of  Penn- 
sylvania. The  father  died  in  1873,  at  the  age  of 
seventy-eiglit  years;  and  the  mother  in  1874,  when 
sixt^'-four  years  old.  They  lie  buried  in  the  cem- 
eteries at  Dillsburg  and  Siddonsburg,  Pa.,  respect- 
ively. 

Young  Ezekiel  attended  the  district  schools  in 
his  native  county,  and  remained  at  home  until  his 
twentieth  year.  Up  to  this  time  he  bad  never  been 
from  home  a  fortnight  in  his  life.  With  the  in- 
tention of  going  to  Missouri  he  and  his  brother 
George  left  home  early  in  August,  1871,  and  jour- 
neyed to  St.  Louis.  Instead  of  locating  immedi- 
ately in  Missouri,  the  boys  came  to  Randolph 
County,  where  their  brother  James  had  planted  a 
crop  of  wheat  near  Ellis  Grove,  and  after  haivest- 
ing  it  they  all  three  intended  to  go  to  their  former 
destination.  They  journeyed  about  twent3'-five 
miles  northwest  of  Rolla,  but  seeing  nothing  but 
broken  hilly  land  they  started  back  on  foot,  re- 
turning to  Illinois.  Here  following  their  first  crop 
with^ another  in  the  fall  of  1873,  thej- secured  a 
farm  south  of  Ellis  Grove,  which  they  occupied 
two  years  and  then  moved  to  the  west  side  of  the 
Okaw  River,  taking  a  fifty  years'  lease  in  two  hun- 


dred and  eighty-five  acres  in  the  second  and  third 
surveys  of  Old  Kaskaskia  Commons.  Here  the  three 
brothers  operated  in  partnership  until  1882,  when 
James  withdrew  from  tlie  company,  intending  to 
locate  in  Kansas.  Finding  nothing  to  suit  him 
there,  he  wandered  down  into  the  Indian  Territor3', 
but  soon  returned  as  far  east  as  Douglas  County, 
Mo.,  where  he  took  up  a  homestead  of  one  hundred 
and  sixty  acres.  After  a  fortnight's  residence 
James  started  for  Kaskaskia,  and  fully  expected  to 
return  to  his  claim,  but  has  now  abandoned  it  alto- 
gether, and  is  with  his  brothers  again.  George  and 
Ezekiel  have  never  been  separated  since  their  first 
departure  for  the  west. 

James  A.  Kerr  was  born  December  25,  1843,  and 
was  married  December  21,  1886,  to  Miss  Mary,  a 
daughter  of  Sterling  and  Clarinda  (Craig)  Adair, 
residents  of  Randolph  Count}'.  To  them  were 
born  two  children,  Ruth  A.,  who  died  in  infancy, 
and  George  W.,  born  September  18,  1892. 

April  27,  1893,  Ezekiel  Kerr  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Mrs.  Susan  McDonald,  the  widow  of 
Benjamin  JIcDonald,  and  a  daughter  of  William 
and  Lucinda  (Hinkle)  Hudson,  natives  of  Ken- 
tuckj'  and  Missouri,  respectively.  The  date  of  her 
birth  is  November  15,  1852.  The  brother  George 
has  never  been  married,  and  with  the  family  is  a 
member  of  the  Missionary  Baptist  Church  at  Pu- 
jol. All  the  brothers  are  stanch  advocates  of  the 
Democracy,  and  support  its  principles  b^-  their  in- 
fluence and  vote. 


(^ 


^^1 


Lt^ 


tg^ 


^ 


;®^ 


^ 


M.  BROWNING  is  the  President  of  the 
Union  Coal  Company,  and  the  leading  mer- 
chant of  Du  Quoin.  He  was  born  in  Frank- 
lin County,  111.,  April  4,  1859,  and  is  a  son 
of  William  R.  Browning,  who  was  one  of  the  pio- 
neer merchants  of  Benton,  and  one  of  the  leading 
citizens  of  that  place.  He  look  quite  an  active 
part  in  local  politics,  but  was  cut  off  from  a  useful 
career  by  his  death  in  earlj-  manhood,  in  1865. 
His  wife,  who  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Lj'dia  Dry, 
was  born  in  Perry  Count}',  111.,  and  is  now  living 
in   Franklin   County.     In   their  family  were  four 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


693 


sons  who  grew  to  manhood,  the  eldest  being  D. 
M.,  who  was  County  Judge  of  Franklin  Count}', 
and  Circuit  Judge  of  the  district.  He  was  upon 
the  Bench  for  twelve  years,  and  is  recognized  as 
one  of  the  most  able  attorneys  of  southern  Illinois. 
He  is  a  leading  Democratic  politician,  and  is  now 
commissioner  of  Indian  affairs  in  Washington,  D. 
C,  to  which  position  he  was  appointed  by  Presi- 
dent Cleveland.  William  R.  is  a  merchant  of  Ben- 
ton, 111.,  and  L.  A.  is  connected  with  the  Eli 
Walker  Dry  Goods  Company  of  St.  Louis. 

Mr.  Browning  whose  name  heads  this  record 
received  his  school  privileges  prior  to  the  age  of 
fifteen  years,  wlien  he  started  out  in  life  to  make 
his  own  way  in  the  world.  Since  that  time  he  has 
been  dependent  upon  his  own  resources,  so  that 
whatever  success  he  has  achieved  through  the 
past  years  is  due  to  his  own  efforts.  Coming  to 
Du  Quoin  when  a  youtii  of  fifteen,  he  began  clerk- 
ing in  a  store,  wiiere  he  was  employed  until  eigh- 
teen years  of  age,  when  with  the  capital  he  had  ac- 
quired through  industrj-,  economy  and  persever- 
ance, he  embarked  in  the  grocery  business  on  his 
own  account.  Since  that  time  he  has  prospered, 
and  although  but  a  young  man  of  thirty-six  years, 
he  is  one  of  the  most  extensive  business  men  of 
Du  Quoin,  and  aside  from  his  store  he  is  regarded 
as  one  of  the  wealthiest  men  of  the  count}'.  He 
is  now  President  of  four  large  coal  mines,  which 
are  operated  under  tlie  name  of  the  Union  Mines, 
being  associated  in  the  ownership  of  the  same  with 
leading  citizens  of  Du  Quoin  and  St.  Louis.  He 
is  also  one  of  the  owners  of  the  Du  Quoin  Gas 
Works,  is  connected  with  a  coal  company  of  St. 
Louis,  and  has  large  property  interests  in  Du 
Quoin. 

In  1879  Mr.  Browning  was  married  to  Miss 
Lillia  Frizzell.  Her  father  was  a  wealth}'  merchant 
of  Du  Quoin,  but  died  when  the  daughter  was 
quite  young.  Siie  has  one  brother,  J.  H.  Frizzell, 
an  extensive  clothing  dealer  of  Du  Quoin.  Like 
the  other  members  of  his  family,  Mr.  Browning  is 
a  Democrat,  but  has  never  sought  or  desired  public 
office.  Few  men  have  done  more  to  make  Du 
Quoin  the  thriving  city  of  to-day  than  our  sub- 
ject, and  his  name  is  inseparably  connected  with 
its  upbuilding.     At  the  age  of  fifteen,  Mr.  Brown- 


ing started  out  in  life  for  himself  with  no  other 
capital  than  good  health,  a  fair  education,  a  sound 
judgment  and  a  determination  to  succeed  in  what- 
ever he  undertook.  Upon  this  foundation  his  for- 
tune was  built  by  his  own  labors. 


I^EV.  THEODORE  A.  SAUPERT,  pastor  of 
IW^  St.  Mark's  Lutheran  Church,  which  position 
<ii  fl|\  he  has  filled  since  1889,  to  the  satisfaction 
of  his  entire  congregation,  was  born  in 
Evansville,  Ind.,  on  the  8th  of  February,  1866. 
His  parents  were  Rev.  Andrew  J.  and  Wilhelmina 
(Schultze)  Saupert.  In  their  family  he  was  the 
third  in  order  of  birth.  His  father  was  a  native 
of  Baireuth,  Bavaria,  and  was  educated  in  Ger- 
many, at  Basel  and  Eriangen.  He  fitted  himself 
for  the  work  of  the  ministry  in  the  Lutlieran 
Church,  and  with  the  desire  to  labor  in  the  minis- 
terial field  of  America  he  crossed  the  Atlantic  to 
this  continent  and  accepted  the  pastorate  of  the 
church  in  Columbus,  Ohio.  He  learned  the  English 
language  after  his  emigration  to  this  country. 
Spending  one  year  in  Columbus,  he  then  accepted 
a  call  to  Evansville,  Ind.  This  was  in  June,  1845. 
He  took  charge  of  Trinity  Church  at  that  place, 
and  continued  as  its  pastor  for  the  long  period  of 
forty-eight  consecutive  years,  respected  and  be- 
loved by  all  who  knew  him.  He  was  a  power  for 
good  in  that  community,  and  his  influence  will 
ever  live  in  the  lives  of  those  who  were  under  his 
pastoral  guidance.  He  suffered  a  stroke  of  paraly- 
sis, and  died  in  I^vansville,  in  July,  1893.  His 
widow  still  survives  him,  and  is  yet  living  in  that 
place. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  acquired  his  educa- 
tion in  the  schools  of  his  native  town,  attending 
the  German,  public  and  private  schools.  He  thus 
acquired  a  good  education.  Determining  to  follow 
in  the  professional  footsteps  of  his  father,  he  began 
studying  for  the  ministry.  He  attended  Concordia 
College  of  Ft.  Wayne,  Ind.,  for  six  years,  making 
a  thorough  study  of  the  classics,  and  then  entered 
Concordia  Seminary  of  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  he 
remained  for  three  years.  His  first  call  was  from 
the  church   in    Steeleville,  111.,  in   1889.     He  ac- 


694 


PORTRAIT   AXD    BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


cepted  it  and  became  pastor  of  St.  Mark's  Lutlieran 
Church,  of  which  he  has  now  had  charge  for  four 
years.  The  gifts  of  the  father  seem  to  have  de- 
scended to  the  son.  He  wins  not  only  the  love  and 
confidence  of  his  own  congregation,  hut  also  has 
the  high  regard  of  other  denominations.  He  is  a 
brilliant  3'oung  man,  successful  in  the  pulpit  and 
in  his  labors  among  the  people. 

On  the  loth  of  Januarj-,  1891,  Rev.  Mr.  Saupert 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Emma  A.  Baeh- 
mann,  a  daughter  of  Rev.  George  and  Amanda 
(Duebel)  Bachmann,  of  Evansville,  Ind.  Her  father 
was  a  pioneer  of  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  and  her  mother 
died  in  that  citj-  in  1873.  Mrs.  Saupert  is  to  her 
husband  a  faithful  companion  and  helpmate,  and 
aids  him  greatly  in  his  labors  by  her  sympathy  and 
encouragement.  She  is  a  highly  accomplished  lady, 
and  for  four  jears  resided  in  Regensburg,  Bavaria, 
where  she  devoted  her  attention  to  classical  music, 
literature  and  domestic  studies.  In  politics  Mr. 
Saupert  votes  with  the  Republican  party,  but  his 
entire  time  and  attention  are  given  to  the  work  of 
the  ministrv. 


J^  OHN  A.  McXERNEY.  who  follows  farming 
!  on  section  3,  Vergennes  Township.  Jackson 
Count3',  was  born  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  May 
_  19,  1837,  and  is  a  son  of  Joshua  McNernej', 
who  was  an  officer  in  Dublin  Castle,  and  held  that 
position  until  his  death,  in  1868.  He  was  married 
in  Dublin  to  Margaret  Welch,  and  to  them  were 
born  tlie  following  children:  Joshua,  John;  Annie, 
wife  of  Peter  Mernah,  who  was  a  Union  soldier, 
and  was  killed  at  Norfolk,  Va.;  Margaret,  deceased ; 
Marj-,  who  died  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  and 
Thomas,  who  is  an  actor, 

Mr.  McNerney  of  this  sketch  crossed  the  Atlan- 
tic in  1848,  and  for  a  time  lived  in  Rondout.  N.  Y., 
on  the  Hudson,  and  attended  school  in  New  York 
City  at  night.  During  his  youth  he  engaged  in 
selling  "Thompson's  Bank  Note  Reporter,"  and  in 
1851  was  thus  employed  in  New  York  City,  where 
he  frequently  saw  Horace  Greelej-,  He  also  there 
heard  one  of  the  famous  speeches  of  Daniel  Web- 
ster, He  there  lived  when  Kossuth  came  to  this 
country,  and  saw  the  welcome  extended  the  patriot 


defender  of  Poland,  In  1856  Mr,  MoNerney  went 
to  Stephenson,  near  Frederickstown,  Me,,  and  from 
there  to  St,  John,  New  Brunswick,  whence  he 
sailed  for  Liverpool,  England.  After  visiting  his 
parents  for  a  year,  he  returned  to  America  in  1857, 
at  the  time  the  bread  riots  were  occurring  in  New 
York. 

In  1858  our  subject  emigrated  to  Rock  Island 
County,  111.,  and  there  heard  an  address  bj'  Abra- 
ham Lincoln.  The  following  winter  was  spent  in 
New  Orleans,  and  in  May  he  went  to  St.  Louis,  but 
after  a  month  made  his  way  to  Cairo,  111.,  which 
then  contained  only  a  few  houses  in  the  midst  of  a 
swamp.  Going  to  Pulaski,  he  worked  in  a  sawmill 
for  a  month,  after  which  he  came  to  Vergennes 
Township,  Jackson  County,  where  lie  was  employed 
as  a  farm  han<l  by  E,  T,  Ross.  In  1861,  he  enlisted 
for  the  lat€  war,  in  Company  B,  Seventh  Illinois 
Infantry,  which  was  the  firet  regiment  that  left  the 
state.  After  being  discharged  on  account  of  phj'- 
sical  disability,  he  served  as  ward  master  of  the 
hospital  in  Mound  City,  He  received  a  letter 
signed  by  the  surgeons  and  officers  of  the  hospital, 
expressing  their  warm  regard  for  him  and  their 
regret  at  his  removal  from  that  post.  He  also 
served  a  year  as  watchman  in  the  commissary  de- 
partment at  Cairo,  was  in  the  quartermaster's  de- 
partment at  Benton  Barracks.  St.  Louis,  and  there 
remained  for  sis  months,  wlien  he  was  taken  ill, 
and  in  1864  resigned.  On  his  return  to  Vergennes 
Township,  he  took  up  farming,  which  he  now 
follows. 

On  the  27tli  of  December,  1862,  Mr.  McNerney 
married  Sarah  J,  Porter,  who  was  born  in  Gallia 
County,  Ohio,  January  31. 1837,  Her  father,  Rus- 
sell Sumner  Porter,  was  born  in  Ohio,  October  12, 
1802,  and  emigrated  to  Du  Quoin,  111.,  in  1844. 
Three  yeai-s  later  he  came  to  Jackson  County  and 
improved  a  farm,  upon  which  he  resided  until  his 
death.  May  15,  1871,  His  wife  bore  the  maiden 
name  of  Dorothy  Burnham,  and  was  bom  April  20, 
1802,  At  the  age  of  sixteen  she  came  with  the 
family  to  Illinois,  and  was  married  in  1825,  Their 
children  are,  Benjamin,  born  February  11,  1826; 
Eliphaz,  September  4,  1827;  John  B.,  August  4, 
1829;  Solomon  A.,  April  7,  1833;  Lauren  R.,  De- 
cember 11,    1834;    Sarah    J.,   January    31,  1837; 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


695 


Phoebe  K.,  January  17,  1839,  and  Hiram  H.,  March 

19,  1843.  The  mother  of  this  family  died  June  12. 
1877.  Mr.  and  Jlrs.  J.  A.  McNerney  became  the 
parents  of  five  children.  Margaret  D.,  born  April 
9,  1864,  was  married  July  29,  1888,  to  T.  C. 
Hughey,  who  lives  in  Champaign,  111.,  and  has  two 
children,  Genevieve,  born  November  28,  1890,  and 
Mildred,  July  10,  1892.  Wilbur,  who  was  born 
January  25,  1866,  died  August  23.  1868;  Phojbe  J. 
was  born  July  28,  1870;  and  Eleanor,  August  23, 
1873.  Jackson  A.,  born  November  30,  1877,  died 
March  21,  1879. 

In  1880  Mr.  McNerne}-  purchased  the  old  familj' 
homestead  of  the  Porters,  and  has  since  resided 
thereon.  He  is  a  member  of  Du  Quoin  Post  No. 
106,  G.  A.  R.,  and  is  a  Royal  Arch  Mason.  In 
politics  he  has  always  been  a  stanch  Republican, 
and  has  held  all  of  the  township  offices  with  the 
exception  of  Supervisor.  He  is  now  acceptable- 
serving  as  Justice  of  the  Peace.  He  was  also  Post- 
master at  Vergennes  for  some  time,  and  was  in- 
strumental in  establisliing  the  office  at  this  place. 
He  received  a  commission  from  Walter  Q.  Gresham 
when  he  was  Postmaster-General.  He  aided  in 
procuring  postal  service  on  the  railroad  through 
this  locality,  and  in  recognition  of  his  service  the 
company  gave  him  a  two  years'  pass  over  their 
road.  He  has  visited  nearlj-  all  of  the  principal 
cities  of  this  country',  but  has  now  settled  down  to 
quiet  life,  and  is  a  respected  and  honored  citizen, 
who  is  enjo_ving  the  rest  which  he  has  so  truly 
earned. 

• 0^P '    . 

¥■*  (^  E.  CHAMBERS  is  one  of  the  wide-awake 
and  enterprising  young  business  men  of 
Murphysboro,  now  engaged  in  general 
merchandising.  He  comes  from  a  southern  family. 
His  father.  C.  C.  Chambers,  was  a  native  of  Virginia, 
and  when  a  3'oung  man  emigrated  to  Tennessee, 
where  he  met  and  married  Martha  Draughon,  a 
native  of  Robinson  County,  that  state,  and  a 
daughter  of  John  Draughon.  Mr.  Chambers  then 
turned  his  attention  to  farming,which  he  continued 
for  man^-  years.  He  is  still  living  in  Tennessee, 
at  the  advanced  age  of  ninety,  and  with  one  ex- 
ception he  is  the  oldest   man  in  the  county.     He 


formerly  owned  over  four  hundred  acres  of  land. 
He  served  as  one  of  the  County  Commissioners 
and  is  an  honored  and  respected  citizen.  Jlrs. 
Chambers  passed  away  in  1878,  leaving  five  chil- 
dren, all  of  whom  yet  survive. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  Robinson  County, 
Tenn.,  .January  22,  1849,  was  reared  on  his  father's 
farm,  and  in  the  common  schools  acquired  his  edu- 
cation. He  continued  under  the  parental  roof 
until  1869,  when  he  began  clerking  in  a  store  near 
his  home.  The  following  year  he  went  to  Spring- 
field, Tenn.,  where  he  was  a  clerk  in  a  dry-goods 
store  until  January  22,  1871,  when  he  went  to  Car- 
bondale.  111.,  and  soon  afterward  came  to  IMurphys- 
boro.  Here  he  embarked  in  the  wholesale  liquor 
business  with  D.  T.  Garrett,  continuing  operations 
along  that  line  for  five  years,  when,  during  the 
panic  of  1876.  they  were  forced  to  close  out  their 
business.  With  characteristic  energy-,  however,  Mr. 
Chambers  opened  a  grocery  store  in  the  Fox  Build- 
ing, on  Main  Street,  and  to  that  trade  devoted  his 
energies  until  1882,  when  he  built  the  store  which 
he  now  occupies,  and  formed  a  partnership  with 
John  M.  Reeder,  since  deceased.  Subsequently  S. 
W.  Gill  purchased  the  interest  of  Mr.  Reeder,  and 
the  firm  of  Chambers  A-  Gill  did  business  until 
September,  1891,  when  our  subject  purchased  his 
partner's  interest.  He  is  one  of  the  oldest  mer- 
chants in  3'ears  of  continuous  trade  in  Murphys- 
boro. He  also  has  some  real-estate  interests  in  this 
city. 

Mr.  Chambers  was  united  in  marriage  in  1874, 
with  Miss  Mary,  daughter  of  H.  H.  Fox,  whose 
sketch  appears  elsewhere  in  this  work,  and  who 
is  a  native  of  Somerset  Township.  Their  union 
has  been  blessed  with  a  daughter  and  a  son,  Nan- 
nie D.  and  Walter  H. 

In  his  political  views  Mr.  Chambers  is  a  Demo- 
crat. He  served  as  Jailer  of  Murphysboro  from 
1880  to  1882,  and  was  a  member  of  the  first  School 
Board  of  the  city,  which  position  he  filled  for  four 
years.  During  this  time  the  new  west  side  school 
house  and  the  high  school  building  were  erected. 
The  cause  of  education  has  ever  found  in  him  a 
warm  friend  and  he  has  done  much  for  its  advance- 
ment. For  two  years  he  was  Alderman  of  the 
,   Second  Ward,  and  his  influence  was  ever  given  for 


696 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


the  promotion  of  those  enterprises  which  were  cal- 
culated to  prove  of  public  benefit.  During  that 
time  the  electric  lights  and  water  works  were  es- 
tablished and  the  sewerage  s^'stem  laid.  Public- 
spirited  and  progressive,  he  is  a  citizen  whom 
Murphysboro  could  ill  afford  to  lose. 


AVID  .1.  WILSON  of  Percy  assumed  the 
management  of  the  AIcGuire  Mines  in 
1892,  and  has  since  successfully  conducted 
the  same.  He  has  the  confidence  of  his 
employers,  the  respect  of  those  who  work  under 
his  direction,  and  in  the  histoiy  of  his  adopted 
county  he  well  deserves  representation.  He  is  a 
native  of  Scotland,  his  birth  having  occurred  in 
Lanarkshire,  on  the  14th  of  June,  1847.  His  par- 
ents were  David  and  Isabella  (Jeffrey)  Wilson,  and 
he  was  the  fiftli  child  in  tlieir  famil3-.  The  father 
was  a  miner  and  followed  that  vocation  in  Scot- 
land up  to  the  time  of  his  death,  which  occurred 
in  1867.  Mrs.  AVilson  continued  to  reside  in  her 
native  land  until  three  years  after  her  husband's 
death,  when,  in  1870,  she  crossed  the  briny  deep  to 
America,  and  took  up  her  residence  in  Will  Coun- 
ty, 111.  Her  death  occurred  in  Braidwood,  111.,  on 
the  loth  of  August,  1882. 

David  Wilson,  whose  name  heads  this  record, 
received  but  limited  educational  privileges,  as  he 
attended  the  public  schools  of  his  native  countv 
only  until  ten  j-ears  of  age.  He  then  began  to 
earn  his  own  livelihood,  and  has  since  been  de- 
pendent upon  his  own  resources,  so  that  whatever 
success  he  has  achieved  in  life  is  due  entirelv  to  his 
own  efforts.  He  began  working  in  the  mines  of 
Scotland,  and  was  thus  employed  until  1866,  when 
he  bade  adieu  to  home  and  friends  and  sailed  for 
the  New  World.  After  arriving  in  America,  he 
took  up  his  residence  in  Braidwood,  111.,  where  he 
engaged  in  mining,  spending  the  succeeding  ten 
j-ears  of  his  life  in  that  place.  He  then  came  to 
Murphjsboro,  111.,  and  took  charge  of  the  mines 
for  the  St.  Louis  Ore  and  Steel  Company,  continu- 
ing to  be  Superintendent  of  the  same  for  another 
decade.     As  before  stated,  he  came  to  Percy,  lU., 


in  1892  and  assumed  charge  of  the  McGuire  Mines, 
which  he  has  since  conducted. 

On  the  27th  of  May,  1882,  Mr.  Wilson  w.is  mar- 
ried to  Miss  Mary  James,  daughter  of  George  and 
Elizabeth  (Evans)  James,  both  of  whom  were  n.i- 
tives  of  Wales.  Unto  our  subject  and  his  wife 
were  born  four  daughters,  who  in  order  of  birth 
are  as  follows:  Belle.  Lizzie,  Maj-  and  Annie. 
The  two  eldest  now  attend  school.  May  died  Jan- 
uary 25,  1894,  at  the  age  of  three  years. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wilson  were  reared  in  the  faith  of 
the  Baptist  Church,  and  are  highly  respected  citi- 
zens of  this  community,  who  hold  an  enviable 
position  in  social  circles  where  true  worth  and  in- 
telligence are  received  as  the  passports  into  good 
societ}-.  Socially,  Mr.  Wilson  is  connected  with 
Steubenville  Lodge  No.  495,  A.  F.  &,  A.  M.,  and 
with  Leonidas  Lodge  No.  87,  K.  P.,  of  Murphys- 
boro. The  Republican  party  finds  in  him  a  stal- 
wart supporter,  ever  ready  to  advance  its  interests 
by  all  worthj'  means.  Mr.  Wilson  is  an  expe- 
rienced miner,  and  has  been  very  successful  in  the 
management  of  mines.  He  now  occupies  a  respon- 
sible position,  and  his  duties  are  discharged  to  tlie 
entire  satisfaction  of  his  employer. 


OHN  DEVINE.  The  foreign  born  citizens 
of  this  county  are  coming  rapidly  to  the 
front  in  various  lines  of  business,  and  among 
llie  residents  of  Chester  the  gentleman  above 
named  is  one  of  the  shrewdest  business  men.  He 
began  his  life  career  with  no  capital  but  his  na- 
tural endowments,  a  common-school  education  and 
a  strong  will.  At  present  he  is  engaged  in  the  sa- 
loon, tobacco  and  cigar  trade  in  this  city,  to  which 
he  has  also  added  that  of  an  ice  dealer. 

Born  in  County  Galwaj-,  Ireland,  November  15, 
1837,  our  subject  is  a  son  of  Philip  and  Margaret 
(Reddinglon)  Devine.  He  was  a  lad  of  sixteen 
years  when  he  determined  to  emigrate  to  the  New 
World,  and  on  coming  hither,  in  1854,  landed  in 
New  York  Cit}-,  whence  he  went  to  Chicago,  111., 
and  later  to  Centralia,  Wis.  After  four  years  spent 
there,  and  after  being  variouslj'  emplo\"«d  for  some 
time  on  the  river  and  in  other  ways,  he  settled  at 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


697 


Cairo,  this  state,  and  clerked  for  Samuel  Wilson  in 
a  boot  store.  After  making  that  city  his  home 
from  1862  to  1869,  he  came  up  the  river  to  Grand 
Tower,  and  in  1877  became  a  resident  of  this  city. 

On  taking  up  his  abode  in  Chester,  Mr.  Devine 
established  a  meat  market,  and  at  the  same  time 
did  a  good  business  as  a  dealer  in  ice,  remaining 
thus  employed  for  the  succeeding  two  j^ears.  At 
the  expiration  of  that  time  he  engaged  in  the  sa- 
loon business,  and  has  a  well  equipped  establish- 
ment located  on  Water  Street. 

John  Devine  and  Miss  Ida  Jones  were  united  in 
marriage  in  1875.  The  lady  was  born  near  Cape 
Girardeau  and  was  a  daughter  of  Silas  and  Eve- 
line Jones.  To  them  were  born  three  sons  and 
five  daughters,  namely:  Cora,  John,  Jr.;  Edna, 
Philip  and  James  (twins),  Winnefred,  Gertrude  and 
Eveline.  The  eldest  daughter  died  when  in  her 
seventeenth  year. 

Mr.  Devine  is  a  straightforward,  prompt  and 
methodical  business  man,  and  his  success  has  con- 
tributed to  the  upbuilding  of  Chester.  In  politics 
he  gives  his  stanch  support  to  the  Democratic  party. 
While  a  resident  of  Jackson  Count}^,  this  state,  he 
filled  the  offices  of  Coroner  and  Deput3-  Sheriff  for 
two  years,  and  in  ever}'  position  to  which  he  was 
called,  always  gave  the  utmost  satisfaction.  He  is 
an  influential  politician  and  has  man }•  warm  friends, 
who  recognize  him  as  a  leader  and  one  entirely 
capable  of  fulfilling  any  duty  imposed  upon  him. 


4^ 


'ifl  AMES  11.  MARTIN  is  a  leading  attorney  of 
Murphysboro,  and  a  popular  and  genial 
^,^1  gentleman,  who  wins  friends  wherever  he 
IJ^J//  goes  by  the  many  excellencies  of  his  char- 
acter and  his  sterling  worth.  The  record  of  his 
life  is  as  follows:  He  was  born  in  Ripley  County, 
Ind.,  October  18,  1852,  and  is  a  son  of  William 
Martin,  who  was  born  in  Kenton  County,  Ky. 
The  grandfather,  James  Martin,  was  a  general 
farmer,  and  a  native  of  Kentucky,  liut  his  father 
was  born  in  Virginia.  lu  an  early  day  the  latter 
removed  to  Kentucky,  where  he  built  a  log  house 
and  opened  up  a  farm.  In  tlie  Indian  massacre 
of  the  settlement  all  of  the  family  were  killed  ex- 


cept the  grandfather  of  our  subject.  He  after- 
ward removed  to  Ohio,  where  he  carried  on  farm- 
ing for  some  years.  His  last  da^'s  were  spent  in 
the  home  of  his  son  William,  and  he  died  in  1864, 
at  the  age  of  ninety  3'ears. 

When  about  twenty-nine  years  of  age  William 
Martin  purchased  and  cleared  land  near  Holton, 
Ind.,  becoming  the  owner  of  a  fine  farm  of  two 
hundred  acres.  In  1866  he  removed  to  Richland 
County,  III.,  where  he  had  previously  purchased 
land,  and  carried  on  general  farming  until  his 
death,  in  1881,  at  the  age  of  fifty -nine.  In  relig- 
ious belief  he  was  a  Universalist,  and  in  politics 
was  a  conservative  Democrat.  He  married  Caro- 
line Behj'mer,  a  native  of  Ohio,  and  a  daughter  of 
John  Behymer,  who  was  born  in  Pennsylvania. 
Her  grandfather  was  a  native  of  Germanj-,  and 
after  emigrating  to  America  made  his  home  in 
the  Keystone  State.  Her  father  was  a  miller  b^' 
trade,  and  in  the  earl\-  days  of  Indiana  he  erected 
a  horse-mill  in  Kipley  County.  Later  he  built  a 
water-mill  on  Otter  Creek,  and  carried  on  that 
business  until  1858,  when  he  removed  to  Boone 
County,  111.,  continuing  the  same  business  until 
called  to  his  final  rest,  at  the  age  of  sixty-five.  He, 
too,  was  a  Universalist.  He  had  three  sons  who 
supported  the  Republican  party,  and  who  were 
numbered  among  the  brave  boys  in  blue  during 
the  late  war.  Mrs.  Mai-tin  is  still  living  on  the  old 
home  of  three  hundred  and  fifty  acres  in  Richland 
County,  at  the  age  of  sixty-four.  In  the  family 
were  thirteen  children,  twelve  of  whom  grew  to 
mature  years,  while  ten  are  still  living. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  reared  upon  the 
home  farm  until  twelve  years  of  age,  and  then  ac- 
companied his  parents  to  Illinois.  His  education 
was  acquired  in  the  schools  of  Noble,  and  at  the 
age  of  twent^'-one  he  began  teaching,  which  pro- 
fession he  followed  for  three  years.  During  this 
time  he  read  law  under  Judge  Preston,  of  Olney, 
111.,  and  in  1878  he  entered  the  law  department  of 
the  State  University,  from  which  he  was  graduated 
in  1880,  with  the  degree  of  LL.  B.  In  the  autumn 
of  that  year  he  came  to  Murphysboro,  and  in 
June,  1881,  formed  a  partnership  with  Hon.  G.  W. 
Hill,  which  connection  has  since  continued.  Mr. 
Martin  is  the  attorney  for  the  Logan    family   and 


698 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


for  the  Abstract  Title  and  Guarantee  Company. 
He  drew  up  the  papers  and  aided  in  tbe  organiza- 
tion of  the  City  National  Bank,  of  which  he  is  one 
of  the  directors.  He  is  an  attorney  for  the  Jack- 
son Countj-  Homestead  Building  and  Loan  Associa- 
tion, and  was  the  attorney  for  the  first  building  and 
loan  association  in  this  place. 

November  13,  1888,  Mr.  Martin  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Lizzie  Kenned_v,  a  native  of 
Murphysboro,  and  a  daugliter  of  George  Kenned}', 
a  retired  merchant  and  earl}'  settler  of  this  place. 
Mrs.  Martin  was  educated  at  the  normal  school  in 
Carbondale  and  is  a  cultured  and  refined  lady. 
The}-  have  one  daughter,  Anna  Kennedy.  So- 
cially, Mr.  Martin  is  connected  with  Amity  Lodge, 
I.  O.  O.  F.,  the  United  Workmen,  which  he  has 
represented  in  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  tlie  Knights 
of  Pythias.  In  politics  he  is  an  inflexible  adherent 
of  Democratic  principles.  He  is  recognized  as  one 
of  the  best  Judges  of  the  law  in  southern  Illinois 
and  has  hardly  an  equal  and  no  superiors  as  an  at- 
torney. 


z^^K^ 


ST==5)  LIAS  D. WIS,  who  resides  on  section  16. 
11^  Elkville  Township,  .Jackson  County,  is  one 
IlLi^  of  the  substantial  farmers  of  southern  Illi- 
nois. His  parents  were  William  and  Catherine 
(Woolrock)  Davis.  The  former  was  a  native  of 
North  Carolina,  in  which  slate  his  father,  .James 
Davis,  settled  at  a  very  early  date.  About  the 
year  1810  William  Davis  accompanied  his  parents 
to  the  Mississippi  bottoms  in  Illinois.  Fertile 
farm  lands  teeming  with  grain  were  then  un- 
known, but  the  lakes  and  swamps  abounded  in 
wild  game.  Bears,  deer  and  turkeys  were  far 
more  common  than  domestic  fowls  or  cattle,  and 
in  hunting  game  Mr.  Davis  did  a  profitable  busi- 
ness. After  a  hunt  he  would  take  his  game  by  ox- 
team  to  St.  Louis,  where  it  was  sold  at  a  good  price. 
Land  at  that  time  was  worth  only  $1.25  per 
acre,  and  William  Davis,  who  readily  foresaw  that 
this  country  would  soon  become  thickly  populated, 
and  that  land  in  consequence  would  rapidly  rise 
in  value,  purchased  more  than  a  thousand  acres  in 
Jackson  County,  where  he  settled  with  his  family. 
While   his  principal  occupation   was  hunting,  he 


also  engaged  in  farming  to  some  extent  with  the 
old  wooden  mold-board  plow.  The  soil  was  very 
rich  and  yielded  abundant  harvests,  seventy-five 
bushels  of  oats  and  one  hundred  bushels  of  corn 
to  the  acre  being  gathered.  Mr.  Davis  also  en- 
gaged in  raising  horses,  cattle  and  hogs,  and  the 
wild  prairies  afforded  rich  pasturage.  The  mo- 
notony of  the  work  was  often  varied  by  hunting 
matches,  for  there  w.as  a  number  of  expert  shots 
in  this  locality.  One  fall  the  different  hunters 
agreed  that  they  would  hunt  through  the  season 
and  the  one  who  shot  the  most  deer  was  to  set  up 
a  bottle  of  rum.  .James  Davis  killed  one  hundred 
and  eighty-two  deer  that  season. 

In  1832  William  Davis  shouldered  a  flint-lock 
rifle  and  for  a  short  time  did  service  in  the  Black 
Hawk  War.  He  reared  his  son  Elias  in  this  local- 
ity. The  latter  received  but  limited  educational 
advantages,  for  the  schools  of  the  community  were 
not  numerous,  nor  were  they  noted  for  their  excel- 
lence. On  arriving  at  man's  estate  he  purchased 
land  and  began  farming  for  himself.  In  1849  he 
married  Miss  Delitha  Crews,  and  they  became  the 
parents  of  six  children,  four  of  whom  are  still  liv- 
ing. Leonard  married  Eliza  House;  Edward  fii-st 
married  Eliza  Sivilts,  and  afterward  wedded  E.  E. 
Degenhardt;  Delia  became  the  wife  of  John  Cann, 
who  died  in  1880.  The  Davis  farm  is  one  of  the 
best  in  the  community,  highly  cultivated  and  im- 
proved, and  our  subject  is  ranked  among  the  lead- 
ing agriculturists  of  the  community.  He  is  enter- 
prising and  industrious,  and  his  success  is  well 
merited. 

One  eccentricity  in  tiie  life  of  William  Davis 
was  the  way  in  which  he  kept  his  money  in  safety. 
Long  before  his  death  he  was  considered  one  of 
the  wealthiest  farmers  of  southern  Illinois.  From 
the  sale  of  game  and  cattle  he  acquired  much  gold, 
which  he  was  in  the  habit  of  hiding  in  queer  places. 
He  was  three  times  married,  and  his  third  wife  on 
one  occasion  hid  ^3,300  of  his  gold  in  a  soap  bar- 
rel. The  Davis  boys  suspected  their  step-mother 
of  the  appropriation,  and  by  working  upon  her 
superstitious  fears  induced  her  to  confess.  The 
money  was  then  placed  in  nail  kegs,  the  heads 
fastened  down  and  put  in  the  corn  crib  in  the 
corn.     Just  how  long  it  remained  there  is  a  mys- 


y^  /j^.  'Variyi^y^'^ 


POETRAIT  AND  BIOGRAHnCAJ^   RECORD, 


701 


tery,  but  after  a  time  rats  tite  their  way  into  tlie 
kegs  and  much  of  the  gold  was  scattered  in  the 
corn.  The  time  came  when  it  was  necessary  to 
purchase  feed  for  tlic  stock,  and  thus  the  golden 
coin  was  turned  into  golden  sjrain. 


I®), ^m^  ,(a)j 

«{>«{»»j»«g»«^«^«}»«^*j*«}**^i^ii|n|njiiji 


)EN.IAMIN  B.  VARNUM,  wlio  throughout 
life  has  followed  farming  and  is  now  en- 
I,'  gaged  in  tiiat  pursuit  on  section  29,  Ora 
Township,  Jackson  County,  has  the  iionor 
of  being  a  native  of  Illinois,  for  his  birth  occurred 
in  Monroe  County,  December  16,  1841.  The 
founder  of  the  family  in  America  was  Joseph 
Bradley  Varnum,a  native  of  Wales,  who  emigrated 
to  this  country  in  1650,  settling  in  Massachusetts. 
His  son,  Moses  Varnum,  was  the  grandfather  of 
our  subject. 

Justice  Bradley  Varnum,  father  of  lienjamin, 
was  born  in  Belfast,  Me.,  November  24,  1799,  and 
with  his  family  removed  to  Ohio,  and  thence  to 
this  state.  Thej-  camped  out  near  where  the  city 
of  Monroe  now  stands,  and  at  length  settled  upon 
a  farm  in  Monroe  Count}',  making  their  home  in 
what  is  now  known  as  New  Design.  Justice  Var- 
num remained  at  home  until  about  thirt_y  years  of 
age,  and  then  married.  The  other  members  of  the 
family  were,  Moses,  who  settled  in  Ohio;  Jewett,of 
Monroe  County;  Frederick,  wlio  was  married  in 
Monroe  County,  but  died  shortly  afterward;  and 
.Susan,  wife  of  Daniel  Barker,  of  Monroe  County. 

Justice  Bradley  Varnum  married  Sarah  Dixon, 
of  Monroe  County, and  then  bought  and  impioved 
a  farm  in  that  localitJ^  Attracted  by  the  discov- 
ery of  gold  in  California  in  1849,  he  made  a  trip 
across  the  plains  with  ox-teams  to  the  Pacific 
Slope.  He  traveled  the  entire  distance  from  New 
England  to  California  by  wagon  and  on  foot,  this 
being  before  the  daj'  of  railroads.  After  a  year  and 
a-half  spent  in  the  west,  he  returned  to  Illinois, 
where  his  last  days  were  passed.  The  greater  part 
of  his  life  was  devoted  to  farming.  In  polities 
he  was  an  old-line  Whig,  and  was  a  prominent  and 
26 


influential  citizen  of  the  community.  His  death 
occurred  in  1861. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  was  a  daughter  of 
Solomon  Dixon,  and  was  born  in  Missouri.  When 
a  maiden  of  seven  years  she  was  brought  by  her 
parents  to  Mon'-oe  County,  III.,  where  she  grew  to 
womanhood.  Her  death  occurred  in  1882.  She 
had  six  sons  who  grew  to  manhood,  and  lost  three 
children  in  infancy.  John  Carlisle  was  born  in 
1832,  and  died  in  the  army  in  1861 ;  Austin  Dixon, 
born  in  1836,  is  now  living  in  St.  Louis;  Horace 
Addison,  born  in  1838,  died  at  the  age  of  forty- 
eight;  Leverett  Decatur  was  born  in  1844,  and  is 
living  in  New  Design,  Monroe' County;  and  Jus- 
tice Frederick,  born  m  1849,  completes  the  family. 

Upon  the  old  home  farm,  Benjamin  Varnum  re- 
mained until  his  marriage,  at  the  age  of  twenty- 
two,  to  Sarah,  daughter  of  Louis  and  Susan  (To- 
land)  Barker.  The  marriage  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Varnum  was  celebrated  July  22,  1863,  and  they 
have  five  children.  Flleanora  E.,  who  was  born 
November  10,  1864,  died  at  the  age  of  six  months; 
Carrie  L.  was  born  November  14,  1866,  and  died 
December  13,  1868;  Ethel  L.,  born  September  29, 
1869,  died  February  23,  1893;  Olive  L,  born 
March  28,  1872,  died  February  8,  1891;  Warren 
J.,  born  November  24,  1874,  is  living  on  the  home 
farm  with  his  fatiier.  The  mother  of  this  f.imily 
died  February  11,  1878,  and  on  the  26th  of  June, 
1880,  Mr.  Varnum  married  Minnie  Boedaker,  a 
native  of  Monroe  County,  111.  Seven  ciiildi-en 
graced  their  union:  Floyd  L.,  who  was  born  Feb- 
ruary 11,  1881,  and  died  at  the  age  of  eight 
months;  Edwin  B.,  born  April  13,  1882;  Grover, 
born  September  18,  1884;  Homer  IL,  born  October 
17,  1886,  and  died  at  the  age  of  four;  James  A., who 
was  born  October  14,  1888,  and  died  at  the  age  of 
four;  Blanchard  11,  wiio  was  born  October  14, 
1891,  and  Nelson  C. 

Mr.  Varnum  is  a  member  of  the  Masonic  lodge 
and  Knights  of  Iionor  of  Ava.  He  takes  an  active 
interest  in  politics,  supporting  the  Democratic 
party,  and  for  two  terms  has  served  as  a  member 
of  the  County  Board  of  Supervisors,  but  has  never 
sought  or  desired  political  preferment.  He  has 
followed  farming  throughout  life,  and  is  a  man  of 
very  active  habits,  conducting  a  large   business. 


702 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


By  industry  and  well  directed  efforts  he  has  be- 
come possessed  of  much  property.  He  has  four 
hundred  acres  of  land  in  the  home  farm  in  Ora 
Township,  eight  hundred  and  sixt}'  acres  of  the 
rich  land  of  the  Mississipi)i  River  bottoms,  of 
which  three  hundred  acres  are  under  cultivation, 
and  a  farm  of  two  hundred  and  Bfteen  acres  in 
Monroe  County,  just  opposite  Crystal  City,  Mo. 
He  is  constantly  improving  his  property  and 
thereby  adding  to  its  value.  He  has  a  splendid 
home  near  Ava,  and  the  Varnum  household  is 
noted  for  its  hospitality  and  good  cheer 


jl^REDERICK  WILLIAM  KUHRTZ  is  the 
r=/si;  leading  blacksmith  of  township  6,  lange  7, 
/l5>  Randolph    County,  and  is  a  man  of  talent, 

of  wide  experience,  and  stands  high  in  the  finan- 
cial circles  of  tlie  county.  He  is  a  native  of  Ger- 
many born  on  tlie  1st  of  June,  1847,  and  is  the 
eldest  son  of  Joachen  Erdmann  and  Anna  Dorothy 
(Schultz)  Kuhrtz.  In  the  fall  of  1872  the  family 
emigrated  from  their  native  country  to  the  United 
States,  and  at  once  located  in  Ellis  Grove.  The 
parents  lived  with  their  children  after  coming 
here,  and  spent  their  declining  days  in  peace  and 
happiness,  the  father  dying  in  April,  1881,  and  the 
mother  June  15,  1888. 

Attending  the  model  schools  of  the  Fatherland, 
young  Frederick  after  attaining  his  fifteenth  year 
began  to  serve  an  apprenticeship  to  the  blacksmith's 
trade.  At  the  end  of  three  years  he  became  a  sol- 
dier in  the  German-French  War,  and  served  faith- 
fully for  a  period  of  twelve  months.  The  follow- 
ing year  he  worked  at  his  trade,  and  on  coming  to 
America  worked  among  the  farmers  for  some  time. 
He  was  then  engaged  by  a  blacksrnith  at  Ellis 
Grove,  with  whom  he  remained  eighteen  months. 
Embarking  in  the  business  for  himself,  he  has  since 
found  it  to  be  a  profitable  trade.  He  has  recently 
erected  one  of  the  most  handsome  residences  in 
the  county,  which  cost  about  $2,000,  and  is  pre- 
sided over  graciousl}^  by  his  estimable  wife. 

The  marriage  of  our  subject  with  Miss  Lizzie  C. 
Deppe,  a  daughter  of  Conrad  Deppe,  was  solemnized 
June  20,  1875.     Three  children   were   born  to  this 


union,  all  of  whom  are  deceased.  Tlie  loving  wife 
and  mother  passed  away  September  7,  1879.  Mr. 
Kuhrtz  was  a  second  time  married  in  April,  1880, 
taking  as  his  wife  Lizzie  Rury,  a  native  of  Perry 
County,  111.,  wlio  bore  her  husliand  two  children. 
The  mother  and  both  children  have  passed  from 
this  life,  the  former  dying  September  19,  1882. 
Our  subject  was  again  married  June  7,  1888,  his 
wife  being  Lizzie  Von  Behren,  whose  parents  lived 
in  Franklin  County,  Mo.  Three  children  have 
come  to  bless  this  marriage:  Otilla,  Lillie  and  Mary. 
Mr.  Kuhrtz  was  reared  in  the  Lutheran  Church  in 
German3',but  is  now  associated  with  thj  German 
Methodist  Church,  as  is  also  his  wife.  The  Repub- 
lican candidates  at  all  times  receive  his  support. 
He  and  his  wife  are  worthy  people,  whose  pleasant 
social  and  moral  qualities  have  won  them  many 
friends  during  their  residence  here. and  have  made 
them  an  influence  for  good  in  social  and  religious 
matters. 


ED  HAYES,  the  efficient  Alderman  from  the 
Second  Ward  of  Murphysboro,  who  is  now 
living  a  retired  life  in  this  city,  claims  Eng- 
land as  the  land  of  his  birth.  His  father,  Richard 
Hayes,  and  his  grandfather,  Edmund  Hayes,  were 
natives  of  that  country,  and  the  latter  was  a 
miner  by  occupation.  Together  they  came  to 
America,  locating  in  Allegheny  County,  Pa.,  where 
Edmund  Hayes  died  at  the  age  of  eighty  years. 
The  father  became  Superintendent  of  a  mine.  In 
1858  he  brought  his  famil}'  to  the  United  States 
and  took  up  liis  residence  Centre  County,  where, 
after  mining  for  a  time,  he  embarked  in  the  hotel 
business  in  Philipsburg,  where  he  spent  iiis  remain- 
ing days.  In  England  he  married  Martha  Rhodes, 
who  died  in  that  country,  and  later  he  was  again 
married.  He  had  a  large  family-  by  the  first  union 
but  our  subject  is  now  the  only  survivor. 

Ed  Hayes  was  born  in  Tinsle^',  Lancashire,  Eng- 
land, December  2,  1848,  and  when  a  lad  of  ten 
summers  crossed  the  Atlantic.  He  soon  began 
work  in  the  mines,  wliere  he  was  employed  until 
1865,  which  year  witnessed  his  removal  westward. 
On  reaching  Illinois  he  cast  his  lot  with  the  citi- 
zens of  Du  Quoin,  and  engaged  in  clerking  in  the 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


703 


grocery  store  of  his  uncle  for  about  five  years.  On 
the  expiration  of  that  period  he  went  with  his  uncle 
to  Mobile,  Ala.,  where  he  continued  to  work  as  a 
salesman  for  one  j-ear.  He  then  returned  to  Du 
Quoin,  where  in  connection  with  his  brother  he 
engaged  in  the  bottling  business,  manufacturing 
soda  waters. 

In  Effingham,  111.,  in  1869,  Mr.  Hayes  was  united 
in  marriage  with  Miss  Esther  Smith,  a  native  of 
Yorkshire,  England.  Her  maidenhood  days,  how- 
ever, were  spent  in  this  state.  One  child  was  born 
to  them,  Reuben,  who  is  now  Superintendent  of  the 
bottling  works  in  Spokane  Falls.  Wash. 

In  1875  Mr.  IIa3'cs  established  the  bottling 
works  in  Murphysboro,  and  continued  business 
along  that  line  for  seventeen  years.  He  met  with 
most  excellent  success  in  this  undertaking,  and 
enjoyed  a  large  and  lucrative  trade  until  sell- 
ing out,  since  which  time  he  has  practically  lived 
retired.  However,  he  is  connected  with  the  Lower 
Mill.  His  life  has  been  a  bus^'  one,  yet  he  has 
found  time  to  serve  in  official  positions.  He 
was  President  of  the  School  Board  one  year,  was 
elected  Alderman  from  the  Third  Ward  in  1885, 
for  a  term  of  two  years,  and  in  1892  was  again 
elected.  In  politics  he  is  a  Populist.  He  was 
Chairman  of  the  Congressional  Committee,  and 
served  as  delegate  to  the  national  convention  in 
Omaha.  He  holds  membership  with  Amity  Lodge, 
I.  O.  O.  F.,  and  with  the  Masonic  fraternity.  His 
labors  in  former  years  brought  him  the  competence 
which  now  enables  him  to  live  retired. 


RTHUR  M.  LEE  is  a  leading  physician 
and  surgeon  of  Carbon  dale.  His  father, 
Charles  B.  Lee,  was  born  in  Kentucky 
July  9,  1811,  and  his  father,  Charles  Lee, 
was  one  of  the  earliest  settlers  of  this  state.  He  was 
a  native  of  Virginia,  who  emigrated  to  Tennessee, 
thence  to  Ken  tuck}',  and  afterwards  became  a 
resident  of  White  County,  III.  Subsequently  he 
came  to  Jackson  Count}',  locating  near  Grand 
Tow^er  about  1835.  From  the  old  Lee  family  of 
Virginia  he  was  descended.  He  served  as  a  sol- 
dier of  the  Black  Hawk  War,  and  was  a  physician 


and  minister.  He  died  of  pneumonia,  in  Decem- 
ber, 1858.  The  mother  of  our  subject  bore  the 
maiden  name  of  Elizabeth  Hunter  and  was  born 
on  the  Cumberland  River,  near  Chattanooga, 
Tenn.,.  in  1817.  Her  father,  Emanuel  Hunter, 
was  a  native  of  West  Virginia,  and  followed 
farming.  He  served  as  a  soldier  in  the  War  of 
1812,  under  Andrew  Jackson,  and  lived  to  the 
advanced  age  of  ninety-four.  He  was  one  of 
the  first  residents  of  West  Virginia  who  emigrated 
to  East  Tennessee,  where  he  married  Judy  Lee. 
Later  he  emigrated  with  his  family  to  William- 
son County,  III.,  which  was  then  an  almost  un- 
broken wilderness,  and  became  one  of  its  promi- 
nent citizens.  His  death  occurred  on  the  old 
homestead,  at  the  age  of  eighty,  and  his  wife 
passed  away  about  1852. 

The  parents  of  the  Doctor  were  married  in  the 
fall  of  1838,  and  located  near  Grand  Tower.  In 
1844  they  removed  to  Williamson  County,  and 
about  1850  became  residents  of  Jackson  County, 
where  Mrs.  Lee  died  in  1858.  In  the  fall  of  1866 
Mr.  Lee  went  to  Jefferson  County,  Kan.,  where  in 
1869  he  married  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Atwood.  Her 
death  occurred  in  1884.  In  1891  he  left  Kansas 
and  went  to  live  in  Arizona  with  his  son,  James 
W.,  who  in  1892  removed  to  New  Mexico,  where 
the  father  yet  makes  his  home.  By  his  first  mar- 
riage he  had  five  sons  and  three  daughters:  Ar- 
thur M.,  Dr.  Thomas  B.,  Charles  B.,  James  W., 
William  R.,  Mrs.  Juda  A.  Beasley,  and  Mrs.  Mary 
A.  Dunlap  and  Mrs.  Nancy  I.Tayloi',  who  are  now 
deceased.  In  1860  Charles  went  to  California, 
and  after  spending  some  time  in  the  west,  took  a 
trip  to  South  America,  since  which  time  no  word 
has  been  received  from  him. 

Dr.  Lee  was  born  in  Jackson  County,  May  12, 
1840,  was  educated  in  the  common  schools  and  at 
Shiloh.  lie  still  holds  an  old  first-grade  certifi- 
cate issued  in  September,  1867.  He  taught  school 
in  the  winter  of  1860-61,  and  on  the  15th  of 
August.  1862,  enlisted  in  Com|)any  C,  Eighteenth 
Illinois  Infantry.  He  was  elected  Orderly-Ser- 
geant and  was  afterwards  made  Quartermaster- 
Sergeant  of  the  regiment.  He  received  a  com- 
mission as  First  Lieutenant  of  Company  I,  and 
subsequently  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  Captain. 


704 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


On  the  16th  of  December,  1865,  he  was  mustered 
out,  but  was  retained  on  the  stafif  of  Gen.  .Joseph 
J.  Reynolds,  Commander  of  the  Department  of 
Arkansas.  He  had  previously  been  detailed  to  act 
as  Ordnance  Officer  of  Arkansas,  under  Maj.-Gen. 
Thomas  J.  Wood,  and  then  became  a  member  of 
the  staff,  as  before  stated.  He  received  his  final 
discharge  in  March,  1866,  after  a  service  of  three 
3'ears  and  seven  months,  during  which  time  he 
took  part  in  the  battles  of  Parker's  Cross  Roads, 
Clifton,  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Little  Rock,  etc. 
His  duties  as  Ordnance  Oflicer  were  to  receive  all 
arms,  accoutrements,  etc.,  from  the  troops  and 
turn  them  over  to  the  regular  army  that  relieved 
the  volunteers.  He  was  wounded  at  Little  Rock 
by  an  accidental  discharge,  and  the  ball,  which 
entered  his  riglit  arm  and  side,  is  still  under  his 
right  shoulder  blade.  During  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg he  was  prostrated  with  t3-phoid  fever  and  was 
sick  for  two  months. 

Before  entering  the  service,  Dr.  Lee  had  begun 
the  study  of  medicine,  and  after  his  return  to  the 
north  he  located  in  De  Soto,  111.,  where  he  em- 
barked in  business.  In  1868  he  sold  out,  and  the 
following  3'ear  attended  Rush  Medical  College  of 
Chicago.  On  the  31st  of  March,  1869,  he  located 
in  Ridge  Township,  .Jackson  County,  where  he  con- 
tinued practice  for  some  years.  In  1878  he  was 
graduated  from  the  Nashville  Medical  College 
under  Paul  F.  Eve,  late  Surgeon-General  of  the 
Confederate  army.  Dr.  Lee  remained  in  Ridge 
Township  until  July,  1889,  when  he  came  to  Car- 
bondale.  In  May  of  that  year  he  was  appointed 
Pension  Examiner,  and   served   until  July,  1893. 

In  1861  Dr.  Lee  wedded  Lucitta  J.  Ward,  a  na- 
tive of  Illinois.  Unto  theni  was  born  a  daughter, 
Lovinie  Josephine,  now  the  wife  of  James  Ether- 
ton,  of  Pomona.  After  the  death  of  his  tirst  wife 
the  Doctor  married,  January  1,  1869,  Sarah  A. 
Heiple,  a  native  of  Jackson  County,  born  Septem- 
ber 15,  1847,  and  a  daughter  of  Samuel  Heiple, 
of  De  Soto,  111.  They  have  five  children — three 
sons  and  two  daughters:  M.  Gertrude,  wife  of 
Dr.  W.  B.  Cauble,  of  Vermilion  County,  111.; 
Homer  Dalton,  a  member  of  the  senior  class  of 
the  Normal  University;  Dora  Emogene;  Ardell 
Agnew  and  Chester  Arthur. 


The  parents  have  long  been  members  of  the 
Missionary  Baptist  Church,  and  the  Doctor  was  or- 
dained to  the  ministry  in  1874.  He  served  a»  pas- 
tor of  the  Ridge  Baptist  Church  for  four  years. 
He  has  taken  an  active  interest  in  politics  and  is  a 
stalwart  supporter  of  the  Republican  party.  He 
became  a  member  of  the  Odd  Fellows'  societ3-  of 
De  Soto  in  September,  1867,  and  of  Chester  I^n- 
campment  of  Du  Quoin  on  the  20th  of  November 
following.  He  has  filled  nearly  all  of  the  offices  in 
both.  He  has  been  Junior  Warden  of  Makanda 
Lodge  No.  434,  A.  F.  &  A.  M.,  and  is  now  a  mem- 
ber of  Carbondale  Lodge  No.  241,  and  in  1891 
joined  Reynolds  Chapter  No.  75,  R.  A.  M.  He  is 
also  a  member  of  the  Fraternal  Mj'stic  Circle  and 
serves  as  its  examining  surgeon.  Since  its  organi- 
zation he  has  been  connected  with  the  Grand  Army 
post,  and  served  for  some  time  as  post  surgeon  of 
John  W.  Lawrence  Post  No.  297,  being  the  |)res- 
ent  incumbent  of  that  office.  He  attended  the 
national  encampment  in  Indianapolis.  In  1893  he 
was  elected  County  Plij'sician,  wiiich  position  lie 
still  fills.  Skill  and  ability' have  won  him  a  promi- 
nent place  in  his  profession,  and  his  sterling  worth 
has  made  him  a  leader  in  social  circles.  He  is 
numbered  among  the  best  citizens  of  Carbondale 
and  well  deserves  representation  in  this  volume. 


*^^1 


m^m\ 


1^^ 


il_^  UGH  MILLS  CRAWFORD.  The  occupa- 
ffjl)  tion  of  farming  is  one  that  has  received 
l^f^  attention  from  the  earliest  ages,  and  it  is 
(^^  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  it  has  become 
the  art  it  is  at  the  present  time.  Among  those 
who  have  shown  a  thorough  knowledge  of  tiiis 
calling,  and  whose  operations  arc  conducted  in  a 
very  satisfactory  manner,  may  be  mentioned  Hugh 
Crawford,  who  is  the  owner  of  a  good  farm  in 
township  7,  range  6,  Randolph  County.  He  is 
also  held  in  higii  esteem  for  services  rendered  his 
country  during  the  late  war.  where  he  was  a  mem- 
ber of  Company  H,  Twentj'-second  Illinois  Infan- 
try. 

Mr.  Crawford  is  a  native  of  this  count}',  having 
been  born  near  Blair,  June  13,  1822.  His  parents 
were    Samuel    and    Sarah  (Hughs)  Crawford,  the 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


705 


former  of  whom  was  born  in  Tennessee,  of  Scotch 
parentage.  The  mother  of  our  subject  is  a  na- 
tive of  this  county,  where  her  father  was  a  pio- 
neer farmer.  Samuel  Crawford,  who  was  a  finely 
educated  man  was  a  school  teacher,  but  Hugh,  of 
this  sketch,  did  not  attend  school,  receiving  his 
training  in  book  lore  from  his  father.  The  latter 
raised  cotton  on  his  farm,  which  after  being  woven 
and  spun  was  made  into  tlie  clothing  worn  by  the 
family,  and  was  the  only  kind  of  wearing  apparel 
that  was  to  be  had  in  that  early  day. 

When  eighteen  3'ears  of  age,  our  subject  began 
making  his  own  way  in  the  world  by  cultivating 
land,  and  has  ever  since  followed  the  occupation 
of  a  farmer.  In  1864  he  enlisted  in  the  Union 
army  as  a  member  of  Company  IT,  Twenty-second 
Illinois  Infantry,  and  while  in  the  service  was 
transferred  to  the  Fort\-second  Infantry', in  which 
he  remained  until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  par- 
ticipated in  the  Atlanta  campaign,  and  during  his 
enlistment  saw  much  active  service.  A  few  months 
previous  to  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  made  As- 
sistant Commissary-Sergeant. 

When  again  settling  down  to  peaceful  pursuits, 
our  subject  returned  to  his  farm,  where  he  has  since 
lived.  August  11,  1842,  he  married  Miss  Mary, 
daughter  of  John  and  Elizabeth  McNabney,  and 
to  them  were  born  six  children,  only  two  of  whom 
are  now  living:  Samuel,  who  is  residing  in  St. 
Louis,  Mo.;  and  Elizabeth,  Mrs.  Henry  Stone,  who 
makes  her  home  in  Kansas.  The  wife  and  mother 
departed  this  life  in  September,  18.58.  In  1861 
Mr.  Crawford  married  Miss  Ciiristina  Brewer,  and 
their  union  was  blessed  b}'  the  birth  of  one  child, 
Mary  C.  Mrs.  Christina  Crawford  departed  this 
life  in  June,  1863.  The  lady  whom  our  subject 
married  in  1866  was  Mrs.  Sarah  J.  Mahan.  Her 
decease  occurred  two  years  later,  and  the  present 
wife  of  our  subject,  with  whom  he  was  united  in 
1872,  was  prior  to  her  marriage  Miss  Catherine 
Crawford.  She  was  born,  reared  and  educated  in 
this  county,  and  has  attained  to  a  ripe  old  age. 

Hugh  Crawford  has  voted  at  fifty  general  elec- 
tions, and  has  cast  every  ballot  within  the  confines 
of  this  county.  In  early  years  a  Whig,  he  has 
voted  with  the  Republican  party  since  its  organ- 
ization, and  is  greatl}'  interested  in  issues  of  a  po- 


litical nature.  He  is  very  popular  in  this  com- 
munity, has  been  Constable  and  Justice  of  the 
Peace,  and  during  his  active  life  entered  with  zeal 
into  the  promotion  of  matters  connected  with  the 
public  welfare.  He  was  a  consistent  member  of 
the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  while  Mrs.  Craw- 
ford worships  with  the  Baptist  Church  in  Ellis 
Grove.  Socially  our  subject  is  a  Grand  Army 
man,  and  belongs  to  Swanwick  Post  No.  212,  at 
Chester. 

' 0#P •    . 

EMIL  BERGER,  of  Percy,  after  a  well  spent 
life,  is  living  retired,  enjoying  the  rest 
which  he  has  so  truly  earned  and  richly 
deserves.  As  he  is  favorably  known  in  this  com- 
munit}-,  we  feel  assured  that  this  record  of  his  life 
will  prove  of  interest  to  many  of  our  readers.  A 
native  of  Germany,  Jlr.  Berger  was  born  in  Baden, 
in  1832,  and  is  the  eldest  son  of  Valentine  and 
Caroline  (Izey)  Berger,  who  were  also  natives  of 
Baden.  His  parents  never  left  the  Fatherland,  but 
continued  there  to  reside  until  called  to  the  home 
beyond.  Mr.  Berger  passed  awaj-  in  1892,  and  his 
wife  died  on  the  18th  of  July,  1893,  at  the  ad- 
vanced age  of  eighty-three  j'ears. 

Emil  Berger,  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  his 
native  land,  attended  its  public  schools  until  four- 
teen years  of  age,  when  he  began  learning  the 
brewing  business.  This  work  he  followed  for  sev- 
eral years,  after  which  he  determined  to  seek  a 
home  and  fortune  beyond  the  Atlantic,  believ- 
ing that  he  might  thereby  benefit  his  financial 
condition.  It  was  in  1851  that  he  sailed  for 
America  and  located  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  re- 
mained for  six  years  engaged  in  tlie  brewing  busi- 
ness. He  then  started  westward  and  located  in  St. 
Louis,  Mo.,  where  he  made  his  home  for  a  period 
of  three  years.  The  year  1860  witnessed  his  ar- 
rival in  Illinois  and  saw  him  located  in  Red  Bud, 
where  he  purchased  a  brewery,  carrying  on  busi- 
ness along  that  line  for  about  twenty-two  years. 
For  some  time  he  met  with  large  sales  and  thus 
acquired  a  handsome  competence.  After  dispos- 
ing of  his  brewer}',  he  engaged  in  the  retail  liquor 
trade  in  Red  Bud  for  a  time,  and  later  went  to 
Burksville,  111.,  where  he  engaged  in  general  mer- 


706 


PORTRAIT  AISD  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


cbandising.  Five  years  of  liis  life  were  spent  at 
that  place,  after  which  he  came  to  Percy,  in  1887, 
and  has  since  here  made  his  home. 

Mr.  Berger  was  married  in  1854,  the  ladj'  of  his 
choice  being  Sarah  Eck,  whose  parents  were  na- 
tives of  Pennsylvania.  They  had  one  child,  Jacob 
v.,  who  died  at  the  age  of  tbhty-one.  JNIrs.  Berger 
died  in  St.  Louis  in  1857,  and  sometime  afterward 
Mr.  Berger  was  again  married,  his  second  union 
being  with  Christina  Flke,  of  St.  Louis.  They  have 
one  child,  a  daughter,  Matilda,  now  the  wife  of 
Herman  Fey.  a  prominent  foundryman  of  Hanau, 
Germany. 

Mr.  Berger  was  reared  in  the  faith  of  the  Cath- 
olic Church,  and  his  wife  is  a  member  of  the  Luth- 
eran Church.  Socially  he  is  connected  with  the 
Masonic  fraternity,  belonging  to  Lodge  No.  427 
of  Red  Bud.  In  his  political  views,  he  was  for- 
merly a  Uemoc-rat.  and  cast  his  vote  in  support  of 
the  men  and  measures  of  that  party  until  the 
breaking  out  of  the  late  war,  since  which  time  he 
has  been  a  stanch  sup[)Orler  of  the  Republican 
party.  During  his  residence  in  Red  Bud,  he  served 
as  Alderman,  but  he  has  never  been  a  politician  in 
the  sense  of  office-seeking,  preferring  to  devote  his 
entire  time  and  attention  to  his  business  interests. 
He  is  now  living  retired  in  Percy,  resting  after 
manj'  years  of  labor. 

1(g).     M^^S_ ^ 

feT" "^^  ^ 

R.  M.  G.  NIXON  is  one  of  the  prominent 
citizens  of  Columbia,  where  he  is  engaged 
in  the  practice  of  medicine  and  surgery^, 
and  where  he  also  carries  on  a  drug  store. 
His  skill  and  ability  have  won  for  him  an  excel- 
lent reputation  and  gained  for  him  a  liberal  pat- 
ronage. He  was  born  in  Jefferson  C'ountj%  Ohio, 
Jul}-  15,  1843.  His  father,  John  Nixon,  was  a  na- 
tive of  Washington  County,  Pa.,  and  thence  re- 
moved to  the  Buckeye  State.  B3-  trade  he  was  a 
carpenter,  and  in  connection  with  that  pursuit  he 
followed  farming.  He  married  Charlotte  Steele, 
also  a  native  of   the  Keystone  Stat€,  and  in   1843 


removed  with  his  family  to  Monroe  County,  111., 
locating  three  miles  west  of  Waterloo.  He  there 
followed  farming  and  made  his  home  until  his 
death,  which  occurred  in  1878.  He  held  member- 
ship with  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  and  was 
a  highlj'  respected  man. 

Tiie  Doctor  is  one  of  a  family  of  eight  children, 
five  of  whom  are  yet  living.  Upon  the  home  farm 
he  was  reared,  and  his  primary  education  was  ac- 
quired in  a  log  schoolhouse.  He  afterward  at- 
tended school  in  Waterloo,  and  later  took  a  scien- 
tific course  of  study  in  McKendree  College,  of  Leb- 
anon, 111.  He  began  the  study  of -medicine  in  the 
office  of  Drs.  Copp  it  AVetmore,  of  Waterloo,  with 
whom  he  continued  until  1862,  when  he  entered 
the  St.  Louis  Medical  College,  from  which  he  was 
graduated  in  1864.  The  Doctor  then  joined  the 
arm}-  as  a  member  of  the  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry, 
and  was  made  Assistant  Surgeon  of  the  regiment, 
in  which  capacity-  he  served  until  the  close  of  the 
war.  When  hostilities  had  ceased,  he  returned 
home  and  located  in  the  eastern  part  of  Monroe 
County.  A  3-ear  later  he  came  to  Columbia,  where 
he  has  since  resided. 

In  1870,  Dr.  Nixon  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Augusta  Brady,  who  died  in  1873,  leaving 
two  children.  The  son  John  has  charge  of  his  fa- 
ther's drug  store.  In  1876,  the  Doctor  married 
Emma  A.  Warnock,  a  native  of  Monroe  Count}-, 
and  a  daughter  of  Lafayette  Warnock.  Their 
union  was  blessed  with  two  children,  Ardelle  and 
Minnie  E. 

Dr.  Nixon  votes  with  the  Democratic  party.  In 
June,  1893,  he  was  appointed  Postmaster  by  Presi- 
dent Cleveland,  and  is  now  acceptably  filling  the 
office.  He  takes  considerable  interest  in  civic  so- 
cieties, is  a  member  of  the  Odd  Fellows'  fratcrnitj-, 
the  Ancient  Order  of  United  Workmen,  and  is  a 
Knight  Templar.  For  about  seventeen  years  he 
was  Master  of  Columbia  Lodge  No.  474,  A.  F.  & 
A.  M.,  and  has  been  Chief  Patriarch  of  the  en- 
campment, the  Odd  Fellows'  organization.  He 
belongs  to  the  Monroe  County  Medical  Society,  of 
which  he  has  been  twice  President,  is  a  member  of 
the  .Southern  Illinois  Medical  Association,  and  of 
the  Illinois  Army  and  Navy  Medical  Association. 
The  Doctor  is  a  pleasant,  genial  gentleman,   well 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAX,  RECORD. 


707 


liked  by  all,  and  is  numbered  among  the  leading 
citizens  of  Columbia,  where  he  has  built  up  an  ex- 
cellent practice  and  secured  a  high  reputation  as 
a  ph3'sician. 


G= 


.^^1 


l!:i^ 


:£) 


m^ 


^ 


EW.  COVER,  agent  for  the  St.  Louis,  Alton 
&  Terre  Haute  Railroad,  and  also  the  Wa- 
bash, Chester  &  Western  Railroad,  at  Pinck- 
neyville,  was  born  in  Pulaski  County,  111.,  Decem- 
ber 12,  1852.  His  father,  Ephraim  Cover,  was  a 
native  of  Maryland,  and  for  many  years  engaged 
in  merchandising,  but  now  follows  farming  in 
Makanda,  111.  lie  served  as  Postmaster  at  Jones- 
boro.  111.,  under  Buchanan, and  at  Makanda  during 
Lincoln's  first  administration.  He  married  Lydia 
E.  Webb,  a  native  of  Virginia,  who  belonged  to  the 
same  family  as  Vice-President  Webb,  of  the  New 
York  Central  Railroad  Compan3\  She  served  as 
Postmistress  at  Makanda  under  Cleveland's  first 
administi'ation,  and  died  in  1890. 

Our  subject  is  the  eldest  in  a  family  of  five  chil- 
dren, numbering  two  sons  and  three  daughters. 
His  brother,  W.  E.,  is  a  conductor  on  the  St.  Louis, 
Alton  &  Terre  Haute  Railroad,  and  resides  in 
Pinckneyville;  Mar}'  E.  is  the  wife  of  J.  S.  Hart- 
man,  a  druggist  of  Makanda;  Fannie  W.  is  the  wife 
of  W.  J.  Zimmerman,  a  railroad  conductor  living 
in  Chester,  111.,  and  Katie  M.  lives  with  her  sister 
in  Chester. 

Mr.  Cover,  whose  name  heads  this  record,  spent 
the  days  of  his  boyhood  and  3'outh  on  the  home 
farm  and  in  his  father's  store.  He  attendee!  the 
public  schools  of  liis  neighborhood,  and  later  was 
a  student  in  a  commercial  college  in  St.  Louis.  On 
his  return  home,  he  entered  his  father's  store,  and 
there  served  as  clerk  until  his  father's  retirement. 
He  then  was  employed  as  a  salesman  for  others  for 
three  years,  and  during  the  succeeding  three  years 
he  was  connected  with  the  asylum  at  Anna,  111. 
On  leaving  that  place  he  became  book-keeper  for 
the  Carbondale  Coal  &  Coke  Company,  at  Carbon- 
dale,  but  at  length  left  that  city,  to  accept  his  pres- 
ent position  with  the  railroad  companies.  Since 
the  11th  of  June,  1883,  he  has  served  in  this  capa- 


city', not  only  with  distinction  to  himself,  but  also 
to  the  great  satisfaction  of  the  company. 

While  in  Anna,  111.,  Mr.  Cover  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Belle  Anderson,  of  Jonesboro, 
111.,  and  to  them  have  been  born  three  children, 
Stella  May,  aged  thirteen;  Frederick  W.,  aged 
eleven,  and  Harry  Wilson,  ten  j-eais  of  age. 

In  his  political  views,  Mr.  Cover  is  a  stanch 
Democrat.  He  is  also  a  prominent  Mason,  and 
served  as  Master  of  the  lodge  at  Pinckneyville  in 
1889,  1890  and  1893.  He  is  said  to  have  been  the 
most  efficient  officer  that  ever  filled  that  position. 
He  is  also  a  member  of  the  Knights  of  Honor,  and 
his  wife  is  a  member  of  the  Order  of  the  Eastern 
Star.  They  both  hold  membership  with  the  Bap- 
tist Church,  in  which  he  now  serves  as  Trustee,  and 
are  prominent  people  of  this  community,  whose 
many  excellencies  of  char.acter  and  sterling  worth 
have  gained  for  them  high  regard. 


■^m- 


'^ 


Vf?  EWIS  BECK  is  one  of  the  leading  and  well 
I  ((^.  known  citizens  of  Du  Quoin,  who  is  prom- 
J^\i  inent  in  its  business  interests  and  in  the 
promotion  of  those  enterprises  which  are  calculated 
to  advance  the  general  welfare  and  prove  of  public 
benefit.  He  is  interested  in  real  estate,  in  farming 
and  in  stock  dealing,  .and  by  his  perseverance  and 
business  ability  hiis  made  his  career  a  prosperous 
one. 

Mr.  Beck  was  born  in  Cape  Girardeau  County, 
Mo.,  on  the  18th  of  February,  1851,  and  is  a  son 
of  Charles  Beck,  who  was  a  native  of  Germany, 
and  a  butcher  b^'  trade.  When  a  young  man  he 
left  the  Fatherland  and  crossed  the  broad  At- 
lantic to  America,  taking  up  his  residence  in  Cape 
Girardeau  County,  Mo.  His  wife  died  when  our 
subject  was  only  six  years  of  age.  Lewis  had  one 
brother  and  two  sisters.  The  former,  John,  was 
two  years  his  senior,  and  died  when  a  young  man. 
The  sisters  are  both  living,  and  one  is  now  married. 

Mr.  Beck  received  but  limited  educational  priv- 
ileges in  early  life,  but  by  experience  and  observa- 
tion he  has  gained  a  practical  business  knowledge, 
and  has  become  a  well  informed  man.  His  resi- 
dence in  Du  Quoin  dates  from  the  year  1874,  and 


708 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


siuce  that  time  he  has  been  engaged  m  the  butch- 
ering and  stock  business.  This  has  proved  to  him 
a  profitable  venture,  as  have  his  other  enterprises. 
He  owns  and  operates  a  farm  two  and  a-half  miles 
from  Du  Quoin,  which  is  under  a  high  state  of  cul- 
tivation and  well  improved,  and  is  the  owner  of 
the  Commercial  Hotel,  which  he  now  rents;  he  also 
owns  other  business  property,  which  has  been  ac- 
quired through  his  own  exertions,  and  which 
stands  as  a  monument  to  his  thrift  and  enterprise. 
He  also  has  twenty-four  residences  in  Du  Quoin, 
which  he  rents. 

In  1874,  Mr.  Beck  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Anna  Witrock,  who  was  born  in  Missouri, 
and  is  also  of  German  lineage.  By  their  union 
eight  children  were  born,  but  one  died  in  eaily 
life.  Those  who  are  still  under  the  parental  roof 
are,  Lena,  Walter,  Delia,  Flora,  Lulu,  Georgia  and 
Johnnie. 

Mr.  Beck  is  a  Democrat  in  political  views,  and 
though  he  has  never  been  a  i)olitician  in  the  sense 
of  oflice  seeking,  he  served  as  City  Alderman  and 
proved  a  capable  otticial.  Socially  he  holds  mem- 
bership with  the  Odd  Fellows'  society,  and  is  a 
member  of  the  Lutheran  Church.  He  may  truly 
be  called  a  self-made  man,  for  by  industry  and  de- 
termination he  has  overcome  the  obstacles  .and 
difiiculties  in  his  path  and  worked  his  way  stead- 
ily upward  from  an  humble  position  to  one  of 
affluence. 


^^EORGE  UDELL  DEAN,  who  is  engaged  in 
III  (-— ,  banking  in  Ava,  occupies  a  prominent  posi- 

<^Jf^  tion  in  business  circles,  being  recognized 
as  one  of  the  leading  and  influential  business  men 
of  this  place.  He  was  born  in  Old  Liberty,  now 
Rockwood,  111.,  September  22,  1854,  and  under  the 
parental  roof  spent  his  boyhood  days.  His  early 
education,  acquired  in  the  common  schools,  was 
supplemented  by  study  in  the  Du  Quoin  Seminary. 
He  then  engaged  in  clerking,  and  was  employed 
as  salesman  in  a  drug  store  for  a  time. 

On  the  30th  of  December,  1875,  was  celebrated 
the  marriage  of  Mr.  Dean  and  Miss  Mariana  Gates 
Brown,     daughter     of     James     M.     and    Rebecca 


(Simons)  Brown.  She  was  born  in  Pennsylvania. 
Mr.  Brown  was  a  native  of  Kentuck}-,  and  came  to 
Illinois  about  1842.  He  was  married  Julj'  25,  1844, 
to  Mrs.  Carter,  a  widow,  whose  maiden  name  was 
Rebecca  Simons.  Her  death  occurred  July  3,  186'5. 
They  were  the  parents  of  five  children,  Fred  W., 
born  October  30,  1843;  Samuel  D.,  February  19, 
1849;  Henry  Clay,  April  14,  1851;  Charles,  March 
17,  1853,  and  Mrs.  Dean,  March  15,  1857.  Mr. 
Brown  first  settled  on  a  farm  near  Shiloh  Hill.  He 
was  an  engineer  on  one  of  the  finest  steamboats  on 
the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  Rivers.  On  the  24th  of 
March,  1869,  he  married  Lurana  E.  Simons,  a  half- 
sister  of  his  first  wife.  He  was  one  of  the  promi- 
nent and  highly  respected  citizens  of  this  commu- 
nity, and  held  some  local  offices.  He  died  January 
14,  1874,  and  his  widow  married  Judge  John  Mor- 
rison, September  12,  1877. 

Mr.  Dean  came  with  his  wife  to  Ava,  January 
5,  1876,  and  began  working  in  his  father's  mill, 
which  afterward  became  the  property  of  the  three 
Dean  brothers  and  their  sister,  Mrs.  Gilbreath.  At 
length  our  subject  and  the  sister  sold  out  and  Mr. 
Dean  went  to  Shiloh  Hill,  where  he  clerked  in  the 
store  of  his  brother,  W.  C.  Dean,  for  one  year.  He 
then  carried  on  a  drug  store  in  his  own  interest 
for  two  years,  after  which  he  sold  out  and  returned 
to  Ava,  spending  two  years  as  clerk  in  his  brother's 
store.  He  next  purchased  a  hardware  store  and 
lumber  yard,  which  he  successfull3-  conducted  for 
live  years,  when  he  disposed  of  that  business,  and 
in  January,  1890,  established  the  bank  of  Ava, 
which  is  carried  on  under  the  name  of  G.  0.  Dean 
&  Brothers.  He  has  built  two  fine  residences  in 
this  place,  his  own  home  being  erected  in  1892,  at 
a  cost  of  i^3,800.  It  is  a  ten-room  house,  with  a 
basement,  is  supplied  with  all  modern  conveniences 
and  is  the  largest  residence  in  the  town. 

To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Dean  were  born  seven  children, 
four  yet  living.  Emma  Leila,  born  October  29, 
1876,  is  now  a  student  in  Forest  Park  University 
of  St.  Louis,  and  is  a  fine  musician;  Fred  M.,  born 
October  21,  1879,  was  page  in  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives of  the  Thirty-eighth  General  Assembly, 
being  appointed  by  Speaker  Craft  through  the  rec- 
ommendation of  Lieutenant-Governor  Gill,  his  un- 
cle, Hon.  W.  C.  Dean  and  Hon.  Reed  Green,  of  Cairo; 


"\ 


} 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


711 


Stella  was  bom  Ma}'  21,  1883,  and  Mina  Bell  was 
born  March  24.  188.5 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  De.in  are  prominent  members  and 
active  worlsers  in  the  Presbyterian  Church,  in 
which  he  is  now  serving  as  Deacon.  He  is  filling 
his  second  terra  as  Sunday-scliool  Superintendent, 
and  liis  wife  has  been  a  teacher  in  the  Sunday- 
school  for  seven  j-ears.  Since  1875,  he  has  been  a 
member  of  the  Odd  Fellow's  societ}-,  is  Past  Noble 
Grand,  and  he  and  his  wife  are  members  of  the 
Rebecca  Lodge.  Botli  have  served  as  representa- 
tives of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  Mrs.  Dean  is  now 
serving  her  second  term  as  Deputy.  Our  subject 
is  a  Royal  Arch  Mason,  and  has  been  Senior  Dea- 
con, Treasurer  and  Secretar}'  of  .Shiloh  Hill  Lodge 
No.  695,  A.  F.  ife  A.  M.  He  belonged  to  the  Knights 
of  Pvtliias  of  Murpli3-sboro,  and  was  one  of  the 
organizers  of  Ava  Lodge  No.  .396,  K.  P.,  of  which 
he  was  the  first  Chancellor-Commander.  In  poli- 
tics lie  is  a  Democrat,  and  was  Chairman  of  the 
Central  Committee.  He  was  the  second  President 
of  tlie  Village  Board  of  Ava,  served  two  terras  as 
Cit}'  Treasurer  and  refused  a  re-election.  He  was 
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Ava  Building  and  Loan 
Association,  was  its  first  Treasurer,  one  of  its  Di- 
rectors and  has  served  as  Vice-President.  He  has 
been  prorainentl}'  identified  with  the  best  interests 
of  this  coraraunity,  and  gives  his  support  to  all  en- 
terprises calculated  to  prove  of  public  benefit.  The 
prosperity  of  the  cit}'  is  due  in  no  small  degree  to 
his  efforts,  and  its  history  would  be  incomplete 
without  his  sketch. 


"^OSKPH  WHITEHOUSE.  The  subject  of 
this  sketch  has  been  a  resident  of  Randolph 
County  for  overfort\-  years,  and  is  an  agri- 
culturist of  prominence,  who,  notwithstand- 
ing the  reverses  and  discouragements  that  almost 
invariably'  attend  those  who  settle  in  a  new  coun- 
try, has  come  boldly  to  the  front  and  surmounted 
all  difficulties.  He  is  residing  at  the  present  time 
on  liis  fine  farm  of  two  hundred  and  seventj'  acres, 
located  on  section  5,  township  8,  range  5.  where  he 
is  surrounded  by  all  the  comforts  of  life. 

A  native  of  England,  Mr.  "Whitehouse  was  bom 


in  West  Bromwieh,  vStafifordshlre,  in  1809.  Los- 
ing his  parents  when  verj'  young,  he  was  reared 
by  strangers,  and  early  commenced  to  battle  with 
life  on  his  own  account.  He  was  taken  into  the 
home  of  Mrs.  Rebecca  Boulton,  in  whom  he  found 
a  kind  and  tender  foster  mother,  and  remained  in 
her  family  until  fully  grown.  After  receiving 
limited  school  advantages,  he  secured  a  position 
in  the  iron  works  at  Golds  Hill,  later  at  Golds- 
green  and  finally  at  Tolls  End,  where  he  remained 
until  he  embarked  for  the  New  World.  Leav- 
ing Liverpool  some  time  in  1832,  he  landed  in 
New  York  after  a  voyage  of  fort3'-seven  days,  and 
found  his  first  employment  at  Boonton,  N.  J., 
where  he  remained  for  about  a  year. 

From  New  Jerse}'  Mr.  Whitehouse  proceeded  to 
Haverstraw,  N.  Y.,  where  he  remained  for  seven- 
teen years.  Meantime  ho  met  and  married  Miss 
Elizabeth  Tudor,  the  daughter  of  an  old  English 
friend,  who  had  preceded  him  to  New  York.  Their 
marriage  occurred  December  26,  1835,  Mrs.  White- 
house  being  in  her  eighteenth  j-ear.  She  remained 
his  devoted  companion  until  May  3,  1890,  when 
her  decease  occurred  on  the  home  farm  in  this 
county. 

The  j-ear  1849  witnessed  the  departure  of  our 
subject  for  the  west,  liis  arrival  in  Randolph  Coun- 
ty being  in  April  of  that  year.  His  first  purchase 
of  land  consisted  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  acres, 
to  which  he  later  added  a  like  amount.  He  has  re- 
sided upon  this  tract  for  over  fort}-  years,  and  has 
consequently  witnessed  the  transformation  of  the 
wild  land  into  the  many  cultivated  farms  for  which 
Randolph  County  is  noted.  To  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Whitehouse  were  born  nine  children,  only  two  of 
whom  survive:  Mary  Ann,  now  Mrs.  M.  Vickers; 
and  William  Tudor,  who  remains  at  home  and  su- 
perintends the  management  of  the  farm.  Those 
deceased  are  John,  Eliza,  Harriet,  Joseph,  Matilda, 
I    Fannie  and  Martha. 

I        In  religious  belief,  Mr.  Whitehouse  is  a  member 
I    of  the  Ebenezer  Presbyterian  Church,   with  which 
I   his  wife  was  also  identified.     Notwithstanding  his 
1   advanced  j'ears,  he  is  hale  and  heart}',  and   in  the 
twilight  of  his  useful  life  is  surrounded  by  every 
comfort,  and  is  affectionately  cared  for  by  his  chil- 
dren and  grandchildren.     Politically,  he  is  as  firm 


712 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


in  his  advocacy  of  Republican  pinnciples  as  he  was 
in  the  early  days  of  the  history  of  that  party. 

The  ouly  son  of  our  subject,  William  T.,  was 
born  November  12,  1848,  in  Haverstraw,  N.  Y. 
In  March,  1874,  lie  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Mary  J.,  daughter  of  John  M.  and  Margaret 
(Galiinore)  Biidgeman,  residents  of  Rockwood,  of 
whom  further  mention  is  made  elsewhere  in  this 
volume.  Mrs.  Wliitehouse  departed  this  life  May 
3,  1889,  after  liaving  become  the  mother  of  four 
children:  Josie,  who  was  born  February  9,  1875, 
and  died  February  12  of  the  same  year;  Willis  11., 
who  was  born  Februaiy  18,  1876;  Martha  M., 
August  8,  1878;  and  Walter  E.,  May  30,  1882. 


"jfj  OHN  KELLERM  ANN.  Perry  County  is  the 
home  of  many  intelligent,  industrious  Ger- 
^^  man  farmers,  who  from  a  small  beginning 
^^l  have  won  a  competence,  securing  a  consider- 
able amount  of  land,  and  surrounding  themselves 
with  many  comforts  and  conveniences.  Among 
this  number  may  be  mentioned  Mr.  Kellerniann, 
who  is  the  possessor  of  one  hundred  and  ninety 
acres  of  improved  land,  located  on  section  36, 
township  4,  range  3  west. 

Our  subject  was  born  in  Prussia  in  the  year  1824, 
and  is  the  son  of  Jasper  and  Josephine  (Schultz) 
Kellermann,  likewise  natives  of  the  Fatherland. 
Jasper  Kellermann  was  one  in  a  family  of  two 
children,  and  his  sister  dying  when  j'oung,  he 
fell  heir  to  the  property  left  b}'  his  parents,  which 
comprised  about  fifty  acres  of  valuable  land.  Of 
his  family,  Clara,  Frank  and  William  are  deceased. 
Those  living  besides  our  subject  are  Catherine, 
and  William  (second).  Jasper  Kellermann  lived 
to  be  seventy-four  years  of  age,  while  his  good 
wife  at  her  death  numbered  ninety-nine  3'eais  and 
two  months. 

John,  of  this  sketch,  received  his  education  in 
the  schools  of  Germany,  and  when  attaining  his 
fourteenth  year  began  work  in  the  rolling  mills,  re- 
ceiving five  cents  a  day  for  his  services,  and  was 
obliged  to  board  himself.  He  was  thus  employed 
until  entering  the  German  armj',  when  twenty 
years  of  age.     He  was  given  a  furlough  after  serv- 


ing his  country  for  two  years  and  five  months,  and 
taking  advantage  of  his  leave  of  absence,  came  to 
the  United  States.  This  was  in  1849,  and  upon 
lauding  in  the  New  World  young  Kellermann 
made  his  way  to  Michigan,  and  after  a  few  months 
spent  in  that  state  moved  to  St.  Louis,  and  later 
to  Monroe  County,  this  state.  Upon  arriving  in 
the  Mound  City  he  had  but  $50  in  monej^,  and 
for  three  years  was  there  employed  in  the  rolling 
mills. 

While  making  his  home  in  Monroe  County,  our 
subject  married  Miss  Mary,  daughter  of  John  and 
Nancy  (Beckley)  Benson.  The  lady  was  likewise 
a  native  of  Germany,  and  was  brought  by  her  par- 
ents to  the  United  States  when  five  years  of  age. 
By  her  union  with  our  subject  were  born  the 
following  named  eleven  children:  Lizzie,  Jasper, 
John,  Henry,  Mary,  Catherine,  Herman,  Henry 
AVilliam,  Frank,  Peter  and  Joseph.  Of  these, 
Henry  and  Catherine  are  decerised.  After  his  mar- 
riage Mr.  Kellermann  rented  land,  which  he  oper- 
ated for  five  years,  and  at  the  end  of  that  time  was 
enabled  to  purchase  a  portion  of  his  present  farm 
in  this  count3%  where  he  has  since  made  his  home. 
In  his  agricultural  pursuits  he  has  ever  shown  a 
disposition  to  improve  his  opportunities  by  means 
of  unflagging  industry  and  perseverance,  and  now 
ranks  among  the  well-to-do  farmers  of  this  section. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Kellermann  are  active  members  of 
the  Catholic  Church.  He  is  a  reliable  citizen,  and 
at  every  election  casts  a  vote  in  favor  of  Demo- 
cratic candidates. 


=*'5-*}-*5-'}"'5''!'"{-= 


OBERT  BEGGS.  This  name  will  be  recog- 
nized by  many  of  our  readers  as  that  of  a 
resident  of  township  4,  range  3  west,  who 
P)  is  engaged  in  farming  and  stock-raising. 
His  landed  estate  consists  of  four  hundred  acres, 
the  greater  portion  of  which  is  well  improved,  and 
its  present  condition  is  due  to  his  own  good  judg- 
ment and  enterprise.  The  farm  is  stocked  with  all 
that  goes  to  make  up  a  well  regulated  estate,  and 
the  family  occupies  a  pleasant  dwelling,  where 
home  comforts  abound. 

Our   subject    is    a   son    of    William   and    Jane 
(Hanley)    Beggs.     His   grandparents    on    the    pa- 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


713 


ternal  side  were  Robert  and  Nancy  (Orr)  Beggs, 
tlie  former  of  whom  was  the  sun  of  Thomas 
Beggs,  who  in  turn  was  a  descendant  of  James 
Beggs.  The  father  of  the  last  named  gentleman 
was  born  in  Scotland,  and  after  his  marriage, 
emigrated  to  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  where  he 
owned  large  tracts  of  land.  Thomas  Beggs,  to- 
gether with  his  sons,  was  an  extensive  land  owner 
in  Ireland,  and  he  also  owned  and  operated  a  mill 
for  many  years.  He  was  the  father  of  three  sons 
and  two  daughters:  William,  Robert  (the  grand- 
father of  our  subject),  James,  Margaret  and  Anna. 
The  sons  owned  large  farms  in  Ireland,  which  are 
still  occupied  by  their  descendants.  The  grand- 
father was  captured  at  Belfast,  and  being  forced 
into  service,  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Trafalgar, 
and  during  that  period  was  in  England  for  three 
years. 

William  Beggs,  the  father  of  our  subject,  was 
born  in  1803,  and  after  receiving  a  limited  educa- 
tion, learned  the  trade  of  a  weaver.  He  fell  heir 
to  a  small  tract  of  land,  which  he  sold  for  fift^' 
pounds,  and  later,  renting  a  larger  farm,  there 
passed  the  remainder  of  his  life,  dying  in  1848. 
He  was  one  in  a  family  of  five  children,  his 
brothers  and  sisters  being,  Thomas,  Robert,  Nancy 
and  Catherine. 

The  parents  of  our  subject  were  members  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church,  and  they  had  seven  children, 
one  of  whom  died  in  infanc}'.  Those  now  living 
besides  our  subject,  who  is  the  eldest  born,  are, 
William,  Catherine,  Ann  (Mrs.  Andrew  McKin- 
stry),  and  Jane.  Fannie  and  Nancy  are  deceased. 
Robert,  of  this  sketch,  was  never  permitted  to  at- 
tend school,  but  being  ambitious  to  gain  a  thor- 
ough knowledge  of  books,  prosecuted  his  studies 
at  home,  and  is  to-day  a  well  read  man. 

Prior  to  crossing  the  Atlantic,  which  trip  was 
made  in  his  twenty-second  year,  our  subject  was 
variously  employed  in  working  out  on  farms  and 
on  tiie  railroad  in  his  native  land,  Ireland.  After 
coming  to  the  New  World,  he  worked  out  as  a  farm 
hand  in  New  Jersey  for  three  years,  and  later  spent 
a  short  time  in  Philadelphia.  In  1855  he  came  to 
Illinois  and  purchased  fort}'  acres  of  land,  which 
now  forms  a  portion  of  his  present  valuable  estate. 
It  was  then  in  a  perfectly  wild  state,  covered  with 


timber,  and  where  are  now  broad  roads  there  were 
Indian  trails.  Mr.  Beggs  was  very  industrious,  and 
from  time  to  time  added  to  his  propert}',  until  he 
accumulated  four  hundred  acres.  He  has  the 
greater  part  of  this  under  the  plow,  and  in  Perry 
Count}'  is  recognized  as  an  important  member  of 
its  farming  communitj-. 

December  25,  1852,  in  New  Jersey,  Mr.  Beggs 
married  Miss  Rosa,  daugiiter  of  Andrew  and  Jane 
(McBrune)  McKinstry.  Mrs.  Beggs  is  a  devout 
member  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  of  Nashville, 
and  is  a  most  highly  esteemed  lad}-.  Our  subject 
is  a  prominent  Democrat  in  politics,  and  as  one  of 
the  representative  citizens  of  this  locality  has  held 
many  offices  of  trust. 


OUIS  H.  GILSTER.  This  successful  busi- 
ness man  of  Chester  is  engaged  as  a  banker, 

merchant  and  miller.     He  was  born   in  the 

kingdom  of  Hanover,  Germany,  January  26, 1844, 
and  is  a  son  of  Henry  and  Doris  (Schraeder)  Gli- 
ster. The  father,  who  was  a  merchant  tailor  in  his 
native  land,  crossed  the  Atlantic,  December  6,  1857, 
on  a  sailing-vessel,  and  landed  at  New  Orleans. 
Thence  he  made  his  way  up  the  Mississippi  River 
to  Chester,  and  there  worked  at  his  trade  until-his 
decease,  which  occurred  April  26,  1880.  His  good 
wife,  who  survives  him,  is  a  most  estimable  lady 
and  is  at  present  residing  in  this  place. 

Louis  II.  is  the  fifth  in  order  of  birth  of  the  par- 
ental family  of  ten  ciiildren.  He  received  a  good 
education  in  his  native  language,  and  after  coming 
to  the  United  States  prosecuted  his  studies  for  two 
winters  in  the  district  school  taught  by  Rev.  Mr. 
Barlow,  a  Baptist  minister  of  Chester.  When  old 
enough  to  choose  an  occupation,  he  learned  the 
trade  of  a  merchant  tailor  from  his  father,  and 
completed  his  apprenticeship  when  reaching  his 
eighteenth  year. 

On  the  outbreak  of  the  Civil  War,  our  subject, 
desirous  of  giving  his  services  to  the  Union,  en- 
listed in  Company  II,  Twenty-second  Illinois  In- 
fantry, which  was  commanded  by  Colonel  Swan- 
wick.  His  regiment  joined  the  Army  of  the  Cum- 
berland   and    participated    in    many  of  the  hard 


714 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


fought  battles  of  the  war.  He  did  brave  and  valiant 
service  throughout  that  period,  and  on  receiving  his 
honorable  discharge,  in  June,  1865,  returned  to 
this  place  and  for  the  following  two  ^-ears  worked 
at  the  tailor's  trade. 

In  1867  Mr.  Gilster  began  clerking  in  the  store 
of  William  Schuchert,  with  whom  he  remained  for 
a  period  of  six  years.  During  that  time  he  had  an 
opportunity  to  learn  the  business,  and  finding 
that  he  could  make  it  pa}-  better  than  to  follow  his 
trade,  he  formed  a  partnership  with  his  father,  the 
firm  becoming  Henry  Gilster  &  Son.  They  put  in 
a  full  stock  of  general  raercliandise,  and  continued 
thus  to  operate  until  1875,  when  the  father's  in- 
terest in  the  business  was  purchased  bj'  a  brother 
of  our  subject  and  the  firm  name  was  changed  to 
L.  H.  Gilster  &  Brother.  They  were  very  successful 
j'oung  business  men,  and  their  trade  extended  over 
a  large  territory-.  Our  subject,  however,  in  the 
spring  of  1891,  purchased  his  brother's  interest  in 
the  store,  which  is  now  known  throughout  the 
county. 

In  1888  our  subject  organized  the  Bueua  Vista 
Milling  Company,  of  which  he  is  Treasurer  and 
general  manager.  The  mill  is  fitted  out  with  a 
new  process  roller  system,  and  manufactures  the 
"  Crown  Patent,"  "  Belle  of  Chester,"  and  "Tri- 
umph" brands  of  flour.  It  also  turns  out  large 
quantities  of  crushed  corn  and  bran,  and  its  ca- 
pacity is  sevent^'-flve  barrels  of  flour  ever\- twenty- 
four  hours.  Our  subject  is  a  man  whose  versatile 
talents  permit  him  to  engage  in  various  kinds  of 
business,  and  in  1882  he  established  the  banking 
house  of  Louis  H.  Gilster,  which  he  is  conducting 
at  the  present  time.  He  has  had  a  large  experience 
as  a  business  man,  and  his  sterling  qualities  and 
genial  manner  are  recognized  bj'  all  who  know  him 
and  prepossess  strangers  in  his  favor. 

June  3,  1866,  Louis  H.  Gilster  and  Miss  Caroline 
Begeinann  were  united  in  marriage.  The  lady  was 
born  in  Lippe-Detmold,  Germany,  January  6, 
1845.  Their  family  comprises  eight  sons  and  four 
daughters,  all  of  whom  are  living.  Our  subject  is 
deeply  interested  in  their  welfare,  and  therefore  is 
ready  to  bear  a  part  in  all  those  movements  which 
will  enliance  the  material,  educational  and  moral 
prosperity  of  the  nation.     As  is  a  well  known  fact. 


he  has  succeeded   well  in  worldly   afifaii-s,  and  has 
just  completed  a  fine  two-story  business  block. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gilster  are  devoted  members  of  the 
Lutheran  Church,  in  which  the  former  has  served 
in  the  capacity  of  Deacon  for  the  past  twenty-five 
years.  He  is  a  decided  Republican  in  politics,  and 
works  earnestly  to  promote  the  interests  of  that 
party.  He  has  held  various  local  offices,  and  for 
four  j'ears  was  Alderman  of  the  Third  Ward  of 
Chester. 


He  is  a  native-born  citizen  of  this  state,  his  birth 
having  occurred  near  McLeansboro,  Hamilton 
Count}',  March  31,  1835.  His  parents  bore  the 
names  of  William  and  Susannah  (Brady)  Henson. 
The  former,  who  was  a  native  of  West  Virginia, 
came  to  Illinois  when  it  was  but  little  more  than 
a  wilderness,  and  here  died  in  March  of  1850. 
Mrs.  Henson  was  a  daughter  of  James  Brady  and 
was  born  in  Union  County,  K)'.  She  came  to 
Hamilton  County  with  her  parents  wlien  a  }'Oung 
girl. 

Our  subject  is  the  fifth  in  order  of  birth  in  a 
family  of  three  sons  and  seven  daughters,  only 
three  of  whom  yet  survive.  His  boyhood  daj-s 
were  spent  in  his  native  count}',  where  his  studies 
were  conducted  in  the  primitive  schoolhouse,  with 
its  slab  seats  and  rude  furnishings.  In  1854  he 
came  to  Chester,  where  he  was  elected  City  Mar- 
shal, and  he  continued  to  hold  that  office  until  his 
enlistment  in  the  array. 

September  7,  1861,  the  name  of  John  Henson 
was  enrolled  in  Company  H,  Thirty-first  Illinois 
Infantry.  He  participated  in  some  of  the  most 
bloody  engagements  of  the  war,  the  first  conflicts 
being  at  Belmont  and  Ft.  Donelson,  and  the  last 
at  Atlanta,  where  he  was  captured  and  taken  to 
Andersonville  Prison.  After  having  been  confined 
for  nearly  a  month  in  that  place  he  made  his  es- 
cape, but  was  recaptured  and  taken  to  Salisbury. 
Two  hours  after  entering  the  prison  he  was  success- 
ful in   escaping,  and  made   his  way  to  the  Union 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


715 


army,  stationed  at  Goldsboro,  N.  C.  He  was 
mustered  out  and  honorably  discharged  July  15, 
1865,  having  served  gallantly  throughout  the  en- 
tire struggle. 

Mr.  Henson  has  been  thrice  married.  In  1854 
he  married  Miss  Rebecca  Griudle,  of  Perry  County, 
this  state.  Two  children  were  born  of  this  union, 
Benjamin  ¥.,  a  resident  of  Randolph  County,  and 
John  L.,  who  lives  in  Jackson  County.  Septem- 
ber 1,  1865,  Miss  Adeline  Baker,  of  Jackson 
County,  became  the  wife  of  our  subject,  and  to 
them  one  son  was  born,  William  Ul.ysses,  who  is 
living  on  a  part  of  his  father's  farm. 

May  15,  1878,  Mrs.  Mary  Steward  became  the 
wife  of  Mr.  Henson.  She  is  an  excellent  ladj' 
and  is  devoted  to  the  welfare  of  her  husband 
and  children,  Laura  Belle  and  Mary  Josephine, 
both  of  whom  are  at  home  with  their  parents. 
Mr.  Henson  is  a  member  of  the  Baptist  Church  of 
Rockwood.  In  his  political  afliliations  he  is  a 
stanch  and  true  Republican.  Socially,  he  is  con- 
nected with  Rockwood  Post  No.  734,  G.  A.  R., 
of  which  he  is  one  of  the  leading  members. 


^^E 


E^i=- 


I OBERT  WORTHEN  WATSON  is  now  serv- 
ing his  third  term  as  Circuit  Clerk  and 
County  Recorder  of  Jackson  County,  111., 
iland  makes  his  home  in  Murphysboro.  The 
fact  that  he  has  been  three  times  elected  to  this 
office  is  a  high  testimonial  of  the  ability  and 
fidelity  with  which  he  has  discharged  his  public 
duties.  True  to  every  trust  reposed  in  him,  his 
fellow-townsmen  could  find  no  better  ofiicial  or 
one  more  worthy  of  their  confidence. 

Mr.  Watson  is  a  native  of  Missouri.  He  was 
born  near  Hillsboro  on  the  3d  of  September,  1847, 
and  is  a  son  of  James  P.  Watson,  a  native  of  New 
York  City.  The  grandparents  emigrated  from 
England  to  that  metropolis  and  there  spent  their 
remaining  days.  The  father  of  our  subject  was 
a  tailor  by  trade.  In  early  life  he  went  to  New 
Mexico, but  afterwards  removed  to  Hillsboro, Mo., 
where  he  followed  his  chosen  occupation  and  also 
engaged  -in  teaching.  In  about  1849  he  located 
in  Jackson  County,  where  he  followed  the  same 


profession  for  several  years  in  connection  with 
his  work  at  tailoring.  In  1856  he  took  up  his 
residence  in  Murph^'sboro  and  was  appointed 
Deputy  Circuit  Clerk.  Four  years  later  he  was 
elected  Circuit  Clerk,  and  on  the  expiration  of  his 
term  was  re-elected,  in  1864.  His  death  occurred 
while  holding  that  office,  September  13,  1865. 
On  attaining  his  majority  he  became  a  supporter 
of  the  Whig  party,  and  on  its  dissolution  he 
joined  the  Democracy.  He  held  membership  with 
the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  The  mother  of 
our  subject  was  in  her  maidenhood  Ann  Parmley. 
She  was  a  native  of  Kentuck}-,  as  was  her  father, 
who  there  followed  farming  throughout  life.  Her 
death  occurred  in  Murjihysboro  in  Jul}-,  1887. 

In  the  famil>-  were  three  daughters  and  one  son, 
all  of  whom  are  yet  living:  Mary  J.,  wife  of 
Hiram  Cover;  Carrie,  wife  of  James  M.  Rolens; 
Frances,  wife  of  George  S.  Rolens,  and  our  sub- 
ject, who  is  the  eldest.  He  was  reared  in  the 
county  which  is  still  his  home,  and  its  public 
schools  afforded  him  his  educational  privileges. 
At  an  early  age  he  began  to  earn  his  own  liveli- 
hood, securing  a  position  as  clerk  with  Bierer  & 
Worthen,  dry-goods  merchants,  with  whom  he  con- 
tinued for  a  period  of  five  years.  He  then  became 
Assistant  Postmaster,  serving  for  four  years  under 
Mrs.  M.  E.  .Jenkins.  During  this  time  he  era- 
barked  in  merchandising,  but  in  1875  his  store 
and  stock  were  completely  destroyed  by  fire.  He 
was  then  forced  to  resume  clerking,  which  he  con- 
tinued until  1880,  when  he  was  made  Deputy  Cir- 
cuit Clerk,  serving  under  C.  B.  Dishom.  In  1886 
his  superior  died,  and  at  a  special  election  in  the 
spring  of  1887  he  was  elected  on  the  Democratic 
ticket  to  fill  the  vacancy,  receiving  the  very  flat- 
tering majority  of  six  hundred  votes.  In  No- 
vember, 1888,  he  was  .igain  elected,  and  in  1892 
was  once  more  the  people's  choice  for  that  oflice. 

On  the  21st  of  September,  1875,  Mr.  Watson 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Ella  Tippett,  a 
native  of  Tennessee,  and  a  daughter  of  W.  C.  Tip- 
pett. a  coal  dealer  of  Murphysboro.  Three  chil- 
dren  bless  their  union,  Jessie,  Nellie  and   Lillie. 

Mr.  Watson  is  a  member  of  Amity  Lodge, 
I.  O.  O.  F.,  has  served  as  representative  to  the 
Grand  Lodge,  and  is  Past  Chief  Patriarch  of  Lin- 


716 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


coin  Encampment  No.  109.  He  also  belongs  to 
the  Knights  of  Pythias  and  is  Treasurer  of  the 
Uniformed  Rank.  His  wife  h^olds  membership 
with  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  North.  Mr. 
Watson  has  also  held  other  ofHces,  having  been 
City  Treasurer  for  two  terms,  from  1876  until 
1880,  and  was  City  Clerk  from  1883  until  1887. 
By  his  prompt  and  faitiiful  discharge  of  duty  he 
has  ever  won  the  high  commendation  of  all  con- 
cerned. A  self-made  man,  he  has  steadily  worked 
his  way  upward,  improving  his  opportunities  and 
making  the  most  of  his  advantages,  and  a  well 
spent  life  has  won  him  high  regard. 


<A  MLLIAM  C.  FKIDRICHS,  a  highly  re- 
\rJ//  spected  and  influential  farmer  residing  on 
\^^  section  12,  township  3,  range  10,  is  a  native 
of  Monroe  Count}-.  He  was  born  near  Waterloo, 
January  27,  1849,  and  is  of  German  descent.  His 
parents,  William  and  Margaret  (Langhorst)  Frid- 
richs,  are  both  natives  of  Hanover,  Germany. 
Our  subject  is  their  onl}-  child.  In  1848  the 
father  crossed  the  Atlantic  to  America  with  his 
wife,  and  came  direct  to  Monroe  County,  locating 
upon  a  farm.  He  lived  only  six  months  thereafter, 
d\ing  from  an  attack  of  cholera,  at  the  early  age 
of  twenty-five  years.  Mrs.  Fridrichs,  who  was 
born,  reared  and  educated  in  Germany,  is  still  liv- 
ing, at  the  age  of  sixty-five  \'ears,  her  home  being 
in  this  count}'.  She  is  a  member  of  the  Lutheran 
Church. 

We  now  take  up  the  personal  histor}'  of  our 
subject,  who  was  reared  in  the  home  of  his  gi-and- 
mother,and  during  his  j-outh  acquired  a  good  edu- 
cation in  the  common  schools.  When  he  liad 
reached  the  age  of  twent3--two  years  he  chose  as 
a  companion  and  helpmate  on  life's  journey  Miss 
Anna  Klotzer,  a  native  of  St.  Clair  County,  111. 
The  greater  part  of  her  girlhood,  however,  was 
spent  in  Monroe  County.  B}-  their  marriage  were 
born  six  children,  but  one  died  in  infanc}-.  Those 
still  living  are  Sophia,  Emma,  William,  Anna  and 
Ida.  The  mother  of  the  family  was  called  to  her 
final  rest  at  the  age  of  twenty-seven  years.  She 
was  a  member  of  the  Catholic  Church  and  a  lady 


possessed  of  many  excellencies  of  character.  Mr. 
Fridrichs  afterwards  married  Catherine  Herring,  a 
native  of  Germany,  who  when  a  little  child  was 
brought  by  her  parents  to  America,  in  1866.  The 
family  came  at  once  to  Illinois  and  made  a  settle- 
ment in  Monroe  County,  where  the  daughter  was 
reared  to  womanhood.  Seven  children  graced  the 
second  marriage  and  six  of  the  number  still  sur- 
vive, as  foOows:  August,  Edward,  Armin,  Bertha, 
Lucretia  and  Lydia.     One  child  died  in  infancy. 

When  Sir.  Fridrichs  started  out  in  life  for  him- 
self he  had  no  capital  save  a  30ung  man's  bright 
hope  of  the  future  and  a  determination  to  win 
success  if  honest  labor  could  accomplish  it.  He 
has  indeed  led  a  busy  life,  and  his  industry  and 
enterprise  have  been  rewarded  by  a  comfortable 
competence.  He  is  now  the  owner  of  three  hun- 
dred and  Bft3-flvc  acres  of  rich  land,  which  is  un- 
der a  high  state  of  cultivation  and  well  improved. 
His  farm  is  considered  one  of  the  valuable  and 
desirable  places  of  the  community,  and  its  neat 
and  thrifty  appearance  indicates  the  uareful  super- 
vision of  the  owner. 

In  his  political  views  Mr.  Fridrichs  is  a  stalwart 
Republican,  and  socially  is  connected  with  the 
Masonic  fraternity  and  the  Farmers'  Mutual  Bene- 
fit Association.  He  holds  membership  with  the 
Lutheran  Church,  and  his  wife  is  a  member  of  the 
Catholic  Church.  His  success  is  well  deserved,  for 
it  is  the  fruit  of  his  own  toil.  He  h.as  alwavs 
lived  in  Monioe  County,  and  those  who  have 
known  him  from  early  boyhood  are  numbered 
among  his  stanchest  friends,  a  fact  which  indicates 
an  upright,  honorable  life. 


$:i6-^e-g^-g^^iS^6^T 


HARLES  W.  PLATER,  one  of  the  promi- 
nent citizens  of  Murphysboro,  now  holds 
the  position  of  foreman  of  the  lumber  and 
wrecking  department  of  the  Mobile  Ji:  Ohio  Rail- 
road, and  also  furnishes  and  receives  the  supplies 
of  the  St.  Louis  Division.  He  was  born  in  Jones- 
boro,  Union  County,  III.,  August  3,  1852,  and  is  a 
son  of  James  L.  and  Anna  C.  (Stell)  Plater,  both 
of  whom  were  natives  of  AVashington,  D.  C.  The 
father  served  as  cashier  in  a  bank  in  the  Capitol 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAl,   RECORD. 


717 


City,  but  afterwards  removed  to  New  York,  and 
subsequent!}-  located  in  Centralia,  III.  There  he 
engaged  in  merchandising,  hauling  his  goods  from 
St.  Louis  b}-  team.  His  last  days  were  sjjent  upon 
a  farm  near  Jonesboro,  111.,  and  he  became  well-to- 
do.  His  death  occurred  in  ,1864,  at  the  age  of 
sixty-four  years. 

Our  subject's  wife  passed  away  February  1, 
1892,  at  the  advanced  age  of  eight^'-four.  In  the 
familj-  were  nine  children,  seven  of  whom  are  yet 
living.  Three  brothers,  John,  James  and  "W.  W., 
were  members  of  the  Thirty-first  Illinois  Infantry 
during  the  late  war,  and  the  first  two  were  num- 
bered among  the  boj-s  in  blue  of  Companj'  D. 

Upon  the  home  farm,  Mr.  Plater  of  this  sketch 
was  reared,  and  in  the  public  schools  of  .Jonesboro 
acquired  his  education,  graduating  from  the  high 
school  in  1871.  He  had  previously  learned  the 
trade  of  cabinet-making,  and  in  that  year  he  pur- 
chased a  cabinet  shop  in  Ava,  111.,  and  embarked 
in  business  for  himself.  He  also  carried  on  a 
furniture  store  there  for  three  jears,  and  was  one 
of  the  first  merchants  of  the  place.  In  1874,  he 
came  to  Murphj'sboro  and  engaged  in  contract- 
ing and  building.  The  following  year,  how- 
ever, he  entered  the  emplo\'  of  the  St.  Louis  & 
Cairo  Railroad  as  a  bridge  builder  under  W.  M. 
Wood.  He  was  afterwards  put  in  charge  of  the 
rebuilding  of  the  tunnel,  which  is  four  hundred 
and  twent3'  feet  in  length,  and  on  the  comple- 
tion of  this  work  he  was  made  foreman  of  the 
bridges  and  buildings  between  Murjjhysboro  and 
Cairo,  which  position  he  held  until  181*1.  During 
that  time  he  was  also  engaged  in  bridge  building 
at  the  new  shops  in  East  St.  Louis  for  one  year, 
and  then  again  took  charge  of  the  bridges.  After 
the  road  was  sold  to  the  Mobile  &  Ohio,  in  1886, 
he  continued  with  it  in  the  same  capacity,  and  in 
August,  1892,  was  appointed  to  his  present  posi- 
tion, as  foreman  of  the  lumber  and  wrecking  de- 
partment. The  wrecking  train  is  always  read}'  to 
be  sent  out  at  a  moment's  notice  and  is  supplied 
with  one  of  the  finest  outfits  of  the  kind  in  the 
Mississippi  Valley. 

Mr.  Plater  was  married  in  Jonesboro,  October  1, 
1886,  to  Miss  Olive  O.  Cruse,  a  native  of  that  city. 
Two  children  grace  their  union,  Clarence  and  Ro- 


land. Thej'  have  a  pleasant  residence  on  South 
Blanchard  Street  and  also  own  another  dwelling 
on  the  same  street. 

Mr.  Plater  is  a  stockholder  in  the  Jackson  Coun- 
ty Homestead  and  Loan  Association,  and  is  Past 
Grand  of  Mt.  Carbon  Lodge  No.  34,  I.  O.  O.  F.,  in 
which  he  holds  membership.  In  polities,  he  is  a 
Democrat,  and  for  two  j-ears  served  as  Alderman 
of  the  Fourth  Ward,  during  which  time  the  water 
works,  electric  light  and  seweiage  systems  were 
put  in.  He  has  ever  had  the  best  interests  of  the 
city  at  heart,  and  has  done  all  in  his  power  for  its 
promotion  and  upbuilding. 


RS.  SARAH  J.  PATE,  a  highly  esteemed 
resident  of  Jackson  County,  has  passed 
her  entire  life  in  Somerset  Township, 
where  she  was  born  on  the  3d  of  October, 
1839.  Reared  amid  the  pioneer  scenes  of  those 
early  days,  she  became  a  strong,  self-reliant  and 
useful  woman.  As  the  daughter  of  a  brave  and 
industrious  pioneer  and  the  wife  of  an  influential 
and  successful  citizen  of  this  county,  she  is  in 
every  waj'  worthy  of  her  father  and  husband. 
She  possesses  excellent  judgment  and  sound  com- 
mon sense  and  is' a  wise  manager,  so  that  her  hus- 
band's estate  has  not  diminished  in  value  since 
it  came  into  her  hands. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  William  Dot}-,  was 
born  in  Rockbridge  County,  Va.,  February  6, 
1787,  and  about  1816  accompanied  the  other 
members  of  the  family  to  Illinois,  sojourning  for 
a  short  time  in  what  is  now  Williamson  County. 
Thence  he  came  to  Jackson  County  and  located  in 
the  northern  part  of  Somerset  Township,  where  in 
the  midst  of  the  dense  woods  he  built  a  log  cabin 
and  commenced  the  arduous  task  of  clearing  the 
land.  After  making  his  home  for  some  time  in 
that  primitive  abode  he  built  a  hewed-log  house, 
a  more  substantial  structure,  which  still  stands  on 
the  farm.  He  was  the  first  settler  in  this  part  of 
the  county  and  purchased  his  farm  from  the  Gov- 
ernment. 

The  trials  that  fell  to  the  lot  of  William  Doty 
were  such  as  every  pioneer  was  obliged  to  endure. 


718 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD 


The  task  of  clearing  the  land  was  one  of  great 
difficulty  and  was  only  secured  after  years  of 
struggling.  Money  was  scarce  in  those  early  days, 
and  often  the  family  was  deprived  of  what  to-day 
would  be  considered  the  necessities  of  life.  Rec- 
ognizing his  ability,  Mr.  Doty's  fellow-citizens 
frequently  elected  him  to  positions  of  honor  in  the 
township,  and  as  time  passed  by  and  the  county 
became  more  denselj-  populated  his  influence  con- 
stantly increased.  He  served  as  Associate  Judge 
of  the  county  and  was  one  of  a  number  who  as- 
sisted in  arranging  the  county  records  after  the 
court  house  was  burned  at  Brownsville,  then  the 
county  seat. 

In  the  death  of  Mr.  Doty,  which  occurred  in 
March,  1867,  Somerset  Township  sustained  a  severe 
loss,  as  he  was  in  every  respect  a  desirable  citizen 
and  had  done  a  great  deal  to  advance  the  material 
prosperity  of  the  community.  He  was  a  consider- 
ate husband,  a  loving  father  and  a  good  neighbor, 
ever  just  and  upright  in  his  dealings.  His  wife, 
whose  maiden  name  was  Sarah  Tedford,  and  who 
was  a  native  of  Tennessee,  passed  away  November 
25,  1847,  many  j'cars  prior  to  his  demise.  They 
were  the  parents  of  fourteen  children,  of  whom 
the  following  survive:  Nancy  D.,  wife  of  Thomas 
Steele,  a  resident  of  Ava  Township:  Elizabeth, 
who  married  James  T.  Cox  and  fives  in  Somerset 
Township;  and  Sarah  J.,  of  this  sketch. 

Our  subject  was  married  July  26,  1863,  to 
Sabe  Pate,  who  was  born  in  Tennessee  February 
11,  1833.  J'or  further  mention  of  the  Pate  family 
the  reader  is  referred  to  the  sketch  of  Anthony 
Pate,  which  is  presented  elsewhere  in  this  volume. 
When  abo3',Sabe  Pate  accompanied  his  parents  to 
Illinois,  and  upon  a  farm  in  Jackson  County 
attained  manhood.  He  and  his  wife  became  the 
parents  of  four  children,  of  whom  three  are  now 
living:  Matthew  W.;  Elvira,  wife  of  Edward 
Hughes;  and  Sarah  E.,  who  married  William 
Franklin.     John  is  deceased. 

A  sound  Democrat  in  his  political  views,  Mr. 
Pate  deemed  that  in  working  for  the  good  of  his 
party  he  was  promoting  the  best  interests  of  his 
country.  He  was  a  devoted  member  of  the  Free 
Will  Baptist  Church,  contributed  liberally  to  the 
support  of   the  Gospel,  and  was  prominent  in  the 


management  of  the  affairs  of  his  church,  occupy- 
ing its  various  offices.  His  death  occurred  De- 
cember 27,  1872,  and  was  deplored  throughout  the 
township  as  a  public  loss.  Since  his  demise  his 
widow  has  continued  to  reside  upon  the  old  home- 
stead of  one  hundred  acres,  the  soil  of  which  is 
carefully  tilled  by  her  only  son,  Matthew  W.  He 
and  his  wife,  formerly  Mary  N.  Franklin,  with  their 
two  children,  Edgar  and  Grover,  also  live  on  the 
old  home  farm.  Like  his  father  and  grandfather, 
he  is  a  Democrat  in  politics,  and  though  scarcely 
yet  in  life's  prime,  has  already  attainefl  a  promi- 
nent place  among  the  agriculturists  of  the  town- 
ship. 

The  present  representatives  of  this  family  are  in 
every  way  worthy  of  their  distinguished  lineage. 
They  are  justly  proud  of  the  fact  that  Grand- 
father Ephraim  Dot}-  fought  for  the  Colonies  dur- 
ing the  trying  times  of  the  Revolution,  and  it  is 
one  of  the  family  traditions  that  this  brave  sol- 
dier was  present  at  the  famous  tea  party  at  Boston 
Harbor. 


^^ 


f  LBERT  M.  NEAL,  who  is  pit  manager  for 
M/Ui     the    Garrison    Shaft,    Big  Muddy   Ore   i 

1!)  Steel  Company,  of  Murphjsboro,  was  born 
in  Du  Quoin,  111.,  on  the  9th  of  October, 
1859,  and  is  a  representative  of  one  of  the  pio- 
neer families  of  this  county.  His  grandfather, 
William  Neal,  settled  in  Carbondale  Township  in 
a  very  early  day  and  there  followed  farming.  His 
father,  John  Neal.  was  born  in  Kentucky,  and  be- 
came a  miner  of  Du  Quoin.  In  1861,  he  engaged 
in  the  Eigliteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  and  for  four 
years  followed  the  Old  Flag.  At  the  battle  of 
Shiloh  lie  had  a  finger  shot  off.  When  the  struggle 
was  over,  he  returned  to  Du  Quoin,  but  in  1866 
came  to  Murphysboro,  where  he  engaged  in  min- 
ing until  1889,  since  which  time  he  has  made  his 
home  in  Quincy.  He  married  Sarah  A.  GoUiher. 
a  native  of  this  state,  who  died  in  Murph^-sboro 
in  1883,  leaving  two  children:  A  jert  M.,  and 
William,  who  is  mine  manager. 

Our  subject  was  reared  and  educated  in  this  city, 
and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  began  working  in  the 
mines  in  the  employ  of  the  same  company  with 


Q- 


/ImJ.M^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


721 


which  he  is  now  connected.  His  service  with  them 
covers  a  period  of  twenty  j-ears,  and  Las  been  one 
of  promotion  from  the  lowest  position  up  to  that 
of  pit  manager.  The  Harrison  raining  machinery 
is  used,  and  about  seven  liundred  tons  of  coal  are 
taken  out  each  day.  His  long  continuance  with 
one  company  indicates  his  high  degree  of  faith- 
fulness, and  his  promotion  shows  that  he  h.as  the 
confidence  and  trust  of  his  employers. 

On  Christmas  Day  of  1883,  in  Murphysboro, 
was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  Mr.  Neal  and  Miss 
Kate  Marshall,  a  native  of  Warwickshire,  England, 
and  a  daughter  of  Josiah  and  Sarah  E.  (Harvey) 
Marshall,  who  were  also  natives  of  England.  Her 
father  was  a  miner,  and  in  186.5  he  went  with  his 
family  to  Belleville,  111.,  where  he  spent  his  last 
days.  His  widow  afterwards  became  the  wife  of 
James  Turner,  and  in  1869  they  came  to  Murphj'S- 
boro,  where  Mr.  Turner  is  now  engaged  in  the  real- 
estate  business.  There  were  two  children  born  of 
the  first  union,  and  one  by  the  second.  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Neal  have  two  children,  Harriet  and  William 
Frederick. 

In  1886,  Mr.  Neal  was  elected  Alderman  from 
the  Tiiird  Ward  for  a  term  of  two  years  on  the 
Republican  ticket,  although  the  ward  is  Demo- 
cratic. In  1889,  he  w.as  again  elected,  and  in  1891 
every  ballot  in  his  ward,  except  seven,  was  cast  for 
him.  He  has  thus  served  for  six  years  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council.  He  was  Chairman  of  the  Finance 
Committee,  and  has  been  a  member  of  other  very 
important  committees.  During  Ids  term  of  office, 
many  of  the  leading  improvements  of  the  city 
were  made,  the  sewerage  S3'stem  was  laid  and  the 
water  works  and  electric  light  plants  were  estab- 
lished. Although  Murphysboro  Township  has  a 
Democratic  majorit}'  of  one  liundred,  Mr.  Neal 
was  elected  on  the  Republican  ticket  as  Supervisor 
by  a  majority  of  fortj^-one  votes.  He  is  now  serv- 
ing on  the  Committee  of  Miscellaneous  Claims. 
His  official  record  is  unsullied  and  his  faithful 
service  has  won  him  high  commendation. 

Since  twenty-one  years  of  age,  Mr.  Neal  h.as 
been  a  member  of  Amity  Lodge  No.  132,  I.  O.  O. 
F.,  of  which  he  is  Past  Grand,  and  is  a  demitted 
member  of  the  encampment.  He  also  belongs  to 
the  Knights  of  Honor  and  Jackson  Camp,  S.  V. 
27 


Besides  his  business  he  owns  some  real  estate  in 
Murphysboro.  He  is  truly  a  self-made  man  and 
his  career  in  many  respects   is   worthy   of   enuila- 


+= 


---^ 


^lOHN  W.  BRIDGEMAN.  Among  tlie  cit- 
izens of  Randolph  County  who  have  con- 
tributed their  quota  toward  its  develop- 
ment ma}'  be  properly  mentioned  this  gen- 
tleman, who  is  living  in  the  village  of  Rockwood, 
and,  who  is  well  known  for  his  integrity  as  a  citizen. 
He  is  a  native  of  this  state,  having  been  born  in 
Gallatin  County,  October  28,  1820.  The  place  of 
his  birth  is  now  in  Saline  County,  owing  to  divi- 
sions which  have  been  made  since  that  time. 

When  our  subject  was  a  lad  of  fourteen  years, 
he  accompanied  his  parents  on  their  removal  to 
Mt.  Vernon,  where  he  resided  until  about  twenty- 
five  years  old.  From  the  age  of  seventeen  until 
his  marriage  he  was  eraploj'ed  as  a  farm  hand  and 
gardener  and  was  thus  fitted  to  managete  farm  of 
his  own  in  a  most  profitable  manner.  The  lady 
whom  he  married  in  April,  1847,  was  Miss  Mar- 
garet, daughter  of  Augustus  and  Victoria  (La 
Beau)  Galinore,  the  former  a  native  of  Canada, 
and  the  latter  of  Peoria,  this  state.  To  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Bridgeraan  have  been  born  six  children. 
The  only  survivor  is  Jackson,  who  has  never  mar- 
ried, and  who  makes  his  home  with  his  parents. 

In  politics  our  subject  and  liis  son  are  suppor- 
ters of  Republican  principles.  During  the  Civil 
War  they  served  in  tlie  Union  arm}-,  being  mem- 
bers of  Company  F,  One  Hundred  and  Fift^-fourth 
Illinois  Infantry,  from  February  15,  1865,  to  Sep- 
tember 18  of  that  year.  Jackson  had  previously 
enlisted  with  Company  H,  One  Hundred  and 
Forty-second  Infantry,  with  which  he  remained 
from  May  13,  1864,  until  October  26  of  the  same 
year. 

After  the  marriage  of  our  subject,  which  oc- 
curred in  Calhoun  County,  this  state,  he  contin- 
ued to  make  that  locality  his  home  until  1856, 
when  he  removed  to  Jefferson  County,  Mo.,  resid- 
ing near  Hillsboro,  the  county  seat,  for  about  two 
years.  At  the  end  of  that  time  he  came  to  Chester, 
with  the  interests  of  which   he  was  identified  for 


722 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


the  following  seven  years,  or  until  he  entered  the 
army.  On  his  return  from  the  war  he  began  oper- 
ating a  farm  on  Mill  Creek,  and  seven  years  later 
removed  to  a  farm  on  Little  Mill  Creek,  where  he 
made  his  home  until  1875.  He  then  took  charge 
of  a  farm  near  Rockwood,  and  twelve  months 
later  moved  into  the  village,  purchasing  a  home 
in  the  western  part  of  the  town,  where  be  has  since 
continued  to  reside. 


HILIP  H.  EISENMAYER,  one  of  the  en- 

li  terprising  business  men  of  Murphysboro, 
is  President  of  the  Soutliern  Illinois  Mill- 
ing Company,  which  erected  its  mill  in 
1892,  and  opened  it  for  business  in  March,  1893. 
Under  his  able  management  it  is  meeting  with 
good  success,  and  prosperity  will  no  doubt  con- 
tinue with  the  concern,  for  the  members  of  the 
company  are  practical,  sagacious  and  industrious 
men. 

Mr.  Eisenmayer  was  born  in  Mascoutah,  111., 
August  25,  1867.  and  is  a  son  of  Jacob  and  Anna 
(Zapp)  Eisenmayer,  who  were  born,  reared  and 
married  in  Bavaria,  Germany.  Emigrating  to 
America,  they  became  earlj'  settlers  of  St.  Clair 
Countj',  111.  Four  children  were  born  to  tiiem, 
two  of  whom  are  now  living.  Our  subject  was 
reared  upon  tlie  home  farm,  spending  his  boyhood 
days  midst  play  and  work.  He  attended  the  com- 
mon schools  and  also  the  college  at  Warrenton, 
Mo.,  for  two  terms.  At  the  age  of  nineteen  he 
engaged  in  the  milling  business  with  the  Sessing- 
haus  Milling  Company',  and  for  eight  years  served 
as  their  salesman  in  St.  Louis.  In  1891  he  went 
to  Pinckneyville,  and  became  connected  with  the 
milling  company'  at  that  place  as  the  wheat  buyer. 
The  following  year  he  was  one  of  the  corporators 
of  the  Southern  Illinois  Milling  Company  and 
was  made  its  President,  which  position  he  still 
fills. 

Plans  were  immediately  drawn  and  work  on  the 
building  commenced.  It  was  finished  earl3'  the 
following  year,  and  in  March,  1893,  opened  for 
business.  Its  entire  length  is  one  hundred  and 
ninety-five  feet,  the  width  thirty-six  feet,  and  the 


main  part  of  tlie  l)uilding  is  four  stories  in  height, 
with  a  basement.  It  has  all  tlie  latest  improved 
machinery,  and  has  a  capacity  of  four  hundred 
barrels  of  flour  per  day.  They  have  made  as  high 
as  seventeen  barrels  an  hour.  The  elevator  has  a 
capacit}'  of  fifty  thousand  bushels  and  is  located 
on  a  side  track  of  the  Cairo  Short  Lino.  The 
company  owns  about  a  block  of  property.  The 
engine  room  is  18x46  feet,  the  engine  is  one  hun- 
dred and  fift3'  horse  power  and  there  are  two 
boilers  of  one  hundred  h<'rse  power  each.  They 
make  extensive  shipments  of  flour  to  the  south 
and  west  and  are  doing  a  very  fine  business.  Their 
principal  brands  of  flour  are  the  "Columbia  Stand- 
ard," "Matchless  Straight,"  "Uncle  Sam"  and 
"  Extra  Fancy."  This  mill  is  carried  on  in  con- 
nection with  the  Pinckneyville  Milling  Company, 
which  operates  the  P^clipse  Blill,  with  a  capacity  of 
four  hundred  barrels  per  d.ay.  This  was  built  in 
1891.  The  Murphysboro  mill  is  the  largest  in  the 
county  and  is  run  night  and  day,  from  early 
Monday  morning  to  Saturday  ut  12  p.  m.  The 
members  of  the  company  are  Philip  Eisenmayer, 
President;  Joseph  VanCloostere,  Secretary;  Wil- 
lard  Wall,  Treasurer;  and  Theodore  Ismert,  Super- 
intendent. 

Mr.  Eisenmaj-er  is  a  Knight  Templar  Mason, 
and  in  politics  is  a  true  Republican,  who  does  all 
in  his  power  to  advance  the  party  and  insure  its 
success.  His  enterprise  and  industry  have  won 
for  him  a  handsome  propert3'  and  have  beli)ed  him 
to  rise  to  a  position  of  affluence.  He  is  a  warm- 
hearted, generous  man,  and  the  best  interests  of 
the  community  ever  find  in  him  a  friend. 


ANUEL  H.  WILSON,  a  prominent  and 
representative  farmer  of  Perry  County, 
residing  on  section  36,  township  6,  range 
2,  has  the  honor  of  being  a  native  of  Illi- 
nois. He  was  born  in  Franklin  Count}'  Septem- 
ber 8,  1851.  His  father,  Peter  Wilson,  was  a 
native  of  Tennessee  and  an  early  settler  of  Frank- 
lin County,  where  he  bought  land.  He  theie  mar- 
ried P0II3'  Roa,  and  in  1856  removed  to  Madison 
County,  where   his    death   occurred   on  the  Isl  of 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


723 


Januaiy,  1857.  They  were  the  parents  of  five 
children,  four  of  whom  jjrew  to  inatiue  3'ears, 
while  three  are  yet  living.  Joseph  and  Peter  are 
both  farmers  of  Franklin  Count}-. 

Our  subject  was  a  youth  of  six  summers  when 
his  father  died,  and  with  his  mother  he  went  to 
Missouri,  where  he  made  his  home  until  1865, 
when  he  returned  to  his  native  county.  Its  pub- 
lic schools  afforded  him  his  educational  privileges. 
On  the  12th  of  December,  1869,  he  wedded  Miss 
Elizabeth  Welch,  daughter  of  Richard  Welch,  a 
native  of  Tennessee.  They  began  their  domestic 
life  in  Franklin  County,  and  two  years  afterward 
removed  to  Du  Quoin,  where  Mr.  Wilson  engaged 
in  mining  for  about  fourteen  years.  He  tlien  turned 
his  attention  to  farming.  In  1881  he  bought  forty 
acres  of  timber  land,  which  he  cleared  and  im- 
proved, and  to  his  farm  he  added  from  time  to 
time  until  he  owned  one  hundred  and  sixt}-  acres, 
of  wliich  one  hundred  and  ten  acres  are  under  a 
high  state  of  cultivation.  The  buildings  upon  the 
place  stand  as  monuments  to  his  enterprise,  and 
its  neat  appearance  indicates  his  careful  super- 
vision. 

A  family  of  nine  children  was  Ijorn  unto  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Wilson,  seven  of  whom  are  yet  living. 
Charles  is  married  and  follows  farming  in  Perry 
County;  Cicero  died  at  the  age  of  three  months; 
Harry  died  at  the  age  of  eight  years.  Silas,  Gu}', 
Ella,  Henry,  Rosa  and  Alice  are  at  home. 

Mr.  Wilson  has  been  a  successful  general  fanner 
and  stock-raiser,  but  he  now  gives  the  greater  part 
of  his  attention  to  bee  culture  and  to  the  manu- 
facture of  bee  hives.  He  is  interested  in  that  busi- 
ness with  Mr.  Brayshaw,  and  they  manufacture 
what  are  known  as  the  square  hive,  the  dove  tail 
and  the  Egyptian  hive.  The  excellence  of  these 
hives  is  attested  by  their  large  sale.  Mr.  Wilson 
has  about  one  hundred  colonies  of  bees,  and  finds 
their  culture  to  be  a  profitable  business.  In  poli- 
tics he  takes  an  active  interest  in  and  is  a  stanch 
supporter  of  the  Republican  party.  He  was  for- 
merljf  Chairman  of  the  County  Republican  Cen- 
tral Committee.  He  has  served  as  School  Director, 
and  at  this  writing  is  one  of  the  elHcient  Trustees 
of  the  township.  He  belongs  to  the  Farmers'  Mu- 
tual Benefit  Association,  and   was   a  delegate   to 


the  National  Convention  in  Indianapolis  in  1891. 
Mr.  Wilson  and  his  wife  hold  membersiiip  with 
the  Christian  Church.  His  life  has  been  an  hon- 
orable, upright  one,  which  has  gained  him  the 
confidence  and  high  regard  of  his  fellow-towns- 
men. He  is  also  a  self-made  man,  whose  success 
is  due  entirely  to  his  own  efforts. 


"^  A.  DRIEMEYEK,  of  Pinekneyville,  is 
[@Oi  numbered  among  the  officials  of  Perry 
County,  holding  the  office  of  Circuit  Clerk, 
a  position  to  which  he  is  justly  entitled, 
for  he  is  one  of  the  valued  citizens  of  the  com- 
munity, ever  ready  to  advance  public  interests. 
He  was  born  in  the  city  which  is  still  his  home, 
September  5,  1859,  and  is  a  son  of  Henrj'  Drie- 
meyer,  who  was  a  native  of  Germany  and  came 
to  this  country  when  a  young  man.  For  a  quar- 
ter of  a  century  he  was  one  of  the  leading  and 
most  prosperous  merchants  of  Pinckne\'ville,  and 
is  now  here  living  retired,  enjoying  the  rest  which 
he  has  so  trulj-  earned  and  richly  deserves. 

Mr.  Driemcyer  spent  the  days  of  his  boyhood 
and  youth  in  Pinekneyville,  and  acquired  his  lit- 
erai'}'  education  in  its  public  schools.  Later  he 
attended  a  commercial  college  to  fit  himself  for  a 
practical  business  career,  and  then  entered  his  fa- 
ther's store,  where  he  served  as  clerk  for  a  time. 
During  President  Cleveland's  first  administration 
he  was  appointed  United  States  Mail  Agent  on  the 
Illinois  Central  Railroad  between  Chicago  and 
Cairo,  with  headquarters  in  the  former  city.  After 
five  years,  in  1891,  he  resigned  that  position  to 
take  charge  of  his  father's  business,  to  which  his 
energies  were  devoted  at  the  time  when  the  Dem- 
ocratic party  brought  him  to  the  front  and  nomi- 
nated him  for  the  position  of  Circuit  Clerk.  He 
ran  against  Charles  Roe,  a  most  popular  and  highly 
respected  man,  who  for  thirty  years  had  filled  the 
office.  No  previous  Democratic  candidate  had  re- 
ceived any  noticeable  support  in  comparison  with 
that  of  the  Republican  nominee,  but  the  great 
popularity  of  Mr.  Driemeyer  swept  the  county, 
and  he  was  elected  by  a  good  majority.  This  was 
indeed   an    honor,   and    his    friends    were   justly 


724 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


proud  of  his  success,  which  placed  him  in  the 
front  rank  as  one  of  the  rising  and  leading  young 
politicians  of  the  county. 

In  1884  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  Mr.  Drie- 
meyer  and  Miss  Lucy  Van  Kenren,  of  Du  Quoin, 
and  to  them  have  been  born  a  son  and  daughter, 
Henry,  aged  six;  and  Ida,  a  little  maiden  of  three 
summers.  Mr.  and  INIrs.  Driome3'er  are  well  known 
people  of  this  community  and  hold  an  enviable 
position  in  social  circles  where  true  worth  and 
intelligence  are  received  as  the  passports  into  good 
society.  His  popularity  was  attested  b3'  his  elec- 
tion, which  indicated  that  his  friends  were  manj'. 


eHARLES  WEINBERG,  one  of  the  wealthy 
citizens  of  Du  Quoin,  is  a  native  of  Ger- 
many. He  was  born  in  Mecklenburg,  June 
SO,  1825,  and  is  a  son  of  Frederick  Weinberg,  who 
was  a  tailor  by  trade  and  lived  and  died  in  his  na- 
tive land.  Our  subject  was  educated  in  the  public 
schools  of  Germany,  which,  according  to  the  laws 
of  that  country,  he  attended  until  fourteen  years 
of  age.  He' then  became  a  shepherd,  and  was  thus 
employed  until  he  had  reached  the  age  of  twenty- 
six,  when,  in  18.51,  he  emigrated  to  America.  He 
reached  this  countr3-  without  a  dollar  in  his  pocket, 
but,  nothing  daunted,  he  started  out  to  seek  a  live- 
lihood, and  the  difficulties  in  his  path  he  has  over- 
come by  perseverance  and  determined  effort. 

Mr.  Weinberg  spent  one  year  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y., 
and  then  went  to  Maryland,  wiiere  he  worked  in 
the  mines  until  1858.  That  year  witnessed  his  ar- 
rival in  Du  Quoin.  He  commenced  work  in  the 
mines  of  St.  John,  and  by  saving  his  earnings  he  was 
soon  enabled  to  purchase  an  interest  in  the  mine, 
becoming  one  of  the  owners  of  the  old  Union 
mines.  He  has  led  a  busy  and  useful  life,  and  his 
untiring  efforts  have  brought  him  a  high  degree  of 
success.  He  has  never  been  afraid  of  labor,  in  fact 
indolence  and  idleness  are  utterly  foreign  to  his 
nature.  He  successfully  continued  his  mining 
operations  until  1889,  when  he  retired  from  that 
line  of  business  and  invested  his  capital  in  Du 
Quoin  property.  He  now  owns  one  of  the  finest 
brick  blocks  on  the  west  side,  together  with  several 


houses,  which  he  rents,  and  the  large  furniture  store 
which  is  carried  on  by  his  sons. 

In  1854  Mr.  Weinberg  was  united  in  marriage 
witli  Miss  Elizabeth  Trescher.  who  was  also  a  native 
of  Germany,  and  to  them  have  been  born  seven  chil- 
dren. John,  who  is  engaged  in  the  furniture  busi- 
ness, married  Amelia  Knauer,  and  thev  have  four 
children:  Charles,  Mina,  Toinette  and  Emma; 
Annie  is  the  wife  of  Henry  Croessman,  a  jeweler, 
and  the}'  have  one  child,  Harlej';  Lena  has  for  ten 
years  successfully  engaged  in  teaching  in  the  pub- 
lic schools  of  Du  Quoin;  Philip  is  interested  in 
coalmining;  Mary  is  the  wife  of  Christ  Bergman, 
a  clerk  in  the  store  of  W.  E.  Brookings;  Charles  is 
engaged  in  the  furniture  business;  Katie  is  the 
wife  of  Frank  Meek,  a  telegraph  operator  of  Du 
Quoin,  by  whom  she  has  one  child,  Edgar. 

Mr.  Weinberg  and  his  familj-  are  all  members  of 
the  Lutheran  Church,  in  which  heservesas  Trustee, 
and  to  the  support  of  which  he  contributes  liber- 
ally. He  is  a  public  spirited  and  progressive  citi- 
zen,who  manifests  a  commendable  interest  in  every- 
thing pertaining  to  the  welfare  of  the  community. 
In  politics  he  has  been  a  Republican  since  the  or- 
ganization of  the  party,  and  in  liis  social  relations 
is  an  Odd  Fellow.  The  success  of  his  life  seems  al- 
most phenomenal,  but  is  the  result  of  well  directed 
efforts,  enterprise  and  industi y  guided  by  good 
judgment. 


J~|OHN  D.  HAYS,  one  of  the  representative 
I  and  enterprising  citizens  of  Elkville,  who 
I  occupies  a  prominent  place  in  social,  busi- 
'  ness  and  official  circles,  well  deserves  repre- 
sentation in  this  volume,  for  he  has  aided  mate- 
rially in  the  growth  and  progress  of  the  county 
and  in  its  upbuilding  and  advancement.  His  birth 
occurred  in  Washington  County,  Ohio,  in  1852. 
He  is  a  son  of  William  Hays,  who  in  1860  re- 
moved with  his  family-  to  Perr^'  Count}-,  111.  Our 
subject,  who  was  then  a  j-outh  of  eight  summers, 
acquired  his  education  and  was  reared  to  manhood 
in  that  county. 

In  the  year  1880,  INIr.  Hajs  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Ellen  Schwartz,  daughter  of  Will- 
iam and  Sarah  (Kimmel)  Schwartz.     Two  children 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


725 


have  been  born  of  this  union,  Herbert  and  Will- 
iam. The  parents  are  well  known  people  of  this 
community  and  have  a  large  circle  of  friends  and 
acquaintances  throughout  the  county-. 

In  1881,  Mr.  Hays  removed  with  his  family  to 
Elkville  and  established  a  general  store,  which  he 
still  carries  on.  He  is  doing  a  lucrative  business 
along  that  line,  having  secured  an  excellent  trade. 
He  carries  a  full  and  ccimplete  stock  of  general 
merchandise,  and  by  his  earnest  endeavors  to 
please  his  customers  and  bj-  his  fair  and  upright 
dealing,  he  has  won  the  confidence  and  good  will 
of  all.  In  addition  to  this  enterprise  he  also  owns 
and  manages  a  good  farm,  comprising  one  hun- 
dred and  sixty  acres  of  valuable  land.  The  place 
is  stocked  with  fine  horses,  many  of  which  re- 
ceive mention  in  the  American  Trotting  Register. 
He  is  a  lover  of  the  noble  steed,  and  takes  great 
delight  in  the  fine  animals  upon  his  place. 

Mr.  Haj's  has  been  frequently  called  upon  to 
serve  in  positions  of  public  trust,  for  his  worth 
and  ability  are  recognized  by  his  fellow-towns- 
men. He  is  now  serving  as  Town  Clerk  and  also 
as  Treasurer.  He  has  also  filled  the  office  of  Post- 
master, but  when  President  Cleveland  became 
chief  magistrate  he  resigned  the  position.  He  has 
ever  proved  a  capable  and  efficient  officer,  dis- 
charging his  duties  with  a  promptness  and  fidelity 
which  have  won  him  high  commendation.  His  res- 
idence, which  is  situated  awa}*  from  the  heart  of 
the  town,  is  regarded  as  the  finest  in  Elkville,  and 
was  secured  by  that  indefatigable  industry'  which 
was  a  distinguishing  trait  of  his  ancestors. 


v(9)^   ^C!^4  ^(a)J 

(^  '^f^f' ~^^ 

ON.  CHARLES  GEUMALLEY.  ex- Associate 
Judge  of  Perry  County,  who  is  now  en- 
gaged in  the  jeweliy  business  in  Pinckney- 
ville,is  one  of  the  worth}-  citizens  which 
QfCrmanj'  has  furnished  to  this  community.  He 
was  born  in  Bavaria,  April  24,  1838,  and  is  a  son 
of  Jacob  Geumalley.  who  was  a  farmer,  and  who  in 
1844  emigrated  to  the  New  World.  He  took  up  his 
residence  in  Penns\ivania,    where  his  remaining 


days  were  passed,  his  death  occurring  in  1866.  He 
married  Marguerite  Ring,  who  was  also  a  native 
of  Bavaria.  She  departed  this  life  in  Pinckney- 
ville  in  1870.  In  their  family  were  fifteen  chil- 
dren, seven  sons  and  eight  daughters,  but  our  sub- 
ject is  the  only  one  of  the  brothers  now  living, 
and  only  two  of  the  sisters  still  survive:  Mary, 
the  wife  of  a  jeweler  of  Chicago;  and  Madelina, 
who  is  married  to  a  farmer  of  Stewardson,  111. 

Charles  Geumalley  was  a  lad  of  only  twelve 
summers  when  he  began  to  learn  the  jeweler's  trade 
in  Pottsville,  Pa.  In  1857,  with  the  hope  of  bet- 
tering his  financial  condition,  he  came  to  the  west, 
locating  in  Chicago,  where  he  worked  at  his  trade 
for  a  little  more  than  a  year.  In  1858  he  came  to 
Pinckneyville,  where  he  embarked  in  business  on 
his  own  account  on  a  small  scale.  From  the  be- 
ginning he  prospered,  his  trade  constantly  increas- 
ing, while  he  continually  increased  his  stock  to 
meet  the  growing  demand.  His  well  directed  ef- 
forts and  good  business  ability  have  brought  to  him 
a  handsome  competency. 

In  1863  Mr.  Geumalley  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Barbara  Mann,  daughter  of  John  Mann, 
one  of  the  pioneer  settlers  of  Monroe  County,  111. 
Thej- now  have  five  children:  Gertrude,  wife  of 
Charles  Bishof,  of  Decatur,  111.;  Mary,  Laura,  Fan- 
nie and  Charles  W.,  who  are  still  with  their  par- 
ents. Their  home  is  one  of  the  finest  residences 
in  th^eit}-. 

In  connection  with  his  jewelr}'  business,  Mr. 
Geumalley  is  interested  in  other  enterprises.  He 
is  a  stockholder  and  Vice-President  of  the  Pinck- 
neyville Milling  Company;  was  for  seven  years 
President  of  the  creamery  company,  and  owns 
considerable  real  estate.  In  religious  belief  he  is  a 
Catholic,  and  in  politics  he  has  ever  been  a  stal- 
wart Democrat.  He  has  served  as  County  Com- 
missioner, and  for  three  years  was  one  of  the  Asso- 
ciate Judges  of  the  count}'.  For  the  past  twenty- 
eight  years  he  has  been  City  Treasurer  of  Pinck- 
neyville, an  honor  which  is  well  merited  by  prompt 
service  and  fidelity  to  duty.  His  frequent  re- 
elections  also  indicate  his  popularity'  and  the  hiwh 
regard  in  which  he  is  held  by  his  fellow-citizens. 
There  is  probably  no  one  in  Perry  County  who  is 
held  in  higher  esteem  than   the   gentleman    whose 


726 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


name  heads  tliis  record,  and  it  therefore  gives  us 
great  pleasure  to  present  to  our  readers  this  sketch 
of  his  life,  knowing  that  it  will  be  received  with 
interest  by  many  of  his  friends. 


W.  DUNN,  M.  D.,  who  for  some  time  has 
'!   made    his    home   in    Du  Quoin,  where  he 


is  successfully  engaged  in  the  practice  of 
medicine,  claims  Tennessee  as  the  place  of 
his  nativity.  He  was  born  in  Pocahontas  Novem- 
ber 25, 1852,  and  is  a  son  of  James  P.  and  Minerva 
(Wooten)  Dunn.  His  mother  died  before  lie  was 
two  years  of  age.  The  father  was  born  near  Hunts- 
ville,  Ala.,  January  1,  1812,  and  was  a  minister  in 
the  Missionary  Baptist  Church,  preaching  in  Ten- 
nessee, Mississippi,  Indiana  and  Hlinois  for  more 
than  fort}'  years.  In  1868  he  located  in  Corinth, 
111.,  where  he  lived  until  his  death,  in  1888.  He 
had  the  respect  and  confidence  of  all  who  knew 
him,  and  his  loss  was  deeply-  mourned.  His  father, 
Daniel  Dunn,  who  was  also  born  in  Alabama,  was 
a  prominent  and  wealthy  stockman  and  died  in 
his  native  state  about  forty  years  ago.  The  Doc- 
tor bad  three  sisters  and  four  brothers,  but  only 
one  sister  arid  two  brothers  are  now  living.  They 
are;  M.  C,  a  farmer  of  Texas;  E.  E.,  who  follows 
farming  near  Poplar  Bluff,  Mo.;  and  Jalia,  wife  of 
George  Wra}-,  a  farmer  residing  near  tht  old 
Dunn  homestead  in  Tennessee. 

The  Doctor  being  the  son  of  a  preacher  had  no 
settled  home  in  his  boyhood.  His  education  was 
such  as  was  afforded  by  the  schools  of  the  com- 
munity in  which  they  happened  to  live.  At  the 
age  of  twenty  he  started  out  to  make  his  own  way 
in  the  world,  and  the  first  thing  he  determined 
upon  was  to  provide  himself  with  a  more  thorough 
education,  but  he  had  no  means  and  had  to  work 
his  way  through  school.  At  the  end  of  three 
years  he  had  fitted  himself  for  teaching  and  em- 
barked in  that  profession,  which  he  followed  for 
twelve  years  in  Franklin  .and  Williamson  Coun- 
ties, 111. 

At  the  age  of  twent3'-one,  in  1873,  Dr.  Dunn 
married  Miss  Mary  Jordan,  and  to  them  were  born 
three  cliildren,  James,  Luther  and  Lulu.    The  wife 


and  mother  died  in  1878.  Three  children  have 
been  born  of  his  second  marriage,  Leonard,  Theo- 
dore and  Everett. 

While  engaged  in  teaching,  our  subject  spent 
his  leisure  hours  in  the  study  of  medicine,  and  also 
mastered  telegraphy,  but  never  made  any  practical 
use  of  the  latter.  After  becoming  well  versed  in 
the  science  of  medicine,  he  gave  up  teaching  and 
entered  the  office  of  Dr.  D.  L.  Carter,  of  Thomp- 
sonville.  111.,  with  whom  he  continued  his  reading 
for  a  year,  when  he  became  a  student  in  the  Amer- 
ican Eclectic  Medical  College  of  St.  Louis,  from 
which  he  was  graduated  on  the  3d  of  June,  1889. 
He  then  engaged  in  practice  for  a  year  in  St.  Louis, 
and  iilso  spent  one  year  in  Thompsonville,  after 
which  he  came  to  Du  Quoin,  where  he  has  since 
built  up  a  large  and  lucrative  pr.actice,  the  result 
of  his  skill  and  ability.  He  has  gained  an  envia- 
ble reputation,  which  is  well  deserved.  In  politics 
he  is  a  Republican,  but  has  never  sought  or  de- 
sired political  prefei'inent. 


\fl  OSEPH  SINGER,  who  is  engaged  in  general 
farming  on  section  2,  township  7,  range  7, 
^^^  Randolph  County,  is  a  native  of  Prussia. 
^//  He  was  born  on  the  15th  of  March,  1836, 
and  is  a  son  of  John  and  Rosa  (Wengkin)  Singer, 
both  of  whom  were  born  in  Prussia,  although  the 
latter  was  of  Polish  parentage.  They  spent  their 
entire  lives  in  their  native  land. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  attended  the  public 
schools  of  his  native  country,  and  thus  acquired  a 
good  education.  As  he  approached  years  of  matur- 
ity and  thought  of  the  future  before  him  in  which 
he  would  be  dependent  upon  his  own  resources,  he 
resolved  to  seek  a  home  in  the  New  World.  He  was 
a  young  man  of  eighteen  years  when  he  bade  adieu 
to  friends  and  Fatherland  and  crossed  the  broad 
Atlantic  to  America.  On  reaching  this  country,  he 
at  once  made  his  way  to  Wisconsin,  where  he  se- 
cured work  as  a  farm  hand,  and  was  thus  employed 
four  years.  On  the  expiration  of  that  period  he 
came  to  Chester,  Randolph  County,  and  with  the 
capital  that  he  had  acquired  by  his  own  industry 
and  perseverance  he  purchased  the  farm  on  which 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


727 


he  now  resides.  He  has  since  devoted  his  time  and 
energies  untiringly  to  agricultural  pursuits,  and  as 
the  result  of  his  continued  labors,  his  well  directed 
efforts  and  good  business  ability,  he  has  acquired 
a  comfortable  competence. 

On  the  1st  of  March,  1861,  Mr.  Singer  was  mar- 
ried to  Miss  Sophia  Jany,  a  daughter  of  John  and 
Anna  Jany.  who  were  both  natives  of  Prussia,  but 
in  an  early  day  located  in  Randolph  County.  The 
union  of  our  subject  and  his  wife  has  been  blessed 
with  a  famil}'  of  nine  children,  and  with  the  ex- 
ception of  Andrew,  who  died  at  the  age  of  two 
years,  all  are  3-et  living  and  are  still  with  their  par- 
ents. They  are,  Julia,  Mary,  Anna,  Frank,  John, 
Joseph,  Herman  and  Edward. 

Mr.  Singer  and  his  family  are  all  consistent  and 
faithful  members  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church. 
The}'  are  people  of  prominence  in  this  communitj', 
widel}^  and  favorably  known,  and  it  is  with  pleas- 
ure that  we  present  to  our  readers  a  record  of  tiieir 
lives.  In  his  political  views,  Mr.  Singer  has  always 
been  a  supporter  of  the  Democracj',  but  has  never 
aspired  to  putolic  office,  preferring  to  devote  his  en- 
tire time  and  attention  to  his  business  interests,  in 
which  he  has  met  with  a  signal  and  well  merited 
success. 

J.  RUSHING  is  the  Postmaster  of  Pinck- 
ney  ville,  and  in  the  discharge  of  his  public 
,v  duties  has  won  high  commendation,  for  he 
^^is  ever  true  to  the  trust  reposed  in  him, 
whether  it  be  public  or  private.  This  is  his  native 
cit3',  his  birth  having  here  occurred  October  18, 
1863.  His  father,  Evan  B.  Rushing,  was  born  in 
Bedford  County,  Tenn.,  June  17,  1827,  and  came 
to  Perry  County  with  his  father,  Joel  Rushing,  in 
1833.  The  latter  was  born  in  North  Carolina, 
December  26,  1799,  and  was  a  prominent  citizen 
and  honored  pioneer  of  this  county.  He  served 
as  County  Commissioner,  and  under  iiis  direction 
the  old  part  of  the  present  court  house  was  built. 
He  was  a  leading  member  of  the  Baptist  Church, 
did  much  to  promote  its  interests,  and  led  a  most 
exemplary  life.  His  death  occurred  in  Pinckney- 
ville,  July  10,  1878.     His  father,  whose  name  was 


Joseph  Rushing,  was  also  born  in  North  Carolina, 
and  died  in  Tennessee. 

Evan  B.  Rushing  acquired  his  education  in  the 
public  schools  of  Perrj'  Count}',  and  in  his  early 
life  engaged  in  teaching  school  for  a  time.  In 
1856,  he  was  elected  to  the  office  of  Circuit  Clerk 
of  the  county,  and  thus  served  for  two  terms,  dur- 
ing which  time  he  read  law  and  became  thoroughly 
acquainted  with  all  the  branches  of  the  profession. 
In  1868,  he  passed  an  examination  and  was  ad- 
mitted to  the  Bar.  The  same  year  he  was  appointed 
Master  in  Chancery,  and  was  several  times  re-ap- 
pointed to  that  office,  which  he  continued  to  fill 
until  1888,  his  term  of  service  being  ended  by 
death.  He  was  also  President  of  the  Town  Board 
and  Trustee  of  the  village,  and  in  whatever  office 
he  was  called  upon  to  fill  he  was  always  found 
prompt,  faithful  and  true  in  the  discharge  of  his 
public  duties.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the 
Perry  Count}'  Agricultural  Society,  and  was  rec- 
ognized as  one  of  the  leading  citizens  of  this  com- 
munity. He  was  married  March  20,  1849,  to  Le- 
titia,  daughter  of  Reuben  and  Elizabeth  (James) 
Kelly.  She  was  born  in  Perry  County,  February 
6,  1833,  and  died  September  28,  1864.  In  their 
famil}'  were  three  children,  a  son  and  two  daugh- 
ters. Susie  is  now  the  wife  of  T.  S.  Campbell,  a 
druggist  of  Pincknej'ville,  and  Mary  A.  is  the  wife 
of  F.  M.  Roe,  a  merchant  of  Pinckneyville. 

In  the  schools  of  his  native  town  our  subject 
was  educated.  He  entered  upon  his  business  career 
when  a  small  bo}'  as  clerk  in  a  store,  and  at  the  age 
of  nineteen  was  proprietor  of  a  grocery  store, 
which  he  successfully  carried  on  for  five  years.  He 
was  then  called  to  public  office,  and  served  for 
three  years  as  Deputy  Count}-  Clerk  of  Perry 
County,  which  position  he  at  length  resigned  to 
accept  the  position  of  Postmaster  in  November, 
1893.  He  was  appointed  without  opposition,  and 
is  now  faithfully  discharging  the  duties  of  the 
office.  In  April,  1893,  he  was  elected  Alderman 
from  the  First  Ward,  and  is  now  serving  in  that 
capacity. 

Mrs.  Rushing  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Maggie 
Strait,  and  is  a  daughter  of  J.  D.  Strait,  who  was 
a  prominent  pioneer  of  Perry  County.  One  child 
graces  the  union  of  our  subject  and  his  wife,  Evan, 


728 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


who  was  born  in  January,  1887.  Mr.  Rushing  has 
always  been  a  Democrat  in  politics,  and  takes  an 
active  interest  in  everything  that  tends  to  insure 
the  success  of  his  party.  Socially,  he  is  a  Royal 
Arch  Mason,  and  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  most 
popular  young  men  of  Pinckneyville,  a  fact  which 
indicates  a  well  spent  life,  as  he  has  always  lived 
in  this  place. 

■  ;  I  l'^^4  !■  I  • 

1 OBERT  P.  THOMPSON  was  born  in  Ran- 
dolph County,  111.,  in  1838,  and  was  a 
\V  worthy  representative  of  one  of  the  hon- 
W^  ored  pioneer  families  of  this  communit}-, 
a  family  prominent  in  the  history  of  the  commu- 
nity, in  its  upbuilding,  advancement  and  improve- 
ment. The  farm  upon  which  he  located  was  set- 
tled by  his  father  in  1818,  the  year  in  which  the 
state  was  admitted  to  the  Union.  His  parents 
were  James  and  Mary  Thompson,  both  of  whom 
were  natives  of  Randolph  County,  and  here  they 
spent  their  entire  lives. 

Our  subject  attended  the  district  schools  of  the 
neighborhood,  and  there  acquired  a  fair  education. 
When  he  had  mastered  the  common  branches  of 
learning  he  studied  surveying  under  the  direction 
of  his  father,  and  having  thoroughly  mastered 
the  business,  he  was  in  1859  elected  Count}'  Sur- 
veyor of  Randolph  County,  proving  a  capable  and 
efficient  officer.  He  afterward  engaged  in  teach- 
ing school  in  different  parts  of  the  county,  and  in 
this  undertaking  was  alike  successful.  In  1863,  in 
connection  with  his  brother  J.  D.,he  got  up  a  map 
of  Randolph  County  from  the  Government  sur- 
veys. In  1866  and  1867  he  served  as  Deputy 
Sheriff  under  Capt.  John  T.  McBride. 

On  the  11th  of  March,  1873,  Mr.  Thompson  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Nancy  Miller,  of 
Lively  Prairie.  The  lady  is  a  daughter  of  John  and 
Nancy  (Boyd)  Miller,  both  of  whom  were  natives 
of  South  Carolina,  but  during  childhood  came  with 
their  respective  parents  to  Randolph  County, 
where  they  were  reared  and  married.  From  that 
time  until  their  deaths  they  continued  residents 
of  this  county.  Mrs.  Thompson  was  their  only 
child.  Unto  our  subject  and  his  wife  were  born 
three  children,  but  two  of  the  number  died  in  in- 


fancy. One  is  still  living,  Miss  Ada,  who  is  at- 
tending the  Chester  schools.  She  and  her  mother 
made  their  home  in  Chester. 

After  his  marriage,  Mr.  Thompson  turned  his 
attention  to  farming,  which  he  carried  on  continu- 
ously until  1887,  when  he  removed  to  Chester 
with  his  family.  During  his  residence  in  that 
place  he  twice  held  the  office  of  Deputy  County 
Clerk,  and  was  several  times  elected  Chief  Magis- 
trate. In  the  various  offices  he  filled  he  ever  dis- 
charged his  duties  with  a  promptness  and  fidelity 
which  won  him  high  commendation  and  fre- 
quently won  his  re-election.  He  was  always  true 
to  every  trust,  whether  public  or  private,  and  had 
the  high  regard  of  all  with  whom  business  or 
social  relations  brought  him  in  contact.  His  loss 
was  mourned  not  only  by  his  immediate  family, 
but  throughout  the  community  as  well,  for  he  had 
many  warm  friends.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
Methodist  Church,  to  which  his  wife  also  belonged. 
She  was  a  most  estimable  lad}',  possessed  of  many 
excellencies  of  character,  and  like  her  husband  is 
widely  and   favorably  known   in   the.  community. 


OHN  L.  OZBURN,  the  efficient  bookkeeper 
of  the  Jackson  County  Milling  and  Eleva- 
tor Company,  is  also  connected  with  other 
,^_^  business  interests  of  Murphysboro.  He  is 
a  Director  in  the  Bloomington  Building  and  Loan 
Association,  is  President  of  the  Board  of  Apprais- 
ers, and  is  a  stockholder  in  the  Southern  Illinois 
Building  and  Loan  and  the  Jackson  County 
Homestead  and  Loan  Associations.  Business 
ability  and  an  upright  life  have  placed  him  in  the 
foremost  rank  of  the  leading  citizens  of  this  com- 
munity. 

Born  near  Brownsville,  111.,  February  20,  1852, 
our  subject  is  a  son  of  Col.  Lindorf  Ozburn,  a  na- 
tive of  North  Carolina,  who  came  to  Jackson 
County  in  an  early  day.  For  a  time  he  operated 
a  horse-mill  at  Brownsville,  and  in  1854  came  to 
Murphysboro,  where  he  built  the  Lower  Mill.  In 
1862    he  aided  in    raising    the    Thirty-first   Illi- 


James  G . Sympson 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


731 


nois  Infantry,  and  was  mustered  in  as  Quarter- 
master of  the  regiment.  At  Jackson,  Tenn.,  he 
was  made  Colonel  of  General  Logan's  old  regi- 
ment, and  continued  to  lead  his  command  until 
forced  to  resign,  in  1864,  on  account  of  physical 
disal)ility,  caused  by  a  fall  from  a  horse.  He 
wedded  Diza  Glen,  a  native  of  this  state  and  an 
own  cousin  of  General  Logan.  Mrs.  Ozliurn  still 
makes  her  home  in  Murphysboro.  Of  the  family 
of  seven  children,  five  are  yet  living,  namely: 
John  L.;  Lillie,  wife  of  Judge  Roberts,  of  Carbon- 
dale;  Lou,  of  Murphysboro;  Al,  conductor  on  the 
Mobile  &  Ohio  Railroad;  and  A.  M.,  Rate  Clerk 
on  the  Missouri  Pacific  Railroad  at  St.  Louis. 

In  the  common  schools  John  Ozburii  acquired 
his  education,  and  from  early  boyhood  worked  in 
ills  father's  mill.  He  afterwards  became  weigh- 
master  of  the  mines  and  was  with  the  Gartside 
Coal  Company  for  four  years.  He  was  then  weigh- 
master  and  bookkeeper  at  the  Lewis  mines  for 
three  yeais,  after  which  he  returned  to  the  old 
company  and  served  as  head  bookkeeper  for  ten 
years.  In  1893  he  became  bookkeeper  for  the 
Jackson  County  Milling  and  Elevator  Company, 
which  position  he  now  fills. 

In  Mt.  Vernon,  111.,  in  1874,  Mr.  Ozburn  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Fannie  Morris, 
a  native  of  Middleton.  The}'  have  three  children: 
Harry,  Assistant  Postmaster  of  Murphysboro, 
Thomas  and  George.  Mrs.  Ozburn  belongs  to  the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church  North.  Since  1881 
Mr.  Ozburn  has  been  a  member  of  the  Ancient  Or- 
der of  United  Workmen,  also  belongs  to  the 
Knights  of  Pythias  and  is  a  charter  member  of 
the  Sons  of  Veterans,  of  which  he  has  served  as 
Captain. 

From  187.5  until  1879  Mr.  Ozburn  served  as 
County  Surve^'or,  being  elected  on  tlie  Democratic 
ticket.  His  political  views,  however,  were  under- 
going a  change,  and  in  1880  he  joined  the  ranks 
of  the  Republican  part}'.  In  1885  he  was  elected 
City  Treasurer  for  a  term  of  two  years.  On  the 
17th  of  June.  1889,  he  was  appointed  Postmaster 
by  President  Harrison,  and  filled  the  office  until 
October  16,  1893.  His  official  duties  have  ever 
been  discharged  with  a  promptness  and  fidelity 
that  have   won  him   high  commendation.     He   is 


true  to  every  public  and  private  trust,  and  the 
community  recognizes  in  him  a  valued  citizen. 
He  is  now  a  prominent  Republican  candidate  for 
the  office  of  County  Clerk. 


Ill  AMES  G.  SYMPSON,  a  native  of  Randolph 
I  ■  County,  was  born  and  reared  on  section 
^^  8,  township  8,  range  5.  He  was  the  son  of 
^^fy  William  and  Nancy  (Knox)  Syrapson,  na- 
tives of  Kentucky  and  Tennessee  respectively, 
who  came  to  Illinois  in  an  early  day,  and  were 
numbered  among  the  first  settlers  in  this  part  of 
the  western  wilds.  They  are  now  deceased,  the 
father  having  died  February  27,  1850,  and  the 
mother  March  21,  1892,  at  the  age  of  about  eighty- 
two  j'ears.  They  had  a  family  of  seven  children, 
of  whom  the  fifth  was  James  G.  He  was  born 
August  11,  1839,  and  departed  this  life  July  14, 
1892,  at  the  homestead  on  section  8,  where  he  had 
lived  since  1885.  During  his  boyhood  he  attended 
the  common  schools  and  grew  to  manhood,  sur- 
rounded by  the  usual  environments  of  pioneer 
life. 

At  the  age  of  twenty,  Mr.  Sympson  was  united 
in  marriage  with  Miss  Mary  E.,  daughter  of  James 
and  Gillah  (Kreider)  Barber,  the  former  probably 
a  native  of  Ohio,  while  the  latter  was  born  in 
Virginia  and  was  of  German  descent.  When  a 
young  man,  James  Barber  accompanied  his  father 
and  the  other  members  of  the  family  on  their  re- 
moval from  Ohio  to  Illinois,  and  liis  marriage  oc- 
curred at  Kaskaskia,  this  state.  He  responded  to 
his  country's  call  for  soldiers  at  the  time  of  the 
Black  Hawk  War,  and  was  ever  a  loj'al  citizen 
and  upright  man.  His  death  occurred  in  May, 
1877.  His  widow  is  still  living  (1894),  and  has 
now  attained  four  score  years. 

To  our  subject  and  his  wife  were  born  eleven 
children,  eight  of  whom  grew  to  maturity.  Their 
record  is  as  follows:  Nancy,  who  is  the  wife  of 
Andrew  Brownfield,  is  living  near  Ava,  111.;  Emma 
died  in  infancy;  Gillah  died  when  eleven  jears 
old;  Florence,  James,  Edward,  Annie,  Bertha,  Lo- 
gan and  Grace  are  at  home  with  their  mother  and 


732 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


are  attending  school;  John,  the  seventh  in  order 
of  birth,  died  in  infancy. 

In  religious  connections  Mr.  Sympson  was  a 
member  of  the  Christian  Cliurch,  as  are  his  good 
wife  and  all  the  children,  with  the  exception  of 
the  three  youngest.  In  1872  our  subject  moved 
with  his  famil}'  to  Paradise,  Perry  County,  this 
state,  where  he  resided  for  a  twelvemonth.  Thence 
he  went  to  Bollinger  County,  Mo.,  and  sojourned 
for  two  years  near  Marquand.  He  had  hoped  to 
there  regain  his  health,  but,  finding  no  relief,  he 
returned  to  his  native  county  and  resided  until 
his  death.  Mrs.  Sympson  continues  to  conduct 
the  homestead  of  one  hundred  acres,  which  was  iier 
birth[)iace.  She  is  an  excellent  lady,  amiable  and 
hospitable,  and  is  training  her  children  for  posi- 
tions of  usefulness  in  business  and  social  circles. 

In  1862  Mr.  Sympson  enlisted  in  Company  A, 
Eightieth  Illinois  Infantry,  and  served  until  the 
close  of  the  war.  He  was  twice  wounded,  and  lost 
a  foot  in  the  service  of  his  country.  He  was  a 
member  of  Rock  wood  Post  No.  734,  G.  A.  R.  A 
Republi(!an  throughout  his  entire  life,  he  cast  his 
first  vote  for  Abraham  Lincoln  in  1860.  He  was 
highly  respected  by  all  with  whom  he  had  social 
or  business  relations,  and  his  demise  was  mourned 
by  a  large  number  of    friends   and   acquaintances. 


■^UDGE  HENRY  BOUCHER,  a  highly  re- 
spected citizen,  who  for  many  years  has 
lived  in  Murphysboro,  is  now  serving  as 
Police  Magistrate,  and  is  also  engaged  in 
the  collection  business.  He  was  born  in  County 
Clare,  Ireland,  on  the  River  Shannon,  November 
22,  1840,  and  is  of  French  and  Irish  descent.  His 
grandfather  was  born  in  France,  and  the  name  was 
originally  La  Bourchier.  In  1798  he  went  with 
his  parents  to  the  Emerald  Isle  and  served  with 
the  French  arm^'  in  the  war  there.  He  afterward 
became  a  merchant  of  that  countrj'. 

The  father  of  our  subject  was  also  a  merchant 
and  farmer,  and  became  well-to-do.  In  1851  he 
came  with  the  Judge  to  Illinois,  locating  near 
Carbondale,  where  his  eldest  son  followed  farm- 
ing.    His  death  there  occurred.     He  first   rijarried 


Mary  Maloney,  their  union  resulting  in  the  birth 
of  five  cliildien.  After  her  death  he  married  Mary 
O'Malle}',  who  was  born  in  County  Limerick,  Ire- 
land, and  died  in  England.  They  had  six  chil- 
dren, of  whom  the  only  survivors  are  Henry  and 
his  two  sisters,  who  married  English  ofHcers  and 
are  now  in  Australia. 

Judge  Boucher  spent  the  first  eleven  years  of 
his  life  in  the  place  of  his  birth,  and  in  1851  started 
for  the  New  World.  After  a  voyage  of  nine  weeks 
and  three  days  he  landed  at  Quebec,  Canada,  and 
by  way  of  the  Lakes  went  to  Chicago,  thence  down 
the  Illinois  and  Mississippi  Rivers  to  Grand  Tower 
and  crossed  the  country  by  foot  to  Murphysboro. 
He  was  accompanied  by  his  father,  and  they  spent 
the  first  night  with  Dr.  John  Logan.  Our  subject 
then  made  his  home  with  the  Doctor  until  the  lat- 
ter's  death,  after  which  he  went  to  the  farm  of  his 
half-brother,  Thomas  Boucher,  two  miles  south  of 
Carbondale,  there  remaining  until  he  had  attained 
his  majority.  He  was  educated  in  the  common 
schools.  Purchasing  a  farm,  he  operated  it  until 
1865,  when  he  sold  it  and  came  to  Murphysboro, 
where  he  opened  a  meat  market.  Later  he  carried 
on  a  saloon  until  1872,  when  he  purchased  two 
farms  in  Murphysboro  Township  and  began  their 
development. 

In  1860  Judge  Boucher  was  married  to  Miss 
Mary  Davin,  who  was  born  in  Maryland,  but  was 
reared  in  Cairo,  111.  After  her  death  he  wedded 
Alice  McCabe,  a  native  of  Ireland.  He  is  a  char- 
ter member  of  St.  Andrew's  Catholic  Church.  In 
politics  a  Democrat,  he  has  served  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  County  Democratic  Central  Committee 
and  has  done  much  for  the  advancement  of  his 
party.  For  three  years  he  was  acting  Marshal, 
and  helped  to  break  up  a  noted  horse  thief  gang. 

In  1875  the  Judge  was  elected  Justice  of  the 
Peace,  which  position  he  filled  for  four  years. 
He  then  again  engaged  in  farming  until  the 
spring  of  1890.  when  he  was  elected  Police  Mag- 
istrate of  the  city.  He  does  all  the  citj^  busi- 
ness and  also  engages  as  collecting  agent.  His 
prompt  and  faithful  discharge  of  public  duties  has 
won  him  high  commendation  and  secured  for  him 
the  confidence  and  good  will  of  the  communitj'. 
He  now  owns  an   eight^'-acre   farm    in    Franklin 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


733 


County,  besides  city  property.  He  is  an  early  set- 
tler, and  in  the  long  years  of  his  residence  here  he 
has  ever  borne  his  part  in  tlie  work  of  public  ad- 
vancement and  improvement. 


APT.  JOHN  T.  McBRIDE,  a  well  known  and 
influential  citizen  of  Chester,  bears  a  prom- 
inent part  in  the  various  affairs  of  the  citj'. 
He  is  social,  benevolent  and  energetic,  and  has 
held  man}'  offices  of  responsibility.  To  whatever 
position  he  is  (jailed  he  brings  a  determination  to 
faithfully  serve  his  fellow-men  and  deal  honorably 
with  them  in  every  particular. 

Our  subject  is  descended  from  one  of  the  oldest 
families  in  Randolph  County,  and  on  his  father's 
side  is  of  Scotch-Irish  blood.  His  grandfather, 
William  McBride,  was  born  in  tlie  north  of  Ireland, 
and  on  emigrating  to  America,  located  in  .South 
Carolina,  where  his  youngest  son,  the  father  of 
our  subject,  was  l)orn  in  1784.  About  1804  tlie 
grandfather  of  our  subject  with  his  family  emi- 
grated to  this  state,  making  the  journey  overland, 
and  settled  a  few  miles  south  of  the  present  town 
of  Baldwin.  In  that  early  da}-  there  were  only  a 
few  American  families  in  this  territory,  and  those 
who  were  here  were  principally  of  French  origin. 
After  a  residence  of  some  years  in  that  place,  the 
family  moved  to  the  west  side  of  the  Kaskaskia 
River,  locating  on  section  30,  township  4,  range 
8.  The  grandfather  of  our  subject  was  an  indus- 
trious man  and  a  valuable  addition  to  the  Irish 
element  of  his  community.  Though  somewhat  ad- 
vanced in  years  on  coming  to  this  state,  he  endured 
all  the  hardships  of  pioneer  life,  and  died  in  1830. 

The  father  of  our  subject  was  first  married  while 
residing  in  South  Carolina.  His  second  wife  bore 
the  maiden  name  of  iiliza  Nelson,  and  became  the 
mother  of  our  subject.  The  Nelson  family  is  of 
English  origin,  and  settled  at  an  early  date  in  the 
old  Abbcyville  District  of  South  Carolina,  where 
our  subject's  father  was  also  born.  The  parental 
family  numbered  ten  children,  of  whom  our  subject 
was  the  youngest  of  five  sons  and   the  youngest 


child  but  one.  He  is  a  native  of  this  county,  hav- 
ing been  born  on  his  father's  farm  in  township  4, 
range  8,  March  15,  1838.  Like  other  farmer  lads 
he  was  reared  on  the  home  farm,  and  received  a 
fair  education  in  the  primitive  schools  of  that  early 
day.  His  father  dying  in  1856,  our  subject,  who 
was  then  a  young  man  of  eighteen  years,  remained 
at  home  and  superintended  the  operations  of  the 
estate,  his  brothers,  with  one  exception,  having 
married  and  moved  away. 

The  maiden  name  of  our  subject's  wife  was  Mary 
A.  Wilson.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Gilbert 
and  Jennie  Wilson,  early  residents  of  this  county, 
and  became  the  wife  of  Captain  McBride  April  21, 
1859.  After  his  marriage  our  subject  continued 
to  reside  upon  the  old  homestead  until  1864,  when 
he  came  to  Chester.  Mrs.  Mary  A.  McBride  de- 
parted this  life  in  December,  1861,  leaving  a  daugh- 
ter, Eliza  G.,  now  the  wife  of  Louis  C.  Stebbins. 
In  1872  Captain  McBride  was  again  married,  the 
lady  of  his  choice  being  Miss  Mary  C.  Smith,  who 
departed  this  life  two  years  later.  Their  union 
was  blessed  by  the  birth  of  a  son,  Kinney  S.,  who 
makes  his  home  with  our  subject.  The  present 
wife  of  our  subject  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Mary 
E.  Brown. 

In  the  fall  of  1860  our  subject  was  elected  As- 
sessor and  Treasurer  of  Randolph  County,  and  was 
re-elected  in  1862.  During  his  incumbency  of  the 
offices  he  discharged  the  duties  devolving  upon 
him  in  a  most  creditable  manner.  In  the  fall  of 
1864  his  name  was  presented  asa  candidate  for  the 
office  of  Sheriff,  to  which  position  he  was  elected. 
He  was  very  popular  in  his  community,  and  would 
have  continued  in  the  office  except  for  provisions 
in  the  constitution,  which  made  him  ineligible  to 
serve  two  terms  consecutively.  In  1868,  however, 
he  was  again  chosen  to  the  position,  which  he  ably 
filled  for  the  two  following  years.  After  the  ex- 
piration of  his  term  of  office  he  devoted  himself 
assiduously  to  his  business  affairs  until  the  fall  of 
1873,  when  he  was  chosen  County  Clerk  by  a  ma- 
jority of  fifteen  hundred  votes  over  his  opponent. 
While  serving  in  that  position  he  was  elected 
Mayor  of  Chester  and  served  one  term  of  two  years. 
In  1878  he  was  chosen  to  represent  his  district  in 
the  Legislature.     He  is  a  straightforward  man,  of 


734 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


excellent  habits  and  a  kindly  disposition,  and  as 
may  already  be  inferred,  is  one  of  the  prominent 
men  of  the  count}'. 


■fl^^HILIPKIMMEL,  Sr.  Could  the  life-rec- 
ord of  this  venerable  pioneer  of  Jaclvson 
^  Count}'  be  presented  in  detail,  with  tlie 
\  many  events  of  interest  that  have  thronged 
the  passing  j^ears,  the  young  people  of  to-day 
would  find  much  therein  to  instruct  and  edify. 
While  it  is  not  our  privilege  to  narrate  minutel}' 
and  concisely  all  the  facts  connected  with  his  long 
and  useful  career,  j-et,  as  full}'  as  space  will  per- 
mit, we  will  portray  the  events  that  have  individ- 
ualized and  given  character  to  his  life. 

In  Somerset  County,  Pa.,  the  subject  of  this 
sketch  was  born  June  4,  1810,  being  the  son  of 
Abraham  and  Elizabeth  (Ileipie)  Kimmel,  natives 
of  the  Keystone  State.  His  childhood  years  were 
spent  on  his  father's  farm,  where  he  early  acquired 
a  practical  knowledge  of  agriculture.  In  the  inter- 
vals of  farm  work  it  was  his  custom  to  attend  the 
subscription  schools  of  the  home  neigliborhood. 
These  primitive  structures  were  characteristic  of 
the  times.  They  were  furnished  with  slab  seats, 
resting  on  wooden  legs,  and  a  writing  desk  for  the 
older  pupils.  Amid  such  unfavorable  surroundings 
the  boys  and  girls  were  initiated  into  the  mysteries 
of  the  alphabet,  and  occasionally  progressed  so  far 
as  to  be  well  informed  concerning  the  three  Rs. 

In  Pennsylvania,  May  4,  1832,  Mr.  Kimmel  was 
married  to  Miss  Mary  G.  Will,  who  was  born  in 
Somerset  County,  that  state,  being  a  daughter  of 
Daniel  Will,  an  early  settler  of  Jackson  County. 
Eleven  children  were  born  of  the  union,  seven  of 
whom  survive,  namely:  Mary  A.,  who  is  the  wife 
of  Andrew  Ereidline;  Daniel  W.;  Joseph;  Julia  A., 
who  married  Jefferson  Casteel;  John  Q.  A.;  Sarah 
J.,  wife  of  John  Rude,  and  Josiah.  The  deceased 
were  named,  Eliza,  James  M.,  Elizabeth  and  Henry 
K.  The  wife  and  mother,  who  was  a  lady  of  noble 
character  and  a  devoted  member  of  the  Lutheran 
Church,  passed  away  March  8,  1882. 

Accompanied  by  Samuel  Koontz,  of  Pennsyl- 
vania, Mr.  Kimmel,  in  the  spring  of  1840,  rode  on 


horseback  to  Jackson  County,  111.,  the  journey  be- 
ing made  over  bad  roads  and  through  an  unim- 
proved country.  Arriving  here,  he  bought  two 
hundred  acres  at  §10  per  acre,  and  then  went  back 
to  the  Keystone  State.  In  the  spring  of  1841  he 
again  came  to  Jackson  County,  his  family  accom- 
panying him.  He  settled  upon  the  farm  previously 
purchased,  of  which  a  few  acres  had  been  cleared, 
and  the  remainder  was  timber  land.  For  a  home 
for  his  family  he  built  a  log  house,  to  which  he 
afterward  added,  until  it  was  quite  roomy  and 
comfortable. 

In  addition  to  fanning,  Mr.  Kimmel  at  one  time 
operated  a  sawmill,  first  by  horse  power  and  later 
by  steam  power.  At  one  time  his  landed  possess- 
ions aggregated  one  thousand  acres,  a  portion  of 
which  lie  has  divided  among  his  children,  althougli 
he  still  retains  a  goodly  amount  in  his  possession. 
In  politics  a  Republican,  he  has  served  in  numer- 
ous official  capacities.  For  three  years  he  was  Su- 
pervisor of  Somerset  Township,  for  two  terms 
officiated  as  County  Superintendent  of  schools,  and 
is  now  Treasurer  of  the  township,  having  filled 
tliat  position  for  twenty  consecutive  years.  Under 
a  former  system  be  served  as  Commissioner  of 
Jackson  County.  For  several  years  he  was  Presi- 
dent of  the  Jackson  County  Agricultural  Society. 
He  has  a  store  of  interesting  reminiscences  of  the 
past,  and  is  an  entertaining  and  instructive  con- 
versationalist. 

^(  OSEPH  CRAWFORD  is  a  popular  and  en- 
terprising young  business  man,  a  member 
of  the  firm  of  Murphy,  Crawford  &  Co., 
^^f''  dealers  in  dry  goods,  of  Pinckneyville.  He 
is  one  of  the  native  sons  of  Illinois,  his  birtli  hav- 
ing occurred  in  Murpliysboro,  March  6,  1864.  His 
father,  Hugh  Crawford,  was  born  in  tlie  Buckeve 
Stale,  and  in  an  early  day  emigrated  to  Illinois, 
settling  in  Murphysboro,  wiiere  he  became  a  prom- 
inent and  leading  citizen.  The  family  is  well 
known  in  this  community,  and  its  representatives 
have  done  much  for  the  upbuilding  and  advance- 
ment of  this  locality. 

In  his  native  city  our  subject  spent  the  days  of 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


735 


his  boyhood  and  youth,  being  reared  in  his  par- 
ents' home.  His  education  was  acquired  in  the 
public  scliools,  wliere  he  pursued  his  studies  until 
sixteen  years  of  age.  He  then  started  out  in  life 
for  himself,  securing  a  position  with  the  Mobile 
(fe  Ohio  Railroad  as  train  dispatcher.  He  contin- 
ued with  tliat  company  as  a  faithful  and  trusted 
employe  for  a  period  of  four  years  and  then  re- 
signed his  position,  coming  to  Pinckne3'ville,  where 
he  has  since  made  his  home. 

Mr.  Crawford  came  to  this  citj*  in  order  to  engage 
in  merchandising,  becoming  a  member  of  the  pres- 
ent well  known  firm  of  Murphy,  Crawford  &  Co. 
This  house  is  doing  a  good  business  and  has  a  large 
trade,  which  is  constantly  increasing,  owing  to 
the  straightforward  and  honorable  dealings  of  the 
proprietors  and  their  courteous  treatment  of  pa- 
trons. Mr.  Crawford's  partner  is  Hon.  William  K. 
Murphj',  whose  only  daughter,  Sadie  V.,  became 
the  wife  of  our  subject  in  1889.  One  child  graces 
the  union  of  the  young  couple,  a  son,  who  was 
named  William  K.  in  honor  of  his  grandfather. 

In  his  political  views  Mr.  Crawford  is  a  Demo- 
crat, but  takes  no  active  part  in  politics,  as  he 
prefers  to  devote  his  entire  time  and  attention  to 
his  business  interests.  His  wife  is  a  member  of 
the  Episcopal  Church.  They  are  highly  esteemed 
citizens  of  this  community,  who  hold  an  enviable 
position  in  social  circles,  and  it  is  with  pleasure 
that  we  present  to  our  readers  this  lecord  of  their 
lives. 

— .J> ••o»o.-(§^>vi^-o*o. .S— 

"\|/OSEPH  W.  RICKERT,  who  is  engaged  in 
the  practice  of  law  in  Waterloo,  was  born 
in  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  on  the  9th  of  July,  1840. 
His  parents  were  Andrew  and  Margaret 
(Slundin)  Rickert,  the  former  a  native  of  Alsace, 
France,  and  the  latter  of  Bavaria,  Germany.  The 
father  came  to  America  in  18.32,  landing  in  New 
York  City,  whence  he  went  to  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and 
then  to  New  Orleans.  After  seven  years  spent  in 
the  latter  city  he  went  to  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  where 
he  met  and  married  Miss  Slundin.  Eight  years 
were  spent  in  Vicksburg,  and  in  1845  he  came 
with  the  family  to  Monroe  County,  111.,  locating 
south  of  New  Design,  where  he   had  purchased  a 


farm.  To  the  cultivation  of  his  land  he  devoted 
his  energies  until  his  death,  in  1880.  Unto  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Rickert  were  born  six  children,  five  of 
whom  are  still  living.     The  eldest  died  in  infancy. 

Our  subject  was  but  .Ive  years  old  when  with 
his  parents  he  came  to  this  county.  He  acquired 
his  early  education  in  the  old  time  subscription 
schools,  and  at  the  age  of  seventeen  entered  the 
St.  Louis  University,  pursuing  the  classical  course. 
He  remained  in  college  until  the  death  of  his 
mother,  in  1860,  when  he  returned  home  and 
taught  a  nine  months'  term  in  the  public  schools 
of  Waterloo.  In  September,  1861,  however,  he 
returned  to  the  university,  where  he  remained  un- 
til 1864,  when  he  was  graduated  with  the  degree  of 
A.B.  After  taking  his  post-graduate  course,  he 
received  the  degree  of  A.M.,  in  1869.  On  his  re- 
turn home,  he  engaged  in  teaching  for  about  a 
month  in  Monroe  County,  and  then  took  charge 
of  the  schools  in  Central  City,  111.  While  there 
he  began  studying  law  with  H.  K.  S.  O'Melveny, 
a  prominent  attorney,  with  whom  he  continued 
until  June,  1865,  when  he  again  came  to  Waterloo, 
and  began  studying  law  with  .lames  A.  Kennedy. 

In  the  fall  of  the  same  year,  Mr.  Rickert  went  to 
Vicksburg,  Miss.,  where  he  spent  the  winter,  and 
on  his  return  in  the  spring  he  took  charge- of  the 
school  near  his  home.  He  continued  to  teach  un- 
til 1868,  when  he  went  to  Chester,  111.,  and  became 
a  student  in  the  law  office  of  Johnson  it  Hartzell. 
On  the  4th  of  December  of  the  same  year  he  was 
admitted  to  the  Bar,  and  in  the  spring  of  the  fol- 
lowing j'ear  opened  a  law  oflice  in  Waterloo,  where 
he  has  since  been  successfully  engaged  in  practice. 
In  the  fall  of  1869  he  was  elected  County  Superin- 
tendent of  Schools,  which  position  he  filled  for 
four  years.  In  the  autumn  of  1874  he  was  elected 
a  member  of  the  Twenty-ninth  General  Assembly 
from  the  Forty-eighth  District,  and  took  a  very 
active  part  in  furthering  the  interests  of  legisla- 
tion. He  was  prominently  connected  with  the 
passage  of  road  laws  for  counties  not  under  town- 
ship organization.  In  1876  he  was  elected  Prose- 
cuting Attorney,  and  filled  that  office  for  eight 
consecutive  years. 

Mr.  Rickert  was  united  in  marriage  May  23, 
1873,  with  Miss  Minnie,  daughter  of  Gottlieb  Zie- 


736 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


bold,  whose  sketch  appears  elsewhere  in  this  work. 
She  was  born  in  Cliillicothe,  Ohio,  and  came  to 
this  county  from  California,  Mo.,  in  1867.  Unto 
our  subject  and  wife  were  born  the  following  chil- 
dren: .losie  L.,  Minnie  E.,  Nelson  A.,  George  F., 
Luella  C,  Charles  .J.  and  Isabella  M.  George  F. 
and  Isabella  M.  died  in  infancy.  Mrs.  Rickert  is 
the  Treasurer  of  the  Frauen-Verein,a  religious  and 
social  organization,  and  was  a  memi3er  of  the  La- 
dies' Auxiliary  of  the  World's  Fair  for  Monroe 
County.  She  has  been  a  faithful  companion  and 
helpmate  to  her  husband  and  a  devoted  mother. 
Two  of  the  children,  Josic  L.  and  Minnie  E.,  are 
attending  the  Sacred  Heart  Convent  of  St.  Louis. 
Botli  are  fine  musicians,  Josie  L.  as  a  pianist,  and 
Minnie  E.  as  a  violinist,  and  the  former  is  also  a 
fine  linguist. 

Miss  Mary  M.  Ziehold,  a  sister  of  Mrs.  Rickert. 
entered  their  family  in  1873,  when  a  maiden  of 
eight  summers.  Under  the  direction  of  her  sister 
she  was  carefully  educated.  She  early  developed 
a  taste  for  music,  and  after  graduating  from  the 
high  school  and  teaching  for  a  short  lime  she 
turned  her  attention  to  that  art.  For  a  time  she 
studied  under  Madame  K.  Broadus,  and  then,  on 
the  advice  of  Professor  Oilraore,  the  noted  leader 
of  the  famous  Gilraore  Band,  she  decided  to  prose- 
cute her  studies  in  Milan,  Italy,  where  she  is  at 
this  writing.  She  will  graduate  from  the  Royal 
Conservatory  of  Music  in  French  and  Italian  music 
in  June,  1894,  and  will  then  go  upon  the  stage  as 
an  opera  singer  in  this  couutrj'. 

Returning  to  the  official  life  of  Mr.  Rickert,  we 
note  that  in  1888  he  was  elected  State  .Senator  for 
a  term  of  four  years,  and  served  in  the  Thirty- 
sixth  and  Thirty-seventh  General  Assemblies.  He 
was  one  of  its  prominent  members  and  served  on 
the  judicial'}-  and  other  important  committees.  He 
regularly  attended  all  sessions,  and  never  failed  to 
vote  on  the  measures  before  the  House.  He  prepared 
the  bill  whereby  110,000  was  appropriated  for  the 
purpose  of  moving  the  pioneer  dead  from  the  burj-- 
ing  grounds  at  Kaskaskia  to  the  cemetery  at  Ft. 
Gage.  He  ever  labored  for  the  interest  of  his  constit- 
uents, and  proved  a  capable  and  etlicient  Senator. 
He  was  one  of  the  famous  "One  Hundred  and  One" 
who  stood  so  nobly  b^' John  M.  Palmer  for  United 


States  Senator  in  1891.  When  his  term  had  ex- 
pired, he  was  prominently  mentioned  in  the  lead- 
ing Democratic  papers  for  the  office  of  .State  Au- 
ditor. His  labors  for  the  advancement  of  this 
community  have  resulted  in  its  material  progress, 
and  tlie  business  interests  have  been  greatly  pro- 
moted through  his  efforts. 

Mr.  Rickert  h.as  been  connected  with  the  Com- 
mercial Bank  of  Waterloo  since  its  organization 
and  is  a  Director  of  the  Waterloo  Milling  Com- 
pany. He  also  owns  about  nine  hundred  acres  of 
fine  farming  land  in  this  county.  The  cause  of 
education  lias  ever  found  in  him  a  warm  friend, 
and  while  serving  on  the  School  Board  for  fifteen 
jears  he  did  much  for  its  advancement.  For  about 
ten  }-eais  he  was  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Trus- 
tees of  Waterloo.  He  is  now  building  a  commo- 
dious and  comfortable  residence  in  the  eastern  part 
of  the  city,  and  in  this  home,  wliich  has  been  pro- 
vided through  his  own  labors,  he  hopes  to  spend 
his  remaining  days.  He  is  probably  the  most 
prominent  citizen  of  Monroe  County,  and  the  in- 
fluential position  which  he  has  won  among  his  fel- 
low-men has  been  gained  through  merit  and  is  well 
deserved. 


UDGE  ABEL  CAKTWKIGHT  DAVIS  has 
for  man}'  jears  been  prominently  identi- 
fied with  the  official  and  business  interests 
of  Murphysboro,  and  in  fact  his  name  is 
inseparably  connected  with  the  historj'of  Jackson 
County,  for  he  is  numbered  among  its  earliest  set- 
tlers, and  during  the  vears  of  his  residence  here 
he  has  been  a  leader  in  the  work  of  progress  and 
development.  Born  in  Murph3'sboro  Township, 
March  8,  1827,  he  is  the  son  of  the  Rev.  Philip 
Davis,  a  native  of  Ohio  County,  Ky.  His  grand- 
father, Gideon  Davis,  was  born  in  Maryland,  and 
became  one  of  the  pioneer  planters  of  Kentucky, 
where  he  spent  his  remaining  years. 

Philip  Davis  was  educated  in  Louisville  and 
afterward  located  in  Jackson,  Mo.  At  that  time 
Kentucky,  Illinois  and  Missouri  were  comprised 
within  one  conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church.  He  there  married  Margaret  Logan,  a  na- 
tive of  Ohio  and  a  daughter  of  John  Logan,  who 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


737 


was  born  in  Ireland,  and  who  came  to  this  county 
in  an  early  day.  She  is  a  sister  of  Dr.  John  Logan, 
of  Murphysboro,  and  an  aunt  of  John  A.  Logan, 
our  subject  being  a  cousin  of  that  famous  General, 
who  was  one  of  the  best  known  and  best  loved 
men  of  this  country. 

In  1823  Mr.  Davis  located  in  Brownsville,  where 
he  engaged  in  teaching  and  also  served  as  pastor 
of  the  Methodist  Church.  A  tew  years  later  he 
bought  a  farm  near  what  is  now  Murphysboro, 
and  when  the  court  house  was  burned  at  Browns- 
ville he  was  appointed  one  of  the  judges  to  restore 
the  records  of  the  county,  which  task  proved  an 
arduous  one.  In  the  Masonic  fraternit}^  he  was 
very  prominent.  To  farming  he  devoted  his  en- 
ergies until  his  death,  which  occurred  in  1842, 
at  the  age  of  forty -six.  His  wife  survived  him 
until  April,  1893,  and  passed  awa3'  at  the  ad- 
vanced age  of  ninety  years.  In  their  family  were 
eight  children,  three  of  whom  are  now  living. 
One  brother*  Philip,  who  is  now  a  minister  of  the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church  .South,  served  in  the 
Thirty-first  Illinois  Infantry  during  the  late  war. 

Judge  Davis  was  reared  amid  the  wild  scenes  of 
the  frontier.  When  quite  young  he  attended  the 
subscription  school  which  was  taught  by  Dr.  Lynch, 
who  was  hired  by  the  father  of  Mr.  Davis  and  by 
Dr.  Logan.  The  father  died  when  our  subject 
was  thirteen  years  of  age,  and  two  years  later  he 
began  to  earn  his  own  livelihood  as  a  farm  hand. 
He  attended  school  at  intervals  until  he  liad  at- 
tained his  majority,  after  which  he  engaged  in 
teaching  for  three  years.  More  or  less  since  at- 
taining to  man's  estate  he  has  been  called  upon  to 
fill  public  ottices.  Between  the  ages  of  eighteen 
and  twenty-one  he  served  as  Constable,  and  after 
about  five  years  spent  as  a  teacher  and  farmer 
he  was  appointed  Deputy  Sheriff  by  William  Cox 
for  a  term  of  four  years.  In  1856  he  was  elected  , 
Sheriff,  and  held  that  olHce  for  four  years.  We 
find  him  among  the  bo3'S  in  blue  in  1862,  serving 
as  a  member  of  Company  A,  Thirty-first  Illinois 
Infantrj'.  He  participated  in  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg,  the  battles  of  Champion  Hill,  Black  River 
Bridge,  Port  Gibson,  Jackson,  Atlanta  and  Kene- 
saw  Mountain.  After  the  battle  of  Atlanta  he 
was  honorably  discharged  on  account  of  disability. 


He  proved  a  valiant  and  faithful  soldier,  and  was 
ever  found  at  his  post  of  duty. 

After  his  return  home,  Mr.  Davis  was  elected 
Associate  Judge  of  the  county  for  a  term  of  two 
j^ears.  On  his  retirement  from  office  he  resumed  the 
care  of  his  farm,  but  soon  afterward  was  elected 
Justice  of  the  Peace,  taking  up  his  residence  in  Mur- 
physboro. He  continued  to  fill  that  office  until 
April,  1893,  when  he  resigned  on  account  of  par- 
tial deafness.  He  has  done  much  work  as  admin- 
istrator of  estates,  and  in  the  discharge  of  his 
official  duties  has  ever  won  high  commendation. 

The  Judge  was  married  in  Murphysboro  Town- 
ship to  Leah,  daughter  of  David  Burkey,  of  Penn- 
sylvania. She  was  born  in  this  county.  They 
became  the  parents  of  ten  childi«n,  five  of  whom 
reached  mature  years:  Laura,  wife  of  Thomas 
Etherton,  of  Sand  Ridge;  Charles,  who  was  killed 
by  a  threshing-machine  in  p]ast  St.  Louis;  Mrs. 
Hattie  Blackwood,  now  deceased;  Mrs.  Mollie  Lipe, 
of  Williamson  County;  Jennie,  wife  of  Dan  Mc- 
Laughlin, of  Murphysboro;  and  Joseph  II.,  wlio 
is  clerking  in  Murphysboro. 

On  the  4th  of  March,  1884,  Mr.  Davis  married 
Mrs.  Cordelia  (Case)  Sanders,  who  was  born  in 
Spafford,  Onondaga  Count}',  N.  Y.,  as  was  her  fa- 
ther, Samuel  Case.  Her  grandfather,  Aaron  Case, 
was  a  native  of  Schenectady,  N.  Y.  The  former 
followed  farming  in  the  Empire  State  and  in 
Rock  County,  Wis.,  but  his  last  days  were  spent 
in  the  east.  He  married  Chloe  J.,  daughter  of 
Timothy  Olmsted,  both  natives  of  New  York. 
Mrs.  Davis  was  one  of  six  children,  five  of  whom 
reached  mature  years,  while  two  are  yet  living. 
She  was  reared  in  Wisconsin,  and  in  1852  became 
the  wife  of  J.  W.  Sanders,  a  natire  of  Tennessee, 
and  removed  to  Marion,  111.,  but  soon  afterward 
settled  in  Carbondale.  He  served  as  First  Lieu- 
tenant of  the  Eight3--first  Illinois  Infantry  during 
the  late  war,  was  afterward  Sheriff  of  Jackson 
County  for  four  years,  and  served  as  Deputy 
Sheriff  under  Judge  Davis  and  M.  B.  Cox.  He 
died  September  12,  1876.  Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Sanders  were  born  three  children:  Leroy,  of  Mur- 
physboro; Frances  C,  wife  of  A.  H.  Roberts,  of 
Murphysboro;  and  John,  who  died  in  his  seventh 
year. 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Judge  Davis  served  as  foreman  of  the  United 
States  Grand  Jury  in  Springfield,  III.,  in  1889. 
He  is  a  charter  member  of  Amity  Lodge  No.  132, 
I.  0.  O.  F.,  has  filled  all  its  of  offices,  and  belongs 
to  the  encampment.  In  politics  he  is  a  Democrat, 
and  is  a  member  of  the  Metliodist  Episcopal 
Church  South,  in  wliich  he  is  serving  as  Trustee. 
He  has  been  honored  with  frequent  elections  to 
public  office,  and  tlie  trust  reposed  in  him  has 
never  been  betrayed.  He  is  faithful  and  true  in 
all  things,  and  no  man  is  more  worth}'  the  high 
regard  in  which  he  is  held  than  A.  C.  Davis,  the 
prominent  pioneer. 


,(;^)EORGE  T.  COFFER,  a  successful  farmer 
and  stock-raiser  of  Jackson  Count}',  and 
^^_  the  owner  of  a  well  improved  tract  of 
land  situated  on  section  6.  Somerset  Township, 
was  born  in  this  county  March  25,  1841.  Little 
is  known  concerning  his  ancestral  history,  although 
it  is  thought  that  his  parents,  Joshua  and  Eliza- 
beth (Wilkison)  Coffer,  were  natives  respectively 
of  Missouri  and  Tennessee.  Tradition  says  that 
his  paternal  ancestors  emigrated  to  America  from 
France,  while  on  his  mother's  side  he  traces  his 
lineage  to  Scotland. 

At  an  early  day  in  tiie  history  of  Jackson 
County  Joshua  Coffer  came  hither  and  for  a  short 
time  sojourned  near  the  Mississippi  River.  Going 
back  to  Missouri,  he  remained  in  that  state  for 
some  time  and  then  returned  to  Jackson  County, 
settling  in  the  northern  part.  A  few  years  afterward 
he  was  drowned  in  Galum  Creek.  His  accidental 
death  was  mourned  by  his  large  circle  of  acquaint- 
ances, whose  high  regard  he  held  to  an  unusual  de- 
gree. Of  his  children  the  following  survive: 
Marena  A.,  wife  of  William  Zimmerman;  George 
T.  and  Elliott  B.  One  of  the  sons,  Joshua  P.,  en- 
listed in  the  Union  armj%  and  died  at  Nashville, 
Tenn.,  in  1864. 

At  the  age  of  about  thirteen  years  our  subject 
accompanied  his  widowed  mother  to  Monroe 
County,  111.,  where  one  year  later  she  passed  away. 
He  was  therefore  thrown  entirely  upon  his  own 
resources  and   obliged  to  earn  his  own  livelihood 


from  an  early  age.  For  a  number  of  j'ears  he  con- 
tinued to  reside  in  Monroe  County,  whence  he  re- 
turned to  Jackson  County,  and  subsequently  lo- 
cated in  Franklin  County,  111.  At  the  opening  of 
the  Civil  War  he  enlisted,  August  10,  1861,  in  the 
Fifteenth  Illinois  Cavahy,  which  was  incorporated 
with  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland.  AVilh  his  regi- 
ment, he  participated  in  the  battles  of  Ft.  Henry 
and  Ft.  Donelson  and  the  siege  of  Corinth,  in  ad- 
dition to  man}'  other  engagements  of  minor  im- 
portance in  which  the  cavalry  engaged.  Ordered 
to  Arkansas,  he  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Big 
Creek,  in  that  state,  and  performed  faithfull)'  and 
with  the  utmost  efficiency  his  duties  as  a  defender 
of  the  Old  Flag.  At  the  expiration  of  his  term  of 
enlistment  he  was  honorably  discharged,  August 
25,  1864.  He  now  receives  a  pension  of  1^6  per 
month. 

About  one  year  after  liis  return  from  the  army 
Mr.  Cofifer  was  united  in  marriage,  August  16, 
1865,  with  Miss  Serenia  J.  Holliday,  who  was  born 
October  17,  1849.  Mrs.  Cofifer  is  the  daughter  of 
the  late  George  W.and  Johanna  (Wliipkey)  Holli- 
day, natives  of  North  Carolina  and  Pennsylvania, 
respectively.  Her  grandfatiier,  David  Holliday, 
was  an  early  settler  of  Jackson  County,  and  located 
in  Somerset  Township  wlien  this  now  highly  im- 
proved township  was  a  wild  waste  of  timber  land. 
George  Holliday  passed  away  in  1881,  and  his 
widow,  now  (1894)  in  her  sixty-eighth  year,  is 
making  her  home  in  Oraville,  III.  Of  their  chil- 
dren six  survive,  namely:  David,  who  lives  in 
Oraville,  III.;  Serenia  J.,  Mi-s.  Coffer;  Desdemonia, 
wife  of  Benjamin  Coffer,  a  resident  of  Vergennes 
Township,  this  county;  Turner,  whose  home  is  in 
Levan  Township,  this  county;  Imri,  residing  in 
Oraville;  and  Susan,  who  is  the  wife  of  Henry 
Nausley,  of  Vergennes  Township,  this  county. 
Elbridge  G.  Holliday,  brother  of  Mrs.  Coffer,  en- 
listed in  the  Twenty-seventh  Illinois  Infantry  and 
was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Belmont,  Mo.,  Novem- 
ber 7,  1861.  Another  brother,  Henry  L.,  took  the 
place  in  the  regiment  made  vacant  by  the  death  of 
Elbridge  G.  and  served  through  the  entire  war, 
participating  in  the  battles  of  Chickamauga  and 
Stone  River,  the  march  to  the  sea,  and  many 
other  important  engagements  and  campaigns.     In 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


741 


1865  he  was  honorably  discharged  from  the  army. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cofifer  there  were  born  eleven 
children,  nine  now  living,  as  follows:  William; 
Ellen,  wife  of  Henry  Doty;  Elsmaralda;  Annie; 
Edgar;  David;  Franklin;  Frederick  and  Eliza- 
beth. Those  deceased  are  diaries  and  Tiiomas 
Marion.  At  the  time  Mr.  Cofifer  settled  upon  his 
present  farm,  in  1872,  the  land  had  not  been 
cleared,  and  it  was  onl}' after  arduous  and  untiring 
labor  that  he  succeeded  in  bringing  the  soil  under 
good  cultivation.  His  farm  is  not  one  of  the 
largest  in  the  township,  containing  but  ninety-three 
acres,  but  it  has  first-class  improvements,  and  every 
acre  is  so  utilized  as  to  produce  the  most  profita- 
ble results. 

Wiiile  the  duties  connected  witli  farming  occupy 
much  of  Mr.  Coffer's  attention,  he  nevertheless 
finds  sufficient  time  to  devote  to  |)ublic  affairs  and 
maintains  a  warm  interest  in  everytiiing  pertaining 
to  the  welfare  of  the  community'.  In  his  politi- 
cal afflliations  lie  adopts  the  principles  of  the  Re- 
publican party  and  supports  its  candidates  with 
his  ballot  and  influence.  He  is  identified  with  the 
Grand  Army  of  the  Republic,  holding  membership 
with  the  post  at  Murphj-sboro.  One  of  the  lead- 
ing citizens  iji  Somerset  Township,  he  justly  occu- 
pies a  high  place  in  the  regard  of  all  who  know 
him. 

g^P • 


^TlOIlN  CLEAKY.  The  simple  record  of  an 
honorable  life  is  the  best  monument  that 
can  be  reared  to  any  citizen,  and  we  shall 
therefore  not  attempt  to  enlarge  upon  the 
history  of  the  gentleman  above  named,  who  is  a 
large  land-owner  in  Perry  County,  Mo.,  and  at  the 
same  time  fills  the  position  of  Government  Con- 
tractor in  Chester.  He  is  of  Irish  birth,  having 
been  born  in  County  Limerick,  December  25,  1840, 
and  is  the  son  of  James  and  Johanna  Cleary.  The 
parents  were  poor  people  in  their  native  land,  and 
■wishing  to  better  their  condition  financially,  emi- 
grated to  the  United  Stales  in  1849,  landing  in 
New  York  City.  From  that  place  they  soon  re- 
moved to  Syracuse,  the  same  state,  where  tliey 
made  their  home  for  six  j-ears,  and  at  the  end  of 
that  time  came  to  Chester,  where  the  elder  Mr. 
28 


Cleary  engaged  in  gardening  and  farming  on  a 
small  scale.  He  departed  this  life  in  Chester  in 
1868,  and  his  good  wife  died  two  years  later. 

John  Cleary  was  the  eldest  of  a  large  family,  of 
whom  only  three  are  living  at  the  present  time. 
While  residing  at  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  he  attended 
school,  but  after  the  removal  of  the  famil3-  to 
Chester,  his  father  being  in  limited  circumstances, 
he  was  compelled  to  aid  him  in  the  support  of  the 
family,  and  thus  his  education  was  neglected.  He 
made  the  best  of  his  spare  moments,  however,  and 
by  reading  good  books  and  being  a  close  observer 
he  gained  a  fair  knowledge  of  men  and  things. 

When  attaining  his  majority,  Mr.  Cleary  em- 
barked in  farming  pursuits  upon  rented  land.  He 
continued  to  remain  under  the  parental  roof,  how- 
ever, for  five  years  longer,  and  then  establishing  a 
home  of  his  own  was  married,  January  2,  1867,  to 
Miss  Jane,  daughter  of  James  and  Margaret  Supple. 
After  his  marriage  Mr.  Cleary  commenced  to  work 
in  the  mill  of  H.  C.  Cole  &  Co.,  with  whom  he  re- 
mained for  some  years,  and  then  began  farming 
again  on  his  own  account,  renting  property'  for 
eight  years.  During  that  period  he  was  very  suc- 
cessful, and  at  the  expiration  of  the  eight  years 
removed  with  his  family  to  Chester  and  began 
contracting,  his  first  work  being  on  the  streets  in 
the  city.  Proving  himself  worthy  of  the  confidence 
placed  in  him  by  his  fellow-townsmen,  he  rapidly 
grew  in  favor  and  was  soon  enabled  to  take  Gov- 
ernment contracts,  sometimes  having  in  hiseiiiiiloy 
as  man^'  as  two  hundred  men. 

Mr.  Cleary, after  saving  a  goodly  sum  of  mone}', 
purchased  a  quarter-section  in  Perry  Count}',  Mo. 
To  this  he  has  added  from  time  to  time  as  his  cir- 
cumstances would  [lermit,  until  at  the  present  time 
he  is  the  proprietor  of  a  vast  estate  of  thirteen  hun- 
dred acres,  nearly  all  of  which  is  under  the  best 
improvements.  He  gives  his  personal  attention  to 
the  cultivation  of  three  hundred  acres  of  his  es- 
tate and  rents  the  balance  to  good  advantage.  He 
still,  however,  carries  on  his  business  as  Govern- 
ment contractor,  in  which  branch  of  work  he  has 
been  engaged  since  1876.  He  always  furnishes  the 
timber  and  supplies  for  his  contracts,  which  at 
times  have  required  as  manv  .as  ninety-four  teams. 

To  our  subject  and  his  estimable  wife  have  been 


742 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


born  five  children,  who  bear  the  respective  names 
of  Mary,  John,  William,  Edward  and  Charles  Cleve- 
land. Mr.  Cleary  has  his  farm  stocked  witli  all  kinds 
of  blooded  animals,  which  he  ships  to  the  St.  Louis 
and  Chicago  markets.  In  the  midst  of  his  exten- 
sive personal  interests  he  ever  finds  time  to  bear 
an  active  part  in  tlie  affairs  of  the  neighborhood, 
and  in  fact,  in  all  movements  which  contribute  to 
the  general  welfare  of  the  county'.  He  is  a  most 
genial  man,  strictly  honorable  in  all  his  dealings, 
and  therefore  he  is  highly  regarded  by  all  with 
whom  he  comes  in  contact.  With  his  family  he  is 
occupying  a  handsome  brick  residence,  located  in 
the  midst  of  beautiful  grounds,  where  he  entertains 
a  host  of  friends.  In  politics  he  votes  the  Demo- 
cratic ticket. 


^^  ONRAD  WELGE.  As  a  representative  of 
jl(^_  the  progressive  and  successful  farmers  of 
^^^  Randolph  County,  especial  mention  belongs 
to  the  subject  of  this  sketch,  who  conducts  agri- 
cultural operations  on  section  2,  township  7,  range 
6.  Through  the  exercise  of  careful  management 
in  conducting  his  business  affairs  he  has  become 
the  owner  of  a  good  tract  of  land,  and  in  addition 
to  raising  the  cereals  he  is  one  of  the  most  ex- 
tensive grape-growers  in  the  county,  having  an 
immense  vinej-ard. 

Mr.  Welge  was  born  the  10th  of  April,  1829, 
in  the  province  of  Braunschweig,  Germanj',  and  is 
a  son  of  Christian  and  Christina  AYelge,  the  former 
of  whom  emigrated  with  his  family-  to  America  in 
18i7.  They  landed  in  the  Crescent  Citj'  Decem- 
ber 31  of  that  year,  and  after  remaining  there  only 
a  few  days  sailed  up  the  Jlississippi  River  and 
made  their  permanent  home  in  this  county.  The 
elder  Mr.  Welge  purchased  farming  land  and  en- 
gaged in  tilling  the  soil  until  his  decease,  which 
occurred  in  1853.  Five  jears  later  the  mother  of 
our  subject  departed  this  life,  leaving  a  family  of 
three  children,  of  whom  Conrad  was  the  eldest. 

Our  subject  received  a  good  education  in 
his  native  land,  and  his  occupation  in  German}' 
was  that  of  a  shepherd  boy.  It  was  the  expecta- 
tion of  his  father  to  engage  in  sheep-raising  in 
Randolph  County,  but  after  locating  here  he  found 


the  locality  was  not  suitable  for  that  branch  of  ag- 
riculture, and  therefore  devoted  himself  to  general 
farm  pursuits.  Conrad  is  living  on  the  old  home- 
stead, which  was  well  improved  when  it  came  into 
his  possession,  hut  he  has  later  added  to  its  value 
and  attractiveness  by  the  erection  of  commodious 
buildings,  and  annually  reaps  an  abundant  har- 
vest from  the  old  farm. 

The  lady  whom  our  subject  married  in  April, 
18.52,  was  Miss  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Frederick 
Shiader.  Tiieir  union  has  been  blessed  bj'  the 
birth  of  the  following  five  children:  Christina,  who 
married  Conrad  Gross  and  makes  her  home  in 
Buffalo,  N.  Y.;  Herman,  who  married  Herraanite 
Sickmeyer,  and  lives  at  Welge;  Louisa,  wlio  be- 
came the  wife  of  Herman  Detmer,  an<f  makes  her 
home  near  Welge,  this  state;  Sophia",  Mrs.  Louis 
Dirks,  who  also  lives  near  the  above  place;  and 
Caroline,  who  married  Henry  Sickmeyer  and  re- 
sides in  Jackson  County,  this  state. 

Our  subject  and  his  entire  family  are  devoted 
members  of  the  Lutheran  Church.  He  is  one  of 
the  venerable  citizens  of  this  township,  and  few 
of  the  residents  of  tiie  county  are  more  widely  or 
favorably  known  than  he.  Though  not  an  .ispir- 
ant  to  an}-  political  office,  he  has  been  elected  to 
serve  on  the  School  Board,  and  held  the  position  'i? 
of  Director  for  six  years.  He  is  a  Democrat  in 
politics  and  takes  a  leading  part  in  all  local  mat- 
ters. 


-^ 


^ 


y^ILLIAM  GOALBY,  one  of  the  substan- 
tial coal  dealers  of  southern  Illinois,  who 
is  engaged  in  coal  mining  in  Randolph 
Count}'  and  makes  his  home  in  Percy,  was  born 
in  England  on  the  31st  of  October,  1881,  and  is 
the  youngest  child  of  William  and  Martha  (Bend) 
Goalby.  Ilis  father  was  a  miner  and  followed 
that  pursuit  in  his  native  land  until  1852,  when 
he  emigrated  to  the  New  World  and  settled  in 
Belleville,  HI.  He  operated  mines  near  that  place 
until  his  death,  which  occurred  in  187-1. 

Mr.  Goalby  of  this  sketch  spent  the  days  of   his 
boyhood  and  youth  in  his  native  land,  and  nttend(;c^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


743 


its  public  schools  until  fifteen  years  of  age,  when 
he  left  the  school  room  to  begin  work  iu  the  mines. 
Since  that  time  he  has  been  connected  with  coal 
interests.  In  1852  he  accompanied  his  father  on 
the  voyage  to  America,  and  in  connection  with 
him  opened  a  mine  in  Belleville,  III.  They  also 
sunk  the  first  shaft  on  the  Cairo  Short  Line  Rail- 
road, also  at  Ogle's  Station,  Robert  Station,  and 
at  many  other  mines.  In  1869  he  was  foreman  of 
the  mines  at  Murphysboro,  111.,  and  in  1872  our 
subject  came  to  the  Miller  mines,  which  at  that 
time  were  controlled  by  the  Missouri  Coal  Com- 
pany. He  there  continued  for  three  years,  on  the 
expiration  of  which  period  the  companj'  became 
disorganized  and  Mr.  Goalby  sunk  a  shaft  at  Rose- 
borough,  near  Sparta,  111.,  which  is  still  in  opera- 
tion. 

On  the  expiration  of  a  short  period,  Mr.  Goalby 
again  went  to  the  west,  leaving  his  family  at  their 
home  in  Randolph  County.  After  spending  five 
years  in  Nevada,  he  returned  to  Illinois,  in  1883, 
taking  up  his  residence  in  Percy,  wheie  he  began 
sinking  shafts.  He  has  successfully  opened  and  is 
now  operating  lw(i  mines,  one  a  top  vein,  and  the 
otiier  a  second  vein.  His  mine  usually-  yields  four- 
teen cars  of  toal  per  day,  and  the  owner  is  re- 
garded as  one  of  the  substantial  coal  dealers  of 
southern  Illinois. 

In  1868  Mr.  Goalby  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Elizabeth  Dean,  daughter  of  Robert  and 
Elizabeth  Dean,  who  were  natives  of  Scotland  and 
came  to  America  iu  184'J.  Unto  our  subject  and 
his  wife  were  born  eleven  children,  but  only  five 
of  the  number  are  yet  living,  viz.:  AVilliam  H., 
who  is  engaged  with  his  father  in  the  coal  busi- 
ness; Arthur  A.,  who  married  Carrie  Harris  and  is 
employed  as  engineer  at  the  mines;  Sarah  D., 
Robert  and  Thomas,  who  are  still  with  their  par- 
ents. The  mother  of  this  faniil3'  is  a  member  of 
the  Baptist  Church  and  is  a  most    estimaljle  lady. 

In  his  political  views  Mr.  Goalby  is  a  Democrat, 
but  has  never  been  a  politician  in  the  sense  of 
office-seeking,  as  he  prefers  to  devote  his  entire 
time  and  attention  to  his  business  interests.  Not 
long  since  the  Barnard  Coal  Company  went  into 
the  hands  of  a  receiver  and  the  mine  was  sold,  be- 
coming the   property  of   the  firm   of  Barnard  & 


Goalby.  In  consequence,  our  subject  is  interested 
in  three  mines,  all  of  which  are  doing  a  good 
business.  The  vocation  which  he  has  made  his 
life  work  has  proved  a  profitable  one  to  him, yield- 
ing him  a  good  income.  He  is  a  man  of  excellent 
business  and  executive  ability,  and  his  well  di- 
rected efforts  and  good  management  have  justly 
won  him  his  prosperit}'. 

-^  -^=^^M^-  ^•^^=^— ^— 

'^  OHN  H.  THOMPSON.  Many  of  the  native- 
born  citizens  of  Randolph  County  have 
adopted  an  agricultural  career,  and  among 
this  number  is  the  gentleman  above  named, 
who  iu  addition  to  carr\'ing  on  his  fine  estate  has 
operated  a  threshing  machine  since  1871,  and  has 
been  engaged  in  running  a  sawmill  for  the  past 
two  years. 

Our  subject  was  born  on  the  19th  of  September, 
1845,  to  James  G.  and  Margaret  Caroline  (Camp- 
bell) Thompson.  The  father  was  born  in  the  Ab- 
beyville  District,  S.  C,  June  14.  1813,  and  oncom- 
ing to  Randolph  County,  about  1835,  became  one 
of  the  earliest  settlers  within  its  bounds.  Later 
he  removed  to  Arkansas,  where  his  decease  oc- 
curred, in  Lawrence  County,  Jul}-  14,  1856.  His 
first  wife  preceded  him  to  the  better  land  by  many 
years,  dying  when  our  subject  was  oulj'  three 
years  of  age.  Afterward  he  married  Miss  Ellen 
Mullln,  bj'  whom  he  had  two  children,  who  are 
now  deceased.  He  was  a  farmer  bj-  occupation 
and  was  well-to-do  in  this  world's  goods.  The 
only  child  born  of  his  union  with  Miss  Campbell 
was  our  subject,  who  was  educated  in  the  common 
schools,  and  during  the  summer  season  worked  on 
a  farm,  thus  learning  the  many  duties  belonging 
to  farm  life. 

AVhen  ready  to  establish  home  ties  of  his  own, 
Mr.  Thompson  was  united  in  marriage,  March  18, 
1886,  with  Miss  Louisa  E.  Thompson,  who,  like 
himself,  was  a  native  of  this  county.  She  was  the 
daughter  of  Thomas  M.  and  Martha  (Hogue) 
Thompson;  the  father  was  born  in  South  Carolina, 
and  the  mother  was  born  in  Randolph  County. 
To  our  subject  and  his  wife  have  been  born  two 
children,  a  daughter,  Margaret  M.,  and  a  son,  Harry 


744 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


S.,who  died  in  infancy.  With  his  wife  he  is  a  de- 
voted member  of  the  Baptist  Cliurdi  and  enjoys 
all  the  esteem  commanded  by  a  man  of  an  honest 
and  upright  life. 

Mr.  Thompson  cast  his  first  Presidential  vote 
for  Seymour  and  always  voted  the  Democratic 
ticket  until  1892,  when  he  cast  bis  ballot  for  the 
candidate  of  the  People's  party.  His  beautiful 
estate,  which  comjirises  eighty  acres,  is  located 
three  and  one-half  miles  southeast  of  Evansville, 
where  he  devotes  the  greater  part  of  his  time  and 
attention  to  its  cultivation.  He  has  served  as 
Constable  for  two  terms  of  four  years  each,  as 
Justice  of  the  Peace  one  term  of  four  years,  Road 
Commissioner  one  term  of  three  years,  and  at  the 
present  time  is  District  Road  Clerk. 


RS.  MARY  ANN  WALLER,  who  is  well 
known  throughout  Jackson  County,  and 
now  resides  on  section  27,  Murphysboro 
Township,  was  born  in  Franklin  Count}', 
now  Williamson  County,  on  the  11th  of  October, 
1834.  Her  parents,  Samuel  and  Elizabeth  (Ilinch- 
cliff)  Crawshaw,were  both  natives  of  England,  and 
in  that  country  were  reared  and  married.  In 
1828,  they  emigrated  to  America,  reaching  their 
destination  on  the  2d  of  October.  They  first  lo- 
cated in  Philadelphia,  where  they  remained  for 
nineteen  months,  when  thej-  came  to  Illinois,  and 
settled  on  what  was  known  as  Eight  Mile  Prairie, 
.about  six  miles  east  of  Carbondale.  The  county 
was  then  wild  and  uuirapi-oved,  the  land  was  in 
its  primitive  condition,  and  there  were  wolves  and 
pantliers  in  the  neighborhood.  Mr.  Crawshaw 
took  up  his  residence  in  this  communitj^  June  11, 
1830,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  forest  developed  a 
farm.  In  1836,  he  removed  to  a  place  three  and 
a-half  miles  southwest  of  Carbondale,  and  was  one 
of  the  earliest  settlers  of  that  locality.  There  he 
continued  to  reside  until  his  death,  which  occurred 
in  1852,  at  the  age  of  sixty-two  j'ears.  His  wife, 
who  w.as  born  in  1791,  passed  away  at  the  age  of 
seventy-eight  j'ears.  Their  family  numbered  nine 
children,  but  only  three  are  now  living,  Mrs. 
Eliza  Davis,  Mrs.  Hannah  Etherton  and  Mrs.  Wal- 


ler. The  parents  were  both  members  of  the  Christ- 
ian Order,  and  Mr.  Crawshaw  was  a  preacher  of 
that  denomination.  One  son,  Thomas,  served 
throughout  the  late  war. 

In  her  parents'  home,  Mrs.  Waller  spent  her 
girlhood  days,  performing  the  duties  of  the  house- 
hold and  acquiring  an  education  in  the  subscrip- 
tion schools  of  the  neighborhood.  In  1852,  when 
eighteen  years  of  age,  she  became  the  wife  of 
George  Hagler,  a  native  of  Union  County,  111., 
born  in  1830.  He  was  one  of  twelve  children, 
whose  father,  John  Hagler,  was  numbered  among 
the  pioneer  settlers  of  Union  County,  whither  he 
emigrated  from  North  Carolina.  George  Hagler 
was  reared  in  Union  and  Jackson  Counties,  and 
after  his  marriage  located  ujjon  a  farm  in  Carbon- 
dale Township,  which  he  continued  to  develop  and 
improve  until  after  the  breaking  out  of  the  late 
war,  when,  in  1862,  he  enlisted  in  Company  B, 
pjighty-first  Illinois  Infantr}-.  He  died  January 
20,  1863,  at  Memphis,  Tenn.,  leaving  a  widow  and 
four  children.  The  latter  are  William,  who  mar- 
ried Sarah  J.  Hanson;  Allen,  who  married  Ida 
Lindse}-;  Joseph,  who  wedded  Frances  Etherton; 
and  George,  who  married  .lane  P.  Burkey. 

In  1864,  the  lady  whose  name  heads  this  record 
became  the  wife  of  William  Waller,  who  was  born 
in  Union  County,  111.,  March  26,  1823.  He,  too, 
had  been  previously  married,  his  first  wife  having 
borne  the  maiden  name  of  Sarah  Diskan.  After 
her  death  he  married  Lucinda  Lipe,  and  they  had 
four  children,  who  are  3^et  living,  namely:  Mrs. 
Sarah  L.  Crawshaw;  Mrs.  Mary  Crow;  John,  who 
married  Ann  Thorp;  and  William  Joseph,  who 
wedded  Mary  E.  Thorp.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Waller  be- 
came the  parents  of  five  children,  of  whom  four 
are  yet  living,  Hannah,  who  married  W.  R.  Lee; 
Elbert  E.,  Gilbert  and  Alice.  Luvisa  married  Dr. 
F.  E.  Trobaugh,and  died  a  few  months  afterwards, 
aged  twenty-three  years. 

The  death  of  Mr.  Waller  occurred  December  26, 
1891,  and  was  deeply  mourned  throughout  the 
community,  for  he  had  man}'  friends.  He  was  a 
faithful  member  of  the  Missionary  Baptist  Church, 
m  which  he  served  as  Deacon, and  was  also  School 
Director.  He  voted  with  the  Republican  party, 
and  kept  well   informed  on  the  issues  of  the  day. 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


745 


Throughout  life  he  followed  agricultural  pursuits, 
and  was  a  successful  farmer.  Since  her  husband's 
death,  Mrs.  Waller  has  carried  on  the  home  farm 
with  the  aid  of  her  younger  son.  It  is  a  tract  of 
three  hundred  acres  of  valuable  land,  the  greater 
part  of  which  is  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation 
and  well  improved.  Mrs.  Waller  is  also  a  member 
of  the  Missionary  Baptist  Church,  and  is  a  lady 
whose  many  excellencies  of  character  have  gained 
for  her  tlie  liigh  regard  in  which  she  is  justl}-  held. 


^^^HOMAS  J.  GREEN,  of  Percy,  was  born  in 
m^  Carroll  County,  Ark.,  on  the  12th  of  De- 
^^^'  cember,  1851,  and  is  a  son  of  William  and 
Millie  (Weis)  Green,  who  were  also  natives  of  the 
same  state.  He  received  hardl3'  any  educational 
advantages  in  his  youth,  but  experience  and  ob- 
servation have  made  him  well  informed.  He  spent 
his  early  life  upon  a  farm,  beginning  work  in  the 
fields  as  soon  as  he  was  old  enough  to  handle  the 
plow.  He  soon  became  familiar  with  all  the  de- 
tails of  farm  work  and  made  a  hand  at  harvest. 

Mr.  Green  was  a  lad  of  only  ten  years  when  he 
left  home  and  went  to  Dallas  County,  Mo.,  where 
he  was  emploj'ed  as  a  farm  hand  for  eleven  years, 
when,  in  1874,  he  came  to  Illinois,  taking  up  his 
residence  in  Randolph  Count}',  where  he  has  since 
made  his  home.  The  greater  part  of  his  life  has 
been  devoted  to  agricultural  pursuits.  When  he 
came  to  this  count}'  he  secured  a  farm  and  with 
characteristic  energ}'  began  its  cultivation,  and  its 
well  tilled  fields  soon  yielded  to  him  a  golden 
tribute  in  return  for  the  care  and  labor  bestowed 
upon  them.  He  also  made  good  improvements, 
and  his  place  was  ever  neat  and  thrift}'  in  apjjear- 
ance.  In  July,  1892,  he  left  the  farm  and  came  to 
Percy,  where  he  has  since  made  his  home. 

In  October,  1877,  Mr.  Green  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Jane  (Weir)  Lemoud,a  daughter  of 
James  and  Jane  (Downing)  Weir,  both  of  whom 
were  natives  of  Kentucky.  On  leaving  that  state 
they  removed  to  Ohio,  and  thence  came  to  Illinois 
in  1851,  settling  in  Randolph  County,  where  they 
spent  their  remaining  days.  Mrs.  Green  has  been 
four  times  married.     Her  first  husband  was  John 


Larue,  of  Ohio.  Frank,  the  only  child  of  that 
marriage,  is  now  living  in  Percy.  She  next  mar- 
ried Charles  G.  Gruenigen,  who  died  while  in  the 
Union  army  during  the  late  war,  leaving  one  son, 
Charles,  who  is  yet  living.  His  widow  afterward 
became  the  wife  of  Thomas  E.  Lemond,  who  died 
leaving  two  children:  Elmira,  now  the  wife  of 
Thomas  Williams,  of  Randolph  County;  and  David 
L.,  who  married  Laura  E.  Blanton  and  resides  in 
Percy. 

Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Green  hold  membership  with 
the  Methodist  Church,  contribute  liberally  to  its 
support  and  are  active  workers  in  its  interest. 
They  are  prominent  and  well  known  people  of  this 
community,  and  their  friends  are  many  in  the 
neighborhood.  In  politics  Mr.  Green  is  a  stalwart 
Republican,  but  has  never  sought  or  desired  the 
honors  or  emoluments  of  public  office.  His  life 
was  a  hard  one  in  his  early  youth,  but  by  persist- 
ent energy,  a  courageous  spirit  and  a  strong  de- 
termination, he  overcame  the  obstacles  in  his  path 
and  steadily  worked  his  way  upward.  As  he  did 
so,  he  acquired  a  comfortable  competence,  which 
now  enables  him  to  spend  his  declining  years  in 
retirement,  enjoying  the  rest  which  he  has  so 
truly  earned  and  richly  deserves. 


|:i^ 


-^") 


^i^ 


x) 


fe 


ARRISON  DRUSE,  a  well  known  farmer 
residing  on  section  16,  township  3,  range 
9,  Monroe  County,  claims  New  York  as  the 
state  of  his  nativity.  His  parents  were 
Stephen  and  Anna  (Denslow)  Druse.  The  former 
was  of  French  descent  and  was  born  in  New  York. 
He  received  such  educational  advantages  as  the 
common  schools  of  his  native  state  afforded.  He 
married  Miss  Denslow,  who  was  born  in  Canada, 
and  who  was  of  Welsh  lineage.  When  quite  young 
she  removed  to  New  York,  where  she  received  but 
limited  school  privileges. 

Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Druse  were  members  of  the 
Baptist  Church  and  took  an  active  interest  in  all 
that  pertained  to  its  upbuilding  and  to  the  welfare 
of  the  community.  By  industry,  economy  and 
good  management  he  steadily  worked  his  way  up. 


746 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


ward  and  acquired  a  comfortable  competence.  In 
1819  he  removed  with  his  famil.y  to  Ohio,  locating 
in  Washington  County,  where  his  death  occurred 
two  }-ears  later.  His  wife  long  survived  him,  pass- 
ing away  in  1845,  on  the  day  of  General  Jack- 
son's death.  In  the  Druse  family  were  ten  chil- 
dren, and  with  one  exception  all  reached  mature 
years.  In.  order  of  birth  they  were  as  follows: 
Ira,  who  died  in  infancy;  Jeremiah,  Luc3%  Sarali, 
Riley,  Stephen,  Melissa,  Harrison,  Warren  and 
Joseph. 

It  was  during  his  early  bo3hood  that  Harrison 
Druse  accompanied  the  family  to  the  Bucke3-e 
State.  In  the  common  schools  of  the  neighbor- 
hood he  conned  his  lessons  through  the  winter 
season,  while  iu  the  summer  months  he  aided  in 
the  labors  of  the  farm.  No  event  of  special  im- 
portance occurred  during  his  3'outh,  which  was 
quietly'  passed  in  his  parents'  home.  In  1843  was 
celebrated  his  marriage  witli  Miss  Agnes  Cockshot, 
a  native  of  England,  who  crossed  tiie  Atlantic  in 
1818  and  settled  in  Belle  Prairie,  Washington 
Count}',  Oliio,  where  she  was  educated  and  reared 
to  womanhood.  In  the  same  year  of  their  mar- 
riage the}'  emigrated  to  Illinois  and  took  up  their 
residence  upon  a  farm  in  Monroe  Count}'.  Six 
children  came  to  bless  their  home  and  all  are  yet  liv- 
ing, namely:  Joseph  D.,  Warren  D.,  Ralph  H.,  Ger- 
tie M.,  Agnes  and  Ollie.  The  mother  of  this  fam- 
ily was  a  sincere  and  faithful  member  of  the 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  and  was  a  lady  of 
intelligence, highly  respected  by  all  who  knew  her. 
In  1884  siie  was  called  to  the  home  beyond,  and 
her  death  was  deeply  mourned. 

In  his  political  views,  Mr.  Druse  was  a  Whig  in 
early  life,  and  when  the  Republican  party  was 
formed  he  joined  its  ranks,  since  which  time  he 
has  been  numbered  among  its  stalwart  supporters. 
He  has  held  the  office  of  School  Treasurer  of  his 
township,  and  was  also  County  Commissioner  for 
two  terms.  He  discharged  his  duties  in  a  prompt 
and  faithful  manner,  .and  thereby  won  the  com- 
mendation of  all  concerned.  Mr.  Druse  is  a  self- 
made  man,  who  started  out  in  life  empty  handed, 
but  by  diligence  and  good  management  he  has  ac- 
cumulated considerable  property  and  now  has  six 
hundred  acres  of  valuable  land  in  Monroe  County 


and  a  fine  home.  He  is  now  practically  living 
retired,  while  his  eldest  son  carries  on  the  farm. 
He  also  has  one  son  who  is  Chief  of  Police  in  San 
Antonio,  Tex. 


•^=^^1 


H 


vH 


LLEN  A.  SHORT,  Treasurer  of  Randolph 
County,  is  a  man  univers.ally  popular,  and 
one  who  has  attained  success  in  life.  No 
public  official  is  held  in  higher  estimation 
for  practicable  ability  and  fine  personal  character, 
and  we  are  pleased  to  represent  such  a  public- 
spirited,  courteous  gentleman  in  our  Record.  He 
is  a  native  of  this  county,  having  been  born  in 
Percy,  April  5,  1856,  and  is  the  son  of  Richard  J. 
.and  Mary  G.  (Cross)  Short.  The  father  of  our 
subject  was  also  a  native  of  this  county,  his  birth 
occurring  on  what  was  known  as  Short's  Prairie, 
where  his  father  located  in  an  early  d.ay.  Mr. 
Short  is  still  living,  making  his  home  on  a  fine, 
farm  near  the  village  of  Percy.  The  maternal 
grandfather  of  our  subject,  Arthur  Cross,  was  also 
numbered  among  the  early  settlers  of  Jackson 
County,  and  there  owned  a  good  estate,  which 
he  placed  under  fine  cultivation.  His  daugtiter, 
Mrs.  Short,  was  born  near  Shiloh  Hill,  in  Jackson 
County. 

The  gentleman  whose  name  heads  this  sketch 
was  the  fourth  in  order  of  birth  of  seven  children, 
and  like  other  farmer  lads  attended  the  district 
school,  where  he  learned  to  read,  write  and 
"cipher."  Later  he  carried  on  his  studies  in  the 
Sparta  schools,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty  j'ears  be- 
gan teaching  school.  After  being  thus  employed 
for  three  years,  he  turned  his  attention  to  farming, 
and  by  his  energy  and  skill  has  attained  satisfac- 
tory results. 

In  his  political  relations  Mr.  Short  always  votes 
with  the  Democratic  party,  and  in  1890  he  was 
elected  Treasurer  of  Randolph  County.  Gifted  by 
nature  with  high  endowments,  he  has  cultivated 
these  to  the  utmost,  and  his  indefatigable  labor 
has  brought  to  him  the  esteem  of  his  fellow-men. 
March  27,  1889,  he  married  Miss  Ida  E.  Monleith, 
a  native  of  Perry  County,  this  state,  and  the 
daughter  of  John  A.  and  Mary  A.  Monteith.   They 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


747 


are  the  parents  of  a  son,  John  A.  Mr.  Short  is  a 
man  of  probity  and  honor.  He  has  been  success- 
ful from  a  financial  point  of  view,  and  has  won 
for  himself  a  high  position  in  the  county  which  is 
his  native  home. 


+= 


=+ 


^(  AMES  H.  CONANT,  a  retired  farmer  mak- 
ing his  home  in  the  city  of  Chester,  has 
been  prominent  in  the  public  affairs  of  that 
place,  and  .is  a  Union  soldier  well  deserves 
representation  in  this  volume.  He  is  widel}'  and 
favorably  known  throughout  the  communit}%  and 
without  doubt  tlie  record  of  his  life  will  prove  of 
interest  to  many  of  oui  readers.  He  is  a  native 
of  this  county',  and  his  birth  occurred  January 
13,  1828.  His  father,  Nathan  Conant,  was  born 
in  Massachusetts  in  1790,  and  his  mother,  whose 
maiden  name  was  Elizabeth  Hindman,  was  a  native 
of  Randolph  Countj',  111. 

When  a  j'oung  man  of  thirty  years  the  father 
of  our  subject  emigrated  to  Illinois,  and  passed 
the  remainder  of  his  life  on  a  farm  near  Chester, 
with  the  exception  of  a  short  time  spent  in  teach- 
ing school  in  Perry  County.  He  was  a  man  of  the 
strictest  integrity  and  uprightness,  and  in  his 
death,  which  occurred  in  1875,  the  community 
lost  one  of  its  most  honored  citizens.  Mrs.  Conant 
is  still  living,  and  resides  in  Salina,  Kan.,  at  the 
advanced  age  of  eight3'-four  years. 

In  his  boyhood,  James  H.  Conant  was  the  re- 
cipient of  ordinary  school  advantages,  and  his 
time  was  devoted  principally  to  working  on  his 
father's  farm.  When  attaining  mature  years  he 
launched  out  in  life  on  his  own  account,  and  in 
connection  with  carrying  on  a  farm  followed  the 
trade  of  a  cooper,  which  he  had  learned.  In  18G2, 
the  Civil  War  being  in  progress,  he  enlisted  in 
Company  A,  Eightieth  Illinois  Infantry,  and  was 
mustered  into  service  at  Centralia.  With  his  regi- 
ment he  was  sent  to  join  the  Armj'  of  the  Cum- 
berland, and  was  actively  engaged  in  many  battles 
throughout  Kentucky,  Tennessee  and  Georgia. 
During  an  engagement  at  Yining  Station,  near  At- 
lanta, he  lost  his   right  arm,  which  was  shot  and 


had  to  be  amputated.  To-day  he  carries  an  empty 
sleeve  as  a  memento  of  his  life  in  the  armj-. 

Mr.  Conant  received  an  honorable  discharge 
from  the  army  in  June,  1865,  and  returning  to  his 
home  in  this  county,  continued  his  farming  opera- 
tions for  a  number  of  years.  He  began  life  for 
himself  without  capital,  but  bj'  perseverance  and 
industry  overcame  the  ditticulties  in  his  path 
and  worked  his  way  upward  to  success.  Having 
acquired  a  handsome  competency,  which  enabled 
him  to  retire  from  active  work,  in  1879  he  moved 
into  the  city  of  Chester,  where  he  is  at  present  re- 
siding. 

James  H.  Conant  and  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Maxwell, 
daughter  of  James  and  Elizabeth  (Patton)  Flem- 
ing, were  united  in  marriage  in  November,  1873. 
The  father  of  Mrs.  Conant  wiis  a  native  of  Scot- 
land, and  emigrated  thence  to  the  United  States 
in  1840.  Further  facts  concerning  his  life  will  be 
found  in  his  biography,  which  appears  on  another 
page.  Our  subject  and  his  wife  are  members  of 
the  Presb3'terian  Church.  In  politics  he  always 
votes  with  the  Republican  party. 


GRACE  M.  VAN  METER,  who  was  born 
near  Elizabethtown,  Hardin  Count}-,  Ky., 
August  28,  1828,  is  a  son  of   William  and 

^  Elizabeth  (Goodin)  Van  Meter.  He  is  now 
residing  in  the  village  of  Rockwood,  and  is  the 
owner  of  a  fine  farm  which  he  cultivates,  and 
which  is  located  but  a  short  distance  from  his  resi- 
dence. 

The  father  of  our  subject  was  probably  a  native 
of  Pennsylvania,  and  a  descendant  of  old  Dutch 
stock.  His  father  bore  the  name  of  Jacob.  He 
died  July  4,  1876.  The  good  wife  and  mother, 
who  was  a  daughter  of  an  English  emigrant,  was 
born  January  1,  1800,  in  Hardin  Count}',  Ky.,  and 
died  April  29,  1886.  Hor.ice  Van  Meter  left  Ken- 
tucky in  1837,  with  his  parents,  who  resided  one 
year  in  Clay  County,  Ind.,  after  which  they  re- 
moved to  Edgar  Count}-,  111.,  settling  near  Grand- 
view,  where  they  continued  to  reside  until  their 
death. 

In  1844,  when  seventeen  years  of  age,  our  sub- 


748 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


ject  left  the  parental  roof,  and  walked  to  the  Ohio 
River,  where  he  took  passage  on  the  steamer  "Con- 
cord," and  went  to  Louisiana.  Near  Baton  Rouge 
he  engaged  in  coopering,  making  sugar  hogsheads 
and  molasses  barrels.  He  continued  at  that  occu- 
pation in  the  immediate  neighborhood  until  Feb- 
ruary, 1853,  when  lie  ascended  the  river  to  Ches- 
ter, this  county,  then  quite  a  village.  Remaining 
there  for  a  year,  he  studied  anatomy  with  Dr. 
William  Vance.  In  June,  1854,  he  came  to  Rock- 
wood,  and  in  the  fall  of  the  same  3'ear  purchased 
land  near  this  village,  in  Jackson  County,  and  be- 
gan the  operation  of  a  farm,  which  he  continued 
until  the  outbreak  of  the  war. 

When  the  outbreak  of  the  Rebellion  called  for 
the  energetic  efforts  of  every  loyal  American  citi- 
zen, Mr.  Van  Meter  offered  his  services  to  the 
Union,  enlisting  September  10,  1861,  in  Company 
K,  Fifth  Illinois  Cavahy,  at  Sparta,  111.  This  regi- 
ment was  mustered  in  at  Springfield,  and  was  as- 
signed to  duty  in  Missouri  and  Arkansas,  travel- 
ing as  far  south  as  Mississippi,  doing  some  service 
also  in  Tennessee,  and  participating  in  the  siege 
of  Vicksburg.  After  more  than  three  years  of 
fighting,  our  subject  was  discharged  at  Vicksburg, 
October  31,  1864,  having  served  under  Generals 
Steele  and  Sherman. 

On  returning  from  the  war,  Mr.  Van  Meter  sold 
his  farin  in  Jackson  County,  and  purchased  one 
hundred  and  sixty  acres  near  Rockwood,  about 
one-half  of  which  is  fine  bottom  land.  Here  he 
has  since  continued  to  carr3'  on  agricultural  pur- 
suits. February  4,  1851,  he  married  Adelaide, 
daughter  of  AVilliam  and  Chloe  (Whitney)  Vance, 
residents  of  Louisana,  who  removed  to  that  state 
from  Iowa,  where  the  mother  was  born.  Of  this 
marriage  five  children  were  born,  three  of  whom 
survive:  Cornelia,  the  wife  of  Warren  Hooker,  of 
St.  Louis;  Willie,  the  wife  of  John  A.  Malone,  of 
De  Soto,  Mo.;  and  Charles  C,  at  present  in- the 
state  of  Oregon. 

On  the  6th  of  March,  1870,  our  subject  was  a 
second  time  married,  taking  as  his  wife  Mrs.  Caro- 
line Gilbreath,  a  daughter  of  Jere  and  Chloe 
(Whitney)  Hill.  Mrs.  Van  Meter  is  a  member  of 
the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  of  Rockwood. 
In  politics  our  subject  is  a  Republican.     Socially, 


he  belongs  to  Chester  Lodge  No.  72,  A.  F.  <fe  A. 
M.;  Rockwood  Lodge  No.  351,  L  O.  O.  F.;  and 
Rockwood  Post  No.  734,  G.  A.  R.  He  has  served 
as  Trustee  and  President  of  the  Village  Board  of 
Rockwood,  and  as  Trustee  and  Director  of  the 
public  schools.  He  and  his  wife  are  held  in  the 
highest  esteem  b}'  the  citizens  of  Rockwood. 


0  ^^Kr  ^Kr  "^^  ^i£r  ^ifcr  ^^Hj 


\\  HARLES  THIEMANN.  Everybody  in  this 
portion  of  the  state  knows  Charles  Thie- 
mann, the  present  Commissioner  of  Ran- 
dolph County,  who  is  residing  on  his  fine  farm, 
located  four  miles  southeast  of  Red  Bud,  where 
ills  birth  occurred  Januar}-  3,  1857.  His  parents, 
John  Friedrich  C.  and  Caroline  (Nagel)  Thiemann, 
were  natives  of  German}',  who  emigrated  to  the 
United  States  in  1842.  They  immediately  located 
in  Randolph  County,  where  the  fatiier  was  vari- 
ously employed  for  two  years,  and  then  purciiased 
the  farm  which  our  subject  now  owns  and  occu- 
pies. While  residing  in  his  native  land,  he  fol- 
lowed his  trade  of  a  potter,  but  after  coming  to 
America  made  farming  his  life  work.  He  was  born 
February  29,  1816,  and  died  March  5,  1894.  His 
wife,  whose  birth  occurred  October  27,  1817,  died 
Januar}-  10,  1879.  Grandfather  John  Thiemann 
was  a  soldier  in  the  Franco-German  War,  and 
spent  his  entire  life  in  his  native  land. 

Our  subject  was  the  youngest  of  a  family  of  five 
children  and  obtained  a  fair  education  in  the  dis- 
trict schools.  He  was  very  studious  and  eagerly 
took  advantage  of  every  opportunity  to  learn. 
He  remained  under  the  parental  roof  until  his 
marriage,  since  which  time  his  father  has  made  his 
home  with  him.  The  date  of  his  union  with  Miss 
Sophia  M.  H.  Schrieber  was  May  29,  1879.  Mrs. 
Thiemann  was  born  June  24,  1858,  and  is  the 
daughter  of  Charles  and  Magdalena  (Huth)  Schrie- 
ber, natives  of  Germany.  Her  parents  came  to 
the  United  States,  and  the  mother  departed  this 
life  in  Randolph  County  in   1884. 

To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thiemann  have  been  born  three 
children,  Albert  F.  W.,  Helen  A.  W.  and  Emma  S. 
The  estate  of  our  subject,  which  comprises  two 
hundred  and   sixty-live   acres,  is  so  divided  tiiat 


i*iM*il"-i^'  '^  ~^ 


'       i-^LYDEHOTa 


Vtl 


h 


CLYDE    HOTEL,     PEKO,    I  LL  .  A(  J  D  R  L /V     CLr-QE,   PROPR, 


^ Iff   ^^^%Ji    '' 


] 


^-^r^  n 


M 


iM^tl 


0  imiF^ 


^^^^_^ 


1    ^_^        4»     J^.      v;;^-    _'        _ 


_^1?^^ 

-i__ , 


RE51DENCE0F  CHARLE5    THIEMANN,  SLC.  23.,  T. '^.  F?.  8., RANDOLPH    CO.,  ILL. 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


751 


one  hundred  and  thirty  acres  are  located  near  Red 
Bud.  and  the  remainder  two  miles  south  of  Sparta. 
He  is  well  informed  in  his  calling  of  agriculture, 
and  by  well  directed  and  incessant  labor  he  has 
thus  accumulated  his  handsome  propertj',  and  by 
conducting  his  affairs  in  a  business-like  manner 
reaps  an  excellent  income. 

Mr.  Thiemann  is  a  loyal  and  law-abiding  citi- 
zen, interested  in  the  welfare  of  his  county,  and  in 
1892  was  elected  by  the  Democratic  part^'  to  the 
office  of  County  Commissioner.  He  cast  his  first 
Presidential  vote  for  Hancock,  and  since  that  time 
the  Democrats  have  found  in  him  a  true  sup- 
porter. In  religion  he  is  a  strong  Lutheran,  and 
with  his  wife  has  been  a  faithful  member  of  the 
church  ever  since  he  identified  himself  with  it. 

lALPH  H.  SELLEW,  of  Paradise  Precinct, 
fT  Perry  County,  was  born  on  the  27th  of 
Jul^-,  1857,  in  .Taekson,  Mo.,  and  is  a  son 
^pof  Henry  and  Jemima  (Cherr}')  Sellew.  The 
former  was  born  in  Connecticut,  Marcli  4,  1817, 
and  the  latter  in  Raleigh,  N.  C,  on  the  21st  of 
June,  1830.  Their  marriage  was  celebrated  in 
Cape  Girardeau  County,  Mo.,  August  16,  1853, 
and  thej-  became  the  parents  of  two  children.  Ralph 
H.  and  Charles  W.  The  latter  is  a  graduate  of  the 
Illinois  College  of  Pharmacy,  and  is  now  in  the 
drug  business  in  Kirkwood,  Mo. 

Tlie  paternal  grandfather,  Col.  James  Sellew, 
was  a  native  of  Connecticut,  and  won  his  title  in 
the  state  militia.  His  fatlier  bore  the  name  of  Philip, 
Jr.,  the  latter  being  a  son  of  John,  whose  father, 
Philip  Sellew,  Sr.,  was  the  founder  of  the  family 
in  America.  He  was  born  in  Bordeaux,  France, 
and  was  educated  for  the  clergy  of  the  Protestant 
Church.  In  consequence  of  the  revocation  of  the 
Edict  of  Nantes,  he  left  his  native  land  for  Amer- 
ica, and  settled  in  Massachusetts.  Here  he  en- 
gaged in  teaching  school  for  fifty  years.  His  death 
occurred  May  15.  1773,  at  the  advanced  age  of 
eighty-five. 

The  great-grandfatlier  of  our  subject  served  in 
the  Indian  wars  in  Canada.  Removing  to  Con- 
necticut, he  became  ver}'"  prominent  in   public  af- 


fairs and  was  elected  to  the  Legislature.  He  also 
served  in  many  local  offices,  being  one  of  the  lead- 
ing and  influential  citizens  of  the  community.  He 
married  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Jeduthan  Smith, 
who  was  the  King's  High  Sheriff  of  the  Colony  of 
Hartford,  and  filled  that  office  until  exempted  by 
age.  John  Sellew  married  Hannah,  daughter  of 
James  Hamilton,  and  granddaughter  of  Thomas 
Hamilton,  who  was  tiie  fourth  son  of  Sir  George 
Hamilton,  co-heir  of  Hon.  George  Hamilton,  sixth 
Earl  Abercorn  in  the  kingdom  of  Scotland,  and 
Duke  of  Chatelherault  in  France,  who  was  the 
great-grandson  of  King  James  II.  by  the  Princess 
Mary. 

James  Sellew.  grandfather  of  our  subject,  was 
the  seventh  ciiild  of  Philip.  He  married  Mabel 
Bentson,  of  Albany,  N.  Y.,  who  was  related  to  the 
Webster  family.  Their  seventh  child  was  Henry 
Sellew,  father  of  our  subject.  He  acquired  a  com- 
mon-school education,  and  learned  the  art  of  mar- 
ble engraving.  From  his  native  state  he  emigrated 
to  New  Orleans,  where  he  engaged  in  the  hard- 
ware business  for  about  three  j-ears.  On  the  ex- 
piration of  that  period,  he  removed  to  Jackson, 
Mo.,  where  he  engaged  in  general  merchandising 
until  just  previous  to  the  breaking  out  of  tlie  late 
war,  when  he  disposed  of  his  possessions  there  and 
came  to  Illinois,  locating  in  St.  John.  Perry  Coun- 
ty. He  purchased  the  farm  known  as  the  Judge 
Jones'  place,  consisting  of  one  hundred  and  twentj' 
acres  of  good  land,  and  there  lived  a  retired  life 
until  called  to  the  home  be3'ond,  November  1, 
1865.  He  was  a  L'nion  man,  .and  his  S3'mpathie8 
were  with  the  Republican  party.  His  widow  still 
survives  him,  and  is  yet  living  on  the  old  home- 
stead with  her  son  Ralph.  Her  father  was  a  farmer 
of  Missouri,  and  was  elected  Captain  of  a  company 
of  volunteers  to  serve  in  the  Mexican  War,  but 
the  troops  were  never  called  to  the  front.  He  was 
a  native  of  North  Carolina,  and  died  Julj-  1,  1854. 
His  wife,  who  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Polly 
Black,  came  of  an  old  Virginian  family. 

Mrs.  Sellew  is  a  member  of  the  Christian  Church, 
and  her  husband  held  membership  with  the  Con- 
gregational Church.  She  is  a  most  estimable  lady, 
and  one  widel3'  and  favorably  known  in  this  com- 
munity.    Their  second  son,  Charles,  was  graduated 


752 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


from  the  Illinois  College  of  Pharmacy  in  the  Class 
of  '92,  and  later  accepted  a  position  with  a  drug- 
gist in  Kirkwood,  Mo.  He  is  a  great  lover  of  fine 
horses,  owning  a  number  of  the  same,  and  deals  to 
some  extent  in  blooded  stock. 

Ralph  Sellew,  whose  name  heads  this  record,  was 
reared  under  the  parental  roof,  and  was  very 
young  when  his  parents  came  to  Perry  County, 
where  the  greater  part  of  his  life  has  been  passed. 
His  primary  education  was  acquired  in  the  district 
schools,  and  was  supplemented  by  studj'  in  the 
high  school  of  Du  Quoin.  Later  he  engaged  in 
teaciiing  for  five  years,  but  he  now  devotes  his 
tune  .and  attention  to  agricultural  interests,  being 
engaged  in  the  operation  of  the  old  homestead. 
Upon  the  farm  may  be  noticed  a  good  dwelling, 
barns  and  outbuildings,  which  are  models  of  con- 
venience, and  all  modern  accessories  and  improve- 
ments. This  place  is  neat  and  thrift}'  in  appear- 
ance and  indicates  the  careful  supervision  of  the 
owner,  who  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  leading  agri- 
culturists of  the  community.  He  has  also  made 
some  investments  in  city  real  estate. 

In  politics  Mr.  Sellew  is  a  supporter  of  Republi- 
can principles.  He  is  a  man  of  culture,  fond  of 
literary  pursuits  and  the  society  of  refined  and 
educated  people.  A  gentleman  of  pleasing  man- 
ner, he  is  generous  and  charitable  in  disposition,  is 
popular  with  all  who  know  him  and  has  the  high 
regard  of  those  with  whom  business  or  social  rela- 
tions have  brought  him  in  contact.  He  is  inter- 
ested in  everything  pertaining  to  the  welfare  of 
the  community,  and  in  the  history  of  his  adopted 
county  well  deserves  representation. 


=-M"M"{"5-5"5 


,^^  TEPHEN  S.  KIKK.  This  gentleman,  who 
^^^^  owns  four  hundred  acres  of  land  located 
(llj/^)  three  and  a-lialf  miles  from  Rockwood,  is 
a  native  of  Tennessee,  having  been  born 
near  Gaiuesboro,  Jackson  (^ount}',  March  7,  1842. 
He  is  the  son  of  George  M.  and  Rachael  (Brown) 
Kirk,  the  latter  a  native  of  Tennessee.  The  father 
of  our  subject  was  born  in  Virginia  in  1810,  and 
when  a  small  boy  removed  with  his  parents  to 
Tennessee. 

Stephen  S.  Kirk  spent  his  childhood  in  his   na- 


tive county  attending  the  subscription  schools, 
which  were  conducted  but  three  months  in  the 
year.  On  the  outbreak  of  the  Civil  War  he  was  in 
his  nineteenth  year,  but  being  desirous  of  defend- 
ing the  Stars  and  Bars,  he  in  September,  1861, 
enlisted  in  Company  G,  Twenty-fifth  Tennessee 
Infantrj',  C.  S.,  serving  faithfully  and  well  until 
November,  1863.  During  that  period  he  partici- 
pated in  the  battles  of  Jlill  Springs,  K}'.,  Murfrees- 
boro,  Beccli  Grove,  Fairfield,  Miss.,  Stephenson, 
Ala.,  and  Perr3'ville,  Ky.  Although  engaging  in 
so  many  conflicts,  he  was  never  taken  prisoner  nor 
wounded,  with  the  exception  of  a  slight  bruise  re- 
ceived while  at  Beech  Grove. 

The  first  year  after  the  war  Mr.  Kirk  remained 
in  the  south  and  put  in  a  crop  of  corn  for  a 
planter.  During  the  following  year  he  engaged 
with  his  brother,  John  H.,  in  making  shoes  near  a 
tanyard,  among  the  hills  of  Tennessee.  On  coming 
to  Illinois,  he  sojourned  for  one  year  and  a-half 
at  Du  Quoin,  working  first  on  the  railroads,  and 
later  in  the  blacksmith  department  of  the  railroad 
shops.  In  the  spring  in  1866,  he  came  to  Ran- 
dolph County,  and  in  companj'  with  his  father, 
who  had  preceded  him  hither,  began  cultivating 
the  land  on  the  river  bottom  above  Rockwood.  In 
the  fall  of  that  year  he  returned  to  Tennessee, 
where  he  remained  for  a  twelvemonth  working 
for  an  uncle,  and  then  came  to  this  county,  where 
he  has  since  been  engaged  in  farming.  During 
the  past  ten  years,  however,  he  built  a  landing 
near  his  home,  which  bears  his  name,  and  the  busi- 
ness of  which  occupies  a  portion  of  his  time  and 
attention. 

August  15,  1872,  Stephen  S.  Kirk  and  Miss 
Adeliza,  daughter  of  Samuel  Mansker,  were  united 
in  marriage.  Mrs.  Kirk  was  born  January  20, 
1857,  at  the  old  Mansker  residence  near  her  pres- 
ent home,  where  her  mother  still  resides.  Their 
union  has  been  blessed  by  the  birth  of  ten  chil- 
dren, of  whom  those  living  are:  Stephen  E.,  Ma- 
bel B.,  Herman  N.,  Gracie  A.,  William  N.  and  Hy 
C.  Those  deceased  are  Nannie  A.,  Elveretta,  Ora 
L.,  and  one  who  died  in  infancy. 

Mr.  Kirk  is  at  present  the  possessor  of  several 
fine  farms  on  the  main  land  and  Crane's  Island, 
which  aggregate  more  than  four   hundred  acres. 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


753 


His  home  farm,  which  consists  of  thirty-two  acres 
of  finely  improved  land,  bears  a  comfortable  resi- 
dence which  overlooks  tlie  river  and  is  but  a  short 
distance  from  Kirk's  Landing.  In  religious  affairs 
Mrs.  Kirk  is  a  member  of  the  Free  Will  Baptist 
Church.  In  his  political  relations,  our  subject  is  a 
Democrat,  and  is  prominent  in  both  national  and 
state  politics.  He  has  been  Director  of  the  Clifton 
School  for  many  years,  and  occupies  a  higli  place 
in  the  regard  of  tiie  community  in  which  he  re- 
sides. 


il^^'ENRY  V.  FAIIERTY.  Conspicuous  among 
iTj;  tiie  influential  citizens  of  Chester,  whom  it 
JW^  is  a  privilege  to  know,  is  the  gentleman 
(^p  whose  name  jntroduces  this  biographical 
notice,  and  who  for  a  number  of  yeare  has  been 
serving  as  Chief  Deputj'  County  Clerk  and  Secre- 
tary of  the  Democratic  Central  Committee.  He  is 
well  known  by  the  citizens  of  Chester,  and  is  also 
prominent  througiiout  Randolph,  his  native  coun- 
ty. He  was  born  near  Red  Bud,  111.,  October  6, 
1856. 

As  the  name  would  indicate,  the  Faherty  family 
is  of  Irish  descent.  Grandfather  Edmund  Faherty 
was  a  native  of  the  Emerald  Isle,  and  thence  emi- 
grated to  America  in  1818,  settling  in  Randolpli 
County,  111.,  during  the  following  3'ear,  and  be- 
coming one  of  the  pioneers  of  this  section  of  the 
state.  His  son,  .lames,  was  born  near  Red  Bud, 
and  grew  to  manhood  amid  the  primitive  scenes 
of  this  section,  acquiring  such  information  as  was 
obtainable  in  the  early  schools.  A  farmer  by  oc- 
cupation, he  pursued  his  chosen  calling  near  Kas- 
kaskia,  on  the  Kaskaskia  River  bottom  lands,  from 
1857  until  1869,  when  he  returned  to  the  old 
homestead. 

In  1886,  James  Fahert}'  removed  from  Ran- 
dolph County,  this  time  locating  St.  Louis,  where 
he  now  resides.  His  wife,  whose  maiden  name  was 
Maria  Hammond,  was  born  in  Ohio,  and  was  of 
English  parentage  and  descent.  They  were  the 
parents  of  eight  children,  the  third  of  whom  is 
Heniy  F.,  of  this  sketch.  He  received  the  rudi- 
ments of  his  education  in  the  district  schools   near 


Kaskaskia,  and  later  attended  St.  Patrick 's  College 
at  Ruma,  111.,  and  also  prosecuted  his  studies  in 
Cape  Girardeau,  Mo.  At  the  age  of  twenty  years 
he  commenced  in  business  for  himself,  opening  a 
livery  and  sale  stable  at  Red  Bud,  where  he  re- 
mained for  four  3'ears. 

We  next  find  Mr.  Faherty  interested  in  the 
mercantile  business  for  nine  years  at  Red  Bud  and 
Ruma,  an  enterprise  in  which  he  met  with  fair  suc- 
cess. In  Januaiy,  1889,  he  came  to  Chester  and 
entered  the  ofEce  of  the  Circuit  Clerk  as  Deputy, 
serving  in  that  capacity  for  a  3'ear  or  more.  In 
December,  1890,  he  became  Deputy  County  Clerk, 
a  position  which  he  is  still  creditabl}'  filling.  He 
is  among  the  most  popular  officials  of  the  county, 
and  though  now  but  in  the  prime  of  life,  has  al- 
readj'  gained  a  success  which  an  older  man  might 
well  desire  to  have. 

September  23,  1879,  occurred  tlie  marriage  of 
Mr.  Faiierty  to  Miss  Julia,  daughter  of  Zachariah 
and  Ann  (Wall)  Moore,  natives  of  Illinois,  where 
the  father  resided  until  his  death.  The  mother 
now  makes  her  home  in  Prairie  du  Rocher.  Mrs. 
Faherty  was  born  in  Monroe  County,  and  is  the 
mother  of  five  children:  Henrj',  Maggie,  Thomas, 
Moore  and  Genevieve,  all  of  whom  reside  with  their 
parents.  In  religious  belief  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Faherty 
are  identified  with  the  Catholic  Church,  and  he  is 
a  member  of  the  Catholic  Knights  of  America,  be- 
ing prominent  in  the  order.  He  has  been  a  life- 
long Democrat,  and  is  quite  active  in  politics,  liav- 
ing,  as  above  stated,  filled  the  position  of  Secretary 
of  the  Democratic  Central  Committee  for  a  num- 
ber of  3'ears. 

,     • 0#^P •    . 

OTTO  KUEHN,  M.  D.,  a  prominent  and  suc- 
cessful physician  of  Burksville,  has  here  en- 
gaged in  practice  since  1865,  and  has  won 
an  enviable  reputation,  which  has  placed  him  in  a 
leading  position  among  his  professional  brethren 
of  Monroe  County.  A  native  of  Germany,  he 
was  born  on  the  26th  of  July,  1842,  and  is  one  of 
seven  children  whose  parents  were  Frederick  and 
Barbara  (Kuehn)  Kuehn.  They  were  also  natives 
of  Germany.  Of  their  family,  four  are  now  living, 
namely' :  Ottilie,  Otto,  Lillie  and  Frida.     The  Doc- 


754 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


tor's  father  acquired  a  most  excellent  education  in 
his  native  land  and  was  a  graduate  of  a  medical 
college  in  German3'.  He  served  as  Surgeon  in  the 
German  army  throughout  the  greater  part  of  his 
life  and  was  a  prominent  and  well  known  man. 
His  death  occurred  at  the  advanced  age  of  sev- 
entj'-nine  years.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Evan- 
gelical Lutheran  Church,  to  whicli  his  wife  also 
belongs.  She  is  still  living  in  Germany,  at  the 
age  of  eighty-one.  She  is  a  most  highly  educated 
lad}',  cultured  and  refined,  and  her  mental  faculties 
are  yet  unimpaired. 

Dr.  Kuehn  spent  the  d.ays  of  his  youth  in  his 
parents'  home  and  was  provided  with  excellent  ed- 
ucational advantages,  which  he  improved,  thus 
becoming  a  well  informed  men.  Determining  to 
take  up  the  pursuit  to  which  his  father  devoted 
his  energies,  he  began  studying  medicine,  and 
after  a  time  was  graduated  from  the  Munich  Med- 
ical College,  of  Germany.  Wishing  to  seek  a  home 
and  fortune  in  tiie  New  World,  he  bade  adieu  to 
home  and  friends  in  1864  and  sailed  for  the 
United  States.  He  was  then  twentj'-two  years  of 
age.  He  at  once  made  his  way  to  Wisconsin.  The 
.Civil  War  was  in  progress,  and  he  was  commis- 
sioned Assistant  Surgeon  of  the  Tliirty-flfth  Wis- 
consin Infantry.  He  served  for  two  months  with 
that  regiment  and  then  made  a  contract  with  the 
Government,  becoming  Acting  Assistant  Surgeon 
of  the  United  States  army.  He  was  thus  employed 
until  November,  18G5,  when,  as  before  stated,  he 
came  to  Burksville,  where  he  has  since  made  his 
home. 

Dr.  Kuehn  was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss 
Antonia  Hesse,  a  native  of  Illinois,  who  was  born, 
reared  and  educated  in  St.  Clair  County.  By  a 
former  marriage  the  Doctor  had  six  children,  five 
of  whom  are  yet  living:  Louisa,  Oltilie,  Wilhel- 
mina,  Emily  and  Jolianna.  The  Doctor  and  his 
wife  are  both  memliers  of  the  Evangelical  Luth- 
eran Church,  and  he  is  a  prominent  member  of 
the  Masonic  lodge  of  Waterloo.  He  takes  a  very 
active  interest  in  political  affairs,  and  is  a  stalwart 
advocate  of  the  Republican  party  and  its  i)rinci- 
ples.  He  has  held  the  office  of  County  Coroner, 
was  Justice  of  the  Peace  for  ten  years  and  has 
served  as  School  Director.     In  these  various  posi- 


tions he  has  discharged  his  duties  with  a  prompt- 
ness and  fidelity  that  have  won  him  the  high  com- 
mendation of  all  concerned.  In  his  business  life 
he  has  met  with  signal  success,  and  has  built  up  a 
very  large  practice  as  the  result  of  iiis  skill  and 
ability.  He  is  a  pleasant,  genial  man  and  througli- 
out  the  community  has  won   many   warm  friends. 


FERDINAND  BUETTNER,  who  resides  in 
Sj  Percy,  is  one  of  the  worthy  German  citi- 
zens of  Randolph  County.  He  is  now  en- 
gaged in  general  merchandising  and  is  doing  a 
good  business  in  that  line,  for  he  carries  a  com- 
plete and  well  assorted  stock  and  iiis  patrons  ever 
receive  courteous  treatment  and  fair  dealing  at  his 
hands.  He  has  thereby  won  a  liberal  patronage, 
which  is  well  deserved,  and  he  is  regarded  as  one 
of  tlie  leading  merchants  of  this  place. 

Mr.  Buettner  was  born  in  German}',  April  11, 
1858,  and  is  a  son  of  Justus  and  Margaret  (Von- 
Keutz)  Buettner.  Their  family  numbered  seven 
children,  of  whom  he  was  the  sixth  in  order  of 
birth.  The  parents  botli  spent  their  entire  lives  in 
their  native  land,  where  the  father  died  at  the  age  of 
fifty-nine,  while  the  mother  passed  away  in  March, 
1892,  at  the  age  of  seventy  years.  Under  the  pa- 
rental roof  our  subject  was  reared  to  manhood. 
He  attended  the  public  schools  of  his  native  town 
until  fourteen  years  of  age,  when  he  began  earn- 
ing his  own  livelihood  by  clerking  in  a  store.  He 
was  thus  employed  for  four  years,  when,  at  the 
age  of  twenty-one,  lie  determined  to  seek  a  home 
and  fortune  in  America. 

Bidding  adieu  to  friends  and  Fatherland,  Mr. 
Buettner  sailed  for  the  New  World  in  1879,  and 
located  in  Red  Bud,  111.,  where  in  connection  with 
his  brother,  Henry,  he  engaged  in  business.  Henry 
Buettner  is  still  a  prosperous  business  man  of  that 
place.  Ferdinand  continued  in  business  with  him 
for  about  four  years,  when  in  1883  he  embarked 
in  the  lumber  business,  which  he  continued  until 
1886.  In  that  year  he  went  to  St.  Louis  and 
worked  for  one  year.  In  1887,  he  came  to  Percy 
and  opened  a  general  merchandise  store,  which  he 
has  since  conducted.     He  is   now  extensively  en- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


755 


gaged  in  general  merchandising  and  has  recently 
completed  the  fine  business  block  whicli  he  now  oc- 
cupies. He  also  erected  a  handsome  residence, 
which  not  onlj'  gives  to  him  his  fine  home,  but  is 
also  a  credit  to  the  beautiful  village  of  Percy. 

On  the  14th  of  April,  1884,  Mr.  Buettner  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Maggie  Biffar,  a 
daughter  of  George  and  Helen  (I>nst)  Bififar,  both 
whom  were  natives  of  Bavaria.  Their  union  has 
been  blessed  by  the  birth  of  four  children,  but  one 
of  the  number  is  now  deceased.  Tliose  still  living 
are  Olga,  Arthur  and  Louis. 

Mr.  and  Jlrs.  Buettner  are  Lutherans  in  religi- 
ous belief  and  are  liberal  contributors  to  the  sup- 
port of  the  church,  with  which  they  liold  member- 
ship. In  political  views,  our  subject  is  a  Republi- 
can, and  is  a  progressive  and  thoroughgoing  citi- 
zen, who  is  alive  to  the  best  interests  of  the  com- 
munity in  which  he  malies  his  home,  and  who  is 
ever  read}'  to  aid  in  the  advancement  in  all  that 
tends  to  promote  the  general  welfare. 


|!L  UGH  OVERSTREET,  who  is  now  publish- 
ifjl;  ing  the  Ava  Advertiser,  has,  through  the 
/^^  greater  part  of  his  life,  been  engaged  in 
(^)  newspaper  work,  and  is  an  able  journalist. 
He  was  born  October  26,  1867,  and  is  a  son  of  J. 
C.  and  Cornelia  (Whetstone)  Overstreet,  both  of 
whom  are  natives  of  Soutli  Carolina.  The  father 
has  followed  merchandising,  milling  and  farming 
during  various  periods  in  his  life.  He  was  a  sol- 
dier in  the  Confederate  army  during  the  late 
war  and  is  now  residing  in  S^ylvania,  Ga.  He  has 
taken  an  active  part  in  local  politics,  and  for 
several  3'ears  was  County  Ordinary.  Five  of  his 
brothers  were  killed  in  the  Confederate  service. 
Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Overstreet  were  born  eight 
children,  all  of  whom  are  j-et  living.  They  gave 
their  children  excellent  educational  advantages, 
and  three  sons  are  college  graduates.  One  of  them, 
J.  W.,  carried  off  the  first  honors  of  his  class  at 
Mercer  Universitj'. 

In  his  native  state  of  Georgia,  Hugh  Overstreet 
was  educated,  graduating  from  tiie  high  school  in 
Sylvania.     At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  left  home. 


and  for  a  few  months  worked  in  a  grocery  store 
in  Savannah,  Ga.  He  then  went  to  Millen,  Ga., 
where  he  was  emploj'ed  in  a  newspaper  office  for 
a  short  time,  but  he  principally  learned  his  trade 
in  the  office  of  the  Savannah  Morning  News.  Bor- 
rowing $50,  lie  then  left  for  the  west.  On  reach- 
ing Ava  he  was  obliged  to  send  home  for  more 
money,  and  when  it  reached  liim,  continued  his 
journey  to  Tipton,  Mo.,  wiiere  he  worked  on  the 
Times  for  seven  montlis.  His  father  then  boiigiit 
him  a  paper  at  Tennille,  Ga.,  which  he  published 
for  nine  months,  when  he  sold  out.  He  was  tiien 
onl3'  seventeen  years  of  age.  A  few  days  later  he 
came  to  Ara,  and  later  went  to  Ogden,  I'tah, 
where  he  was  emploj'ed  on  the  LTtaii  Daily  Union 
for  thirteen  months.  He  next  went  to  Evanston, 
Wyo.,  and  took  charge  of  the  Uinta  Chieftain, 
wluch  was  owned  bj'  a  stock  company  which  liad 
the  best-equipped  office  in  Wj'oming. 

For  a  year  Mr.  Overstreet  there  remained,  and 
then,  by  the  advice  of  George  Carpenter,  of  the 
Carpenter  Paper  Companjs  of  Omaha,  Neb.,  he 
went  to  Pocatello,  Idaho,  and  organized  a  stock 
company  for  tlie  publication  of  the  Pocatello 
Tribune,  a  weekh'  Republican  paper.  In  this  ven- 
ture he  lost  all  he  had.  .lames  H.  Ilawley,  the 
Chairman  of  the  Democratic  State  Central  Com- 
mittee of  Idaho,  then  asked  him  to  carry  on  a 
dailj^  Democratic  paper  through  a  political  state 
canvass,  and  for  the  admission  of  the  territorj' 
into  the  LTnion.  Mr.  Overstreet  did  so,  publishing 
the  first  Democratic  daily  paper  of  Idaho.  He 
then  went  to  Salmon  City,  Idaho,  where  he 
woi'ked  on  a  paper  seven  months,  after  which  he 
went  ninet}'-flve  miles  up  the  Salmon  River  to 
Clayton,  and  with  the  capital  he  had  saved  pur- 
chased a  paper,  but  the  boom  in  that  town  col- 
lapsed and  he  was  left  without  a  cent.  Going  to 
Boise  City,  he  then  traveled  for  the  Irrigation  Age 
for  a  few  months,  and  later  took  charge  of  the 
Anaconda  Standard,  a  dailj'  paper  of  Anaconda, 
Mont.,  where  he  continued  for  three  montlis. 
Subsequently  he  removed  to  Missoula,  Mont., 
where  he  met  his  present  wife,  who  had  journeyed 
from  Ava  to  meet  him. 

In  September,  1892,  was  celebrated  the  mar- 
riage of  Mr.  Overstreet  and  Jliss  Etta  Henson,who 


756 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


was  born  in  Ava  December  26,  1866,  and  is  a 
daughter  of  James  and  Julia  (Bower)  Henson. 
One  child  graces  their  union,  Georgia  Ruth.  After 
their  marriage  Mr.  Overstreet  went  to  Butte,  and 
for  a  few  months  worked  on  the  Butte  Miner.  On 
the  1st  of  February.  1893,  he  took  charge  of  the 
Ava  Advertiser,  in  the  publication  of  which  he  is 
now  successful!}-  engaged.  In  politics  he  is  a 
Democrat,  and  his  wife  is  a  memlier  of  the  Presb}'- 
terian  Church.  Both  are  highly  respected  citizens 
of  this  community  and  hold  an  enviable  position 
in  social  circles. 


^^EORGP]  K.  KEINER,  a  well  known  farmer, 
III  I—-,  living  on  section  3,  Paradise  Prairie,  Perr}^ 
'^Jft  County,  was  born  January  11,  1842,  in 
Prussia.  His  parents  were  William  C.  and  Sophie 
(Kern)  Keiner.  The  father  was  a  native  of  the 
same  locality,  and  in  his  Prussian  home  carried  on 
general  farming.  He  also  served  in  the  Prussian 
army  for  three  years  and  was  a  highly  respected 
citizen.  He  held  the  office  of  Burgomaster,  or 
Mayor,  of  his  native  place  for  a  number  of  years. 
The  mother  was  also  born  in  the  same  locality  as 
her  husband,  and  their  marriage  was  celebrated  in 
1838.  They  became  the  parents  of  eight  children, 
all  of  whom  are  3-et  living,  namely:  William  C, 
who  resides  with  our  subject;  George  K.,  who  is 
the  next  j'ounger;  Frederick  W.,  who  still  makes 
his  home  in  Prussia;  Minnie,  who  married  Henry 
Pepper,  of  Ohio,  and  then  returned  to  Prussia; 
Henry,  who  served  in  the  P'ranco-Prussian  War 
and  now  makes  his  home  in  Du  Quoin  Precinct,  of 
Perry  County;  Ernest,  a  school  teacher  of  Dord- 
mund,  Prussia;  and  Nettie  and  Peter,  who  com- 
plete the  family. 

In  his  native  laud  our  subject  was  reared  to 
manhood,  his  early  boyhood  days  being  spent 
upon  his  father's  farm.  In  the  winter  months  he 
attended  the  common  schools,  and  through  the 
summer  season  aided  in  the  labors  of  the  field. 
His  time  was  thus  passed  until  fourteen  years  of 
age,  when  he  left  home  and  started  out  in  life  for 
himself  to  make  his  own  way  in  the  world.  He 
began  learning  the  cooper's  trade,  which  he  fol- 


lowed until  twenty-five  years  of  age.  At  that  time 
he  bade  adieu  to  the  Fatherland  and  crossed  the 
Atlantic  to  America.  He  flrst  located  in  Belle- 
ville, 111.,  where  he  remained  fr  r  five  years,  and 
since  1872  he  has  resided  upon  his  present  farm. 
His  first  purchase  was  eighty  acres,  to  which  he  has 
added  from  time  to  time  until  he  now  owns  over 
two  hundred  acres.  He  carries  on  general  farm- 
ing and  his  place  is  neat  and  thrifty  in  appearance. 
On  the  3d  of  June,  1869,  Mr.  Keiner  was  united 
in  marriage  with  Miss  Maiy  Wegerich,  a  native  of 
the  province  of  Saxony,  Germany.  Their  union 
is  blessed  with  five  children:  Charlie  and  Henry, 
who  aid  their  father  in  the  operation  of  the  home 
farm;  Minnie,  who  aids  the  mother;  George  and 
Lewis.  The  familj'  circle  yet  remains  unbroken. 
Mr.  Keiner  is  a  man  of  thrifty  habits,  and  his 
home  and  surroundings  show  the  effects  of  his 
efforts  to  make  his  homestead  comfortable  and  at- 
tractive. In  politics  he  votes  with  the  Republican 
party,  but  never  seeks  political  preferment  for 
himself.  He  and  his  family  are  members  of  the 
German  Lutheran  Church  and  are  highly  respected 
people,  who  hold  an  enviable  position  in  social 
circles. 


W 


ILLIAM  SPENCE,  who  is  now  living  a 
\/iJli  •'ctired  life  in  JIurphysboro,  is  one  of  the 
'^^  earliest  settlers  of  .lackson  County,  dating 
his  residence  here  from  1841.  He  has  aided  in 
the  development  and  upbuilding  of  this  commu- 
nit3',  has  watched  its  growth  and  progress  and  has 
ever  borne  his  part  in  the  work  of  public  advance- 
ment. 

Mr.  Spence  was  born  in  County  Fermanagh, 
Ireland,  in  1819.  His  father  and  grandfather 
both  bore  the  name  of  James  and  were  farmers  of 
the  Emerald  Isle.  In  1825  the  former  emigrated 
to  America  with  his  familj'.  locating  in  Guernsey 
Count}',  Ohio,  where  he  bought  land  and  improved 
a  farm  of  two  hundred  acres.  He  was  also  a  stock 
dealer  and  drover.  In  politics  he  advocated 
Democratic  principles.  His  wife,  Mary  Spence, 
was  a  native  of  the  Emerald  Isle  and  a  daughter 
of  James  and  Mar}'  Cunningham.     Her  fatlier  was 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


757 


a  weaver  by  trade  and  in  an  early  day  emigrated 
with  liis  family  to  America.  Locating  in  Ohio,  he 
engaged  in  gardening  for  a  time,  but  his  last  days 
were  spent  in  retirement.  Mr.  Spence  passed 
away  at  the  age  of  seveut3'-five,  and  his  wife  was 
previously  called  to  her  final  rest.  They  were 
members  of  the  Episcopal  Chuicli. 

Our  subject  is  the  only  survivor  in  a  family 
of  fourteen  children.  He  was  a  lad  of  six  sum- 
mers when  with  his  parents  he  left  Belfast  on 
the  sailing-vessel  "Eliza,"  and  after  a  voyage  of 
three  months  landed  in  Baltimore.  He  was  reared 
in  Ohio,  and  educated  in  an  old  log  schoolhouse 
with  a  fireplace  and  a  mud  and  stick  chimney'  at 
one  end.  Remaining  at  home  until  he  had  at- 
tained his  majority,  he  went  down  the  Ohio  and 
up  the  Mississippi  Rivers  and  at  length  located  in 
Jackson  County,  111.  With  his  capital  of  -iiiOO  he 
bought  one  hundred  and  twenty  acres  of  land  in 
Ridge  Township,  built  a  rude  log  shanty  and  be- 
gan developing  a  home.  Wolves  made  the  night 
liideous  with  their  howling  and  seemed  to  make 
the  situation  more  lonely.  There  were  many  hard- 
ships and  trials  to  be  borne,  but  he  at  once  began 
clearing  his  land  with  ox-teams  and  primitive  im- 
plements, and  two  years  later  he  built  a  large  log 
house,  which  still  stands  as  a  monument  to  those 
pioneer  da3S.  He  extended  the  boundaries  of  his 
farm  until  it  comprised  four  hundred  acres  of 
highly  improved  land,  and  his  possessions  in  all 
aggregated  eleven  liundred  acres.  He  raised  grain 
and  stock  extensive!}',  making  a  specialty  of  hogs 
and  horses,  and  took  a  number  of  premiums  at 
county  fairs.  He  has  aided  his  children  in  start- 
ing out  in  life,  giving  to  each  $7,000  or  its  equiv- 
alent, and  after  disposing  of  his  entire  property 
located  in  Murphysl)oro. 

Mr.  Spence  was  married  in  Union  County,  III., 
in  1848  to  Miss  Lydia  Butcher,  a  native  of  that 
count}'.  Her  death  occurred  on  the  old  home  farm. 
In  the  family  were  fourteen  children,  of  whom  the 
following  grew  to  mature  years:  Mrs.  Alesy  Mil- 
ler, now  of  Hamilton  County,  111.;  Samuel,  a 
farmer  and  dealer  in  agricultural  implements  in 
Carbondale;  Mrs.  Mary  Etherton,  of  Ridge  Town- 
ship; William,  a  farmer  and  gardener,  of  Texas; 
Lydia,  wife  of  A.  J.  Etherton,  a  farmer  of  Mur- 


physboro;  and  Alonzo,  an  extensive  farmer  of 
Williamson  County,  111. 

Mr.  Spence  was  again  married,  in  Wickliffe,  Ky., 
November  20.  1887,  his  second  union  being  with 
Mrs.  Nancy  T.  Sewright.  She  was  born  near 
Nashville,  Tenn.,  and  is  a  daughter  of  .James 
Council,  a  native  of  the  same  state.  He  was  a 
Republican  in  politics,  and  in  18(53,  during  the 
war,  came  to  Illinois,  locating  in  Johnson  County. 
He  afterward  went  to  Marion,  where  his  death  oc- 
curred. His  widow  is  still  living  in  Mound  City, 
111.  The  family  owns  a  farm  near  Nashville, 
Tenn.  Mrs.  Spence  is  the  eldest  of  twelve  chil- 
dren, and  was  born  in  1844.  She  was  married  in 
Johnson  County  May  4,  1865,  to  Joseph  Sewright, 
of  Paris,  Tenn.,  who  made  his  home  principally  in 
Illinois.  He  died  in  Carbondale,  leaving  one 
child,  Edward  L.,  who  is  still  living  with  his 
mother.  After  the  death  of  her  first  husband, 
Mrs.  Spence  made  her  home  in  Cairo  until  her 
second  marriage.  She  is  a  member  of  the  Method- 
ist Episcopal  Church. 

In  politics  Mr.  Spence  is  a  Democrat.  He  helped 
to  build  the  first  schoolhouse  in  the  neighborhood 
and  for  years  served  as  a  school  officer.  His  life 
has  been  a  successful  one,  and  through  well  di- 
rected etforts  he  has  gained  the  means  which  now 
enable  him  to  live  retired.  In  manner  he  is  genial 
and  pleasant,  is  fond  of  a  good  joke,  is  an  enter- 
taining companion,  and  few  have  more  friends  in 
the  community  than  William  Spence. 

;»  li;ILLIAM  R.  BURCII  has  made  farming  his 
\/iJ/l  ^'^®  pursuit,  and  in  the  prosecution  of  his 
^^  calling  has  achieved  a  success  that  has 
placed  him  among  the  leading  farmers  of  Ran- 
dolph County,  where  he  owns  a  valuable  and  well 
managed  farm.  He  is  the  son  of  Joshua  G.  Burch, 
whose  sketch  will  be  found  elsewhere  in  this  work, 
and  was  born  in  New  Haven,  Nelson  County, Ky., 
April  10,  1840.  He  is  the  second  in  order  of  birth 
of  seven  sons  born  to  his  parents,  and  w.as  an  in- 
fant when  the  latter  emigrated  from  the  Blue 
Grass  State  to  Red  Bud,  III.  In  1847  the  elder 
Mr.   and    Mi's.    Burch    came    to  Kaskaskia,  where 


758 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


William  began  attending  school.  His  studies,  how- 
ever, had  been  previouslj-  carried  on  at  home, 
where  he  was  taught  to  read  and  write  b}'  his 
mother.  His  first  teacher,  John  Cleveland,  con- 
ducted the  school  but  two  weeks,  when  he  died 
from  cholera,  wliich  was  raging  in  the  vicinity. 
Shortly  afterward  Albert  Phillip  opened  a  sub- 
scription school,  which  lie  carried  on  for  three  or 
four  years.  George  S.  Ellis,  the  founder  of  Ellis 
Grove,  was  the  next  teacher,  and  was  followed  by 
John  Lindsev,  known  as  "one-armed"  Lindse}',  in 
order  to  distinguish  him  from  anotlier  teacher  of 
the  same  name,  who  is  now  Judge  Lindsey,  of 
Chester. 

In  the  fall  of  18.57  our  subject  entered  St.  Mary's 
College  in  Marion  County,  Ky.,  wliere  he  prose- 
cuted his  studies  for  ten  months.  In  1861  he  be- 
came a  student  in  the  Christian  Brothers'  College 
of  St.  Louis,  and  after  completing  a  ten  months' 
term  in  that  institution,  abandoned  his  studies 
and  began  rafting  on  the  upper  Mississippi  River. 
In  tbe  fall  of  1864  he  entered  the  Jones  Business 
College  in  St.  Louis,  where  he  attended  for  a  time 
before  starting  for  the  west. 

In  1865  William  R.  Burch  started  overland  foi- 
the  mountains,  going  as  far  as  Atchison,  but  there 
his  plans  were  changed.  On  reaching  home,  in 
company  with  three  of  his  brothers,  in  the  spring 
of  1866,  he  rented  part  of  his  father's  estate  and 
began  farming,  operating  in  partnership  until  they 
had  raised  four  crops.  At  the  expiration  of  tliat 
time  our  subject  (lurchased  the  tract  of  land  from 
his  father  on  which  he  has  resided  ever  since. 

April  20,  1869,  our  subject  was  married  to  Miss 
Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Andrew  A.  and  Helen 
(Smith)  Stephenson.  The  ladj-  was  born  in  Kas- 
kaskia,  October  3.  1845,  and  died  April  6,  1877. 
The  lady  whom  our  subject  chose  as  his  second 
companion  was  Miss  Mary  A.  Stephenson,  sister 
of  his  first  wife,  born  Januarj-  3,  1854,  and  was 
married  to  our  subject  October  25,  1877.  An- 
drew A.  Stephenson,  who  was  born  October  16, 
1815,  and  died  February  5,  1869,  was  the  son  of 
William  J.  and  Elizabeth  (Abel)  Stephenson,  the 
former  born  October  6,  1788,  and  the  latter  lx)ra 
October  16,  1793.  The  mother  of  Mrs.  Burch  was 
the  daughter  of  Maurice  D.  and  Rosalie  (Senagal) 


Smith,  and  was  born  December  16,  1822,  and  died 
February  11,  1879.  Maurice  D.  Smith  came  from 
New  York  State  in  1820,  and  located  in  Illinois. 
His  wife,  who  was  a  native  of  Kaska.skia,  was  a 
member  of  an  old  French  family  who  trace  their 
ancestry  back  for  hundreds  of  years. 

B}'  his  first  marriage,  our  subject  became  the 
father  of  four  children,  namely:  William  R., 
Robert  E.,  Helen  E.  and  Augusta.  By  his  second 
marriage  Mr.  Burch  became  the  father  of  eight 
children,  one  of  whom  died  in  infancy.  Those 
living  are,  Mary  L.,  Agnes  A.,  Grace  B.,  Walter  E., 
Nancy  F.,  Mark  A.  and  Omega,  so  called  from  hav- 
ing been  born  on  the  last  day  of  the  week,  month 
and  j-ear  of  1892. 

March  16,  1871,  our  subject  was  elected  Justice 
of  the  Peace  to  fill  a  vacancy  caused  by  the  resig- 
nation of  Judge  Lindsev,  now  of  Chester.  He 
was  the  incumbent  of  that  position  until  Novem- 
ber, 1878,  when  he  was  elected  County  Commis- 
sioner, holdina;  the  oflflce  for  three  j-ears.  He  was 
again  made  Justice  of  the  Peace  in  1881,  which 
office  he  is  still  holding.  Mr.  Burch  is  operating 
two  hundred  and  ninety-eight  acres  of  his  own 
land,  besides  cultivating  several  hundred  acres  be- 
longing to  his  father.  He  has  been  a  life-long 
Democrat  in  politics,  and  is  looked  upon  as  a  leader 
in  his  partj"  in  this  section.  With  his  wife  he  is  a 
member  of  the  Catholic  Church,  worshiping  at 
Kaskaskia. 


^^^HEODULE  E.  PICOU  is  one  of  the  ener- 
//^^^,  getic  and  successful  farmers  of  Randolph 
'\^yy  County,  where  he  has  resided  for  more 
than  a  decade.  He  is  a  son  of  Theodule  and 
Maiy  E.  (Delassus)  Picou,  who  were  natives  of 
Louisiana.  Our  subject  is  the  youngest  in  a  family 
of  three  boys  and  three  girls  born  to  his  paient-s, 
his  birth  occurring  Maj'  13,  1861,  near  Bailey's 
Lodge,  in  Perry  County,  Mo.  He  received  his 
education  in  the  schools  of  Clarj-ville,  Perry 
County,  and  when  eighteen  years  of  age  started 
out  for  himself,  clerking  for  his  uncle  in  a  diy- 
goods   store.     In    this  capacity  he  remained  for 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


763 


about  four  years  and  then  began  farming  in  his 
native  count>.  In  1883  he  moved  to  Randolph 
County,  purchasing  his  present  place  at  Kaskaskia 
Point,  lot  48,  second  sub-division  Kaskaskia  Com- 
mons. He  is  engaged  in  general  farming  and  is 
well  known  and  highly  respected  throughout  the 
community. 

January  11,  1885,  Mr.  Picon  was  married  to 
Miss  Edith, a  daughter  of  Tyler  and  Lutitia  (Mat- 
tingly)  Seders,  residents  of  Chester.  Mrs.  Picon 
was  born  in  Chester  January  20,  1865,  and  is  the 
eldest  of  a  family  of  two  children  born  to  her 
worthy  parents.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Picou  have  been 
blessed  with  a  family  of  five  children:  Josepii 
Glenn,  who  was  born  November  4,  1886,  and  died 
in  infancy;  Roy  L.,  born  May  6,  1887;  Ora  W., 
September  27,  1890;  Endora,  October  11,  1891, 
and  Carl  Theodule,  January  17,  1894.  The  wife 
and  mother  is  a  member  of  the  Baptist  Church, 
while  her  husband  is  of  the  Catholic  faith.  In 
politics  Mr.  Picou  is  a  Democrat. 

\^ ^*4 jgJ 


^AVID  MrCOY,  who  carried  on  general 
farming  on  section  16,  Ora  Township, 
Jackson  County,  has  the  honor  of  being 
a  native  of  Illinois,  his  birth  having  oc- 
curred in  Coles  County,  May  17,  1830.  The  fam- 
\\y  is  of  Irish  origin.  The  father  of  our  subject 
was  born  in  Tennessee  about  1797,  and  there  mar- 
ried Mahala  Evans,  a  native  of  tlie  same  state.  In 
1829,  they  emigrated  to  Jackson  County,  I II.  They 
afterward  lived  in  Arkansas  and  St.  Louis,  and 
subsequently  made  a  permanent  location  in  this 
community.  Both  parents  died  on  their  farm  near 
the  present  home  of  our  subject  in  1879.  Mr.  Mc- 
Coy was  a  typical  pioneer,  who  delighted  in  explor- 
ing new  country  and  making  new  settlements.  In 
the  family  were  four  sons  and  two  daughters:  John 
Wesley,  who  died  in  Belleville;  William,  who  died 
in  childhood;  Daniel  C,  whose  last  days  were  spent 
in  Jackson  County;  Nancy,  who  became  the  wife 
of  John  R.  Gillet  and  died  near  Chester,  111.,  and 
Cynthia,  who  became  the  wife  of  Isaac  GiilHn,  and 
29 


fter  his  death  married  James  Walker,  who  is  also 
now  deceased. 

Mr.  McCoy  of  this  sketch  has  followed  farming 
throughout  his  entire  life.  When  twenty-one 
3'ears  of  age  he  started  out  for  himself  empty- 
handed.  He  chose  as  a  companion  and  helpmate 
on  life's  journey  Miss  Amanda,  daughter  of  John 
Cheatham.  Her  death  occurred  seven  years  later. 
Four  children  were  born  to  them:  John  W.,  whose 
birth  occurred  April  30,  1852;  William,  who  died 
at  the  age  of  four  years;  Maiy  Elizabeth,  wlio  died 
at  the  age  of  two,  and  Charles,  who  died  in  iiifanc}'. 
For  his  second  wife  Mr.  McCoy  chose  Mrs.  Mary 
M.  Stone,  widow  of  John  M.  Stone.  Their  wed- 
ding was  celebrated  January  24,  1860,  and  they  be- 
came the  parents  of  the  following  children:  Casto- 
son,  who  died  in  iufancj';  David,  who  was  born 
November  5,  1864;  Ellen,  who  was  born  December 
6,  1866,  and  is  the  wife  of  Alex  Varnum,  by  whom 
she  has  four  sons  and  two  daughters,  Charles,  Will- 
iam D.,  John  E.,  Thomas  F.,  Letta  and  Martha  A.; 
Eliza  A.,  who  was  born  August  24,  1868,  and  died 
at  the  age  of  seven  years,  and  Stephen  D.,  who 
was  born  April  9,  1871,  and  died  in  infancy. 

Mrs.  McCoy  was  born  in  St.  Clair  County,  III., 
March  7,  1834.  Her  father,  James  Chew,  was  born 
in  Indiana,  and  in  St.  Clair  County-,  in  1826,  mar- 
ried Nancy  Mellion.  He  was  a  pioneer  Baptist 
preacher  of  southern  Illinois,  and  was  also  a  prac- 
ticing physician  of  St.  Clair  County-.  In  both  lines 
of  work  he  was  very  successful.  His  death  occurred 
while  on  a  visit  to  his  people  in  Indiana  in  1840. 
His  widow  afterward  married  Jt)hn  Edwards,  and 
died  Maich  1,  1889.  By  her  first  niairiage,  Mrs. 
McCoy  had  three  children.  Mary  J.,  the  eldest, 
wedded  Willis  Cheatham,  b}'  whom  she  had  a  son, 
Samuel.  After  the  death  of  Mr.  Cheatham  she 
married  Philo  Jenkins,  and  they  had  a  daughter, 
Mary  E.  The  mother  died  August  18,  1885.  The 
second  daughter,  Lena,  is  now  the  wife  of  John 
Stanes,  a  farmer  of  Ora  Township,  and  they  have 
five  children:  Laura  M.,  aged  twenty-one;  Rolla, 
eighteen;  Otis, fourteen;  Herbert,  seven,  and  John, 
a  lad  of  six  summers. 

On  the  2d  of  September,  1861,  Mr.  McCoy  en- 
tered the  service  of  his  country  as  a  private  of 
Company  G,  Thirty-fourth  Illinois  Infantry,  which 


764 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


was  commanded  first  by  Colonel  Kirk,  and  after- 
ward b}'  Colonel  Aza.  He  saw  much  hard  service 
under  General  Sherman,  but  was  never  sick, 
wounded  or  taken  prisoner,  and  engaged  in  every 
battle  and  skirmish  in  which  the  regiment  took 
part.  He  participated  in  the  battles  of  Shiloh, 
Corinth,  Missionary  Ridge,  Pittsburg  Landing, 
Stone  River,  Lookout  Mountain,  Buzzard's  Roost, 
siege  of  Atlanta  and  Jonesboro.  At  the  battle  of 
Kenesaw  IMonntain,  where  his  regiment  supported 
a  heavy  battery,  he  stood  for  hours  by  the  boom- 
ing guns,  and  the  constant  roar  made  him  perma- 
nently deaf.  This  is  a  great  affliction,  for  he  is  a 
very  social  and  intelligent  man  and  keenly  enjoyed 
good  compan}'.  He  marched  under  Sherman  from 
Atlanta  to  the  sea,  took  part  in  the  Grand  Review 
in  Washington, 'the  finest  military  pageant  ever 
seen  in  this  country,  and  was  honorably  discharged 
in  Louisville,  Ky.  He  is  a  most  enthusiastic  ad- 
mirer of  General  Sherman,  and  was  a  warm  personal 
friend  of  Gen.  John  A.  Logjin. 
,  Mr.  McCoy  holds  membership  with  Ava  Post,  G. 
A.  R.,  and  from  the  Government,  which  he  so 
faithfully  aided  to  perpetuate,  he  now  receives  a 
pension  of  127  per  month.  He  has  always  been  a 
stalwart  supporter  of  the  Republican  party,  and  for 
many  years  he  and  liis  wife  have  been  consistent 
members  of  the  Free  Will  Baptist  Church.  His 
time  and  attention  are  now  given  to  the  further 
cultivation  and  improvement  of  bis  fine  farm  of 
one  hundred  and  sixty  acres,  which  is  supplied 
with  all  modern  accessories  and  conveniences,  and 
is  regarded  as  one  of  the  best  farms  in  the  neigh- 
borhood. The  owner  is  a  man  whose  fidelity  to 
duty  and  sterling  worth  have  won  him  the  highest 
regard  of  all,  and  his  friends  are  many. 


jUFUS  R.  COBBUM,  a  popular  and  highly 
if  esteemed  citizen  of  Murphj'sboro,  and  a 
Director  of  the  Jackson  County  Lumber 
^^Companj',  was  born  in  Bluflfton,  Wells 
Count}-,  Ind.,  September  24,  1847.  The  famil3Ms 
of  English  origin,  and  the  grandparents  came  from 
England  to  America.  The  grandfather  was  a 
contractor  and  builder,  and  contracted  to  erect  the 


State  Capitol  of  Virginia.  The  father  of  our  sub- 
ject, James  Cobbum,  was  born  in  Maryland,  and 
was  a  tailor  by  trade.  Removing  to  Ohio,  he  there 
married  Sarah  Webb,  a  native  of  Hocking  County, 
that  state,  whither  her  parents  remoyed  from  Penn- 
sylvania. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cobbum  became  early  settlers  of 
Wells  Count}',  Ind.,  where  he  entered  land  from 
the  Government  and  improved  a  fine  farm.  In 
politics  he  was  a  Republican,  and  in  religious  be- 
lief he  was  a  Methodist.  He  passed  away  in  March, 
1861,  respected  by  all  who  knew  him.  His  wife 
was  called  to  her  final  rest  in  1872.  They  had 
seven  sons  and  one  daughter,  of  whom  four  are 
j'et  living:  Joseph,  now  a  farmer  of  Wells  Count}-, 
Ind.;  Henry,  who  is  living  a  retired  life  in  Bluff- 
ton,  Ind.;  James  L.,  who  makes  his  home  in  the 
same  place;  and  Rufus  R.,  the  only  one  living  in 
Illinois.  Henry  w.as  one  of  the  boys  in  blue,  being 
a  member  of  the  One  Hundred  and  First  Indiana 
Infantry  during  the  late  war. 

Our  subject  received  his  early  education  in  an 
old-time  log  schoolhouse,  with  the  writing  desk 
along  the  wall,  rude  benches  and  other  primitive 
furniture.  Much  of  his  instruction,  however,  was 
receive«iJ  from  a  blind  man,  John  McLeary,  who 
taught  the  high  school  at  Bluffton,  Ind.  At  the 
age  of  twenty  years  he  began  traveling  for  a,  mar- 
ble firm  in  Ft.  Wayne,  Ind.,  and  thus  continued 
for  seven  consecutive  years,  after  which  he  em- 
barked in  business  for  himself  in  Geneva,  Adams 
County,  opening  a  grocery  store,  which  he  carried 
on  for  two  years.  He  then  became  representative 
for  the  Fairbanks  AVindmill  Company,  of  Indian- 
apolis, traveling  for  tliem  throughout  Indiana  for 
about  nine  years.  He  also  owned  a  farm  near 
Bluffton. 

In  1888  Mr.  Cobbum  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Mrs.  Nancy  Gill,  widow  of  Hon.  John  M. 
Gill,  and  the  mother  of  Lieut.-Gov.  J.  B.  Gill.  ' 
She  was  born  in  Williamson  County,  III.,  and  is 
a  cultured  and  refined  lady,  who  is  a  controlling 
influence  in  social  circles. 

In  1887  Mr.  Cobbum  came  to  Murphysboro  and 
purchased  a  sawmill  in  Kinkaid  Township,  manu- 
facturing hard-wood  lumber  for  two  yeai-s.  He 
also  had  a  lumber  yard  in  the  city.-    In  C>cfiob^i;, 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


765 


1890,  he  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the  Jackson 
County  Lumber  Company,  and  for  eigliteen  months 
served  as  its  manager.  lie  is  now  serving  as  sales- 
man. Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cobbum  own  considerable  real 
estate,  having  seven  hundred  and  sixt}'  acres  of 
filie  timber  land  in  Arkansas,  besides  five  lots  and 
good  buildings  in  this  place.  In  the  year  1889 
their  residence  on  Cherry  Street,  a  comfortable  and 
commodious  home,  was  erected.  Mr.  Cobbum  is  a 
member  of  the  Odd  Fellows' society,  is  a  Democrat 
in  politics, and  is  an  Elder  in  the  Christian  Church. 
He  is  a  stockholder  in  the  Jackson  County  [loiiie- 
stead  Buildin<i;  and  Loan  Association. 


,,J  NDERSON  E.  GAKKETT,  attorney-at-law 
?1L!J|  of  Murphysboro,  was  born  near  Charles- 
ton, Mo.,  July  18,  1852.  His  grandfather, 
Larkin  Garrett,  was  a  native  of  Virginia, 
and  in  the  War  of  1812  served  under  Gen.  William 
Henry  Harrison  at  the  battle  of  Tippecanoe,  and 
was  also  with  Jackson  at  New  Orleans.  Later  he 
removed  to  Benton  County,  Teun.,  where  he  car- 
ried on  farming  for  six  3'ears.  From  tiiat  place  he 
went  to  Hardeman  County,  Tenn.,  where  he  oper- 
ated a  fine  farm  of  five  hundred  acres.  His  death 
occurred  in  1872,  at  tiie  age  of  eighty-three.  He 
voted  the  only  ticket  for  the  continuance  of  the 
Union  in  his  precinct  in  1861.  The  great  grand- 
father of  our  subject  was  one  of  the  heroes  of  the 
Revolution,  and  traced  his  ancestry  back  to  Eng- 
land and  thence  to  Normandy. 

Mattliew  D.  Garrett,  father  of  our  subjet'l,  was 
a  native  of  Benton  County,  Tenn.,  and  in  that 
state  followed  carpentering  and  farming  until  his 
removal  to  Oweusboro,  Ky.  He  there  married 
Joyce  Ann,  daughter  of  .lohn  Wilkinson,  an  early 
settler  of  that  community,  whose  father  was  Judge 
in  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas.  In  an  early  day 
Mr.  Garrett  removed  to  Mississippi  County,  Mo., 
where  he  did  business  as  a  contractor,  and  built 
the  first  court  house  at  Charleston.  In  1853  he 
removed  to  the  southwestern  part  of  the  state, 
where  he  carried  on  a  grist-mill  run  by  water 
power.  His  wife  there  died  in  June,  1856,  after 
which  he  sold  his  mill  and  worked  at  his  trade. 


He  then  again  married,  and  lived  at  various  places 
until  1861,  when  he  went  to  Jackson,  Tenn. 

When  A.  B.  Garrett  was  a  lad  of  nine,  he  began 
newspaper  work  in  Jackson,  Tenn.,  and  later  went 
as  a  newsboy  with  the  Sixth  Regiment  of  Confed- 
erate Volunteers,  under  Col.  Stevens,  to  Union 
City  and  Columbus.  He  continued  with  the  regi- 
ment until  after  the  battle  of  Sliiloh,  then  went  to 
Memphis  as  a  newsboy,  and  later  was  thus  em- 
ployed on  the  Mississippi  Central  (now  the  Illinois 
Central)  Railroad.  After  three  months  he  re- 
turned to  Jackson,  Tenn.,  and  for  a  few  weeks 
was  a  lackey  boy  in  the  hospital.  His  father  then 
removed  with  the  family  to  Union  County,  III., 
and  worked  in  a  sawmill  until  1863,  when  he  lo- 
cated on  a  farm. 

In  the  following  autumn,  Mr.  Garreit,  Sr.,  re- 
cruited the  Eighty-first  I  llinois  Infantry,  but  after- 
ward was  transferred  to  Company  A,  Twenty- 
second  Regiment  Veteran  Reserve  Corps,  in  which 
he  served  until  honorably  discharged  at  the  close 
of  the  war.  His  remaining  ^ears  were  spent  upon 
his  farm,  where  he  died.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
Baptist  Church.  Bj'  his  first  wife,  the  mother  of 
our  subject,  there  were  born  four  sons  and  two 
daughters,  of  whom  three  reached  adult  age.  At 
the  age  of  twenty  years  Larkin  W.  became  a  sol- 
dier in  the  Confederate  army,  and  died  at  Ft.  Pil- 
low in  the  spring  of  1862.  Thomas  S.  was  a  sol- 
dier in  the  Union  army,  being  a  member  of  Company 
C,  Seventeenth  Illinois  Cavalry;  he  died  at  Rolla, 
Mo.,  in  1864,  at  the  age  of  nineteen  ^cars.  After 
the  death  of  Ins  first  wife  Matthew  D.  Garrett 
married  Lydia  .Stafford,  and  they  had  three  chil- 
dren, all  of  whom  died  when  young.  His  second 
wife  dying,  he  afterward  married  Sallie  Hinkle, 
and  their  union  resulted  in  the  birth  of  three  chil- 
dren, one  of  whom  died  in  childhood.  Two  are 
living,  both  married  and  residents  of  Union  Coun- 
ty, III.  Mr.  Garrett  passed  awa}'  in  January,  1870; 
his  wife  survived  him  for  a  number  of  years,  her 
death  occurring  in  1883. 

After  coming  to  Illinois,  A.  B.  Garrett  attended 
school  during  the  winter  and  worked  on  the  farm 
through  the  summer  until  eighteen  years  of  age, 
wlien  he  embarked  in  teaching  school.  He  was 
thus  employed  for  three  winters,  and  in  the  sum- 


766 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPfflCAL   RECORD. 


mer  attended  a  select  school  at  Anna  and  after- 
ward the  high  school  at  Cairo.  When  twenty-one 
he  became  Principal  of  the  Dougola  schools.  .Sub- 
sequentl}-  he  was  Principal  of  the  schools  of  Vi- 
enna for  two  j'ears,  Pinckney  ville  for  one  year, 
and  later  was  siruilarlj-  engaged  at  Carbondale, 
Ava  and  Cobden  for  one  year  each.  He  was  also 
Principal  of  the  Murphysboro  schools  during  the 
seven  years  of  the  decade  between  1879  and  1889. 
While  .Superintendent,  he  established  the  best 
graded  and  high  school  course  in  the  city.  He 
was  very  successful  as  an  instructor  and  won  com- 
mendation for  his  excellent  work  wherever  he 
went. 

Mr.  Garrett  began  reading  law  in  Vienna  in 
1876,  and  continued  his  stud}*'  in  leisure  hours 
until  August,  1887,  when  he  was  admitted  to  the 
Bar  at  Mt.  Vernon,  but  did  not  begin  practice 
until  1889.  He  then  resigned  his  position  as  Su- 
perintendent of  the  city  schools,  and  on  the  9th 
of  Ma}-  opened  a  law  office.  He  continued  prac- 
tice alone  until  1891,  when  the  firm  of  Swartz  & 
Garrett  was  formed.  The}-  iiave  an  office  in  Car- 
bondale, his  partner  looking  after  the  business  at 
that  place,  while  he  attends  to  the  practice  in  Mur- 
physboro. From  1888  until  1891  he  served  as 
City  Attorney,  having  been  elected  on  the  Demo- 
cratic ticket. 

In  Dongola,  in  1875,  Mr.  Garrett  married 
Georgie  Williams,  eldest  daughter  of  A.  G.  Will- 
iams, of  Tennessee,  and  an  early  settler  of  Don- 
gola, 111.  The  lady  was  born  in  Tennessee,  and  by 
her  marriage  became  the  mother  of  two  children, 
Pearl  and  Ray.  Their  home  is  pleasantly  situ- 
ated on  Evelyn  Street,  and  the  office  is  in  the 
Gill  Block,  at  the  corner  of  Main  and  Walnut 
Streets. 

Mr.  Garrett  is  a  member  of  Amity  Lodge,  I.  0. 
O.  F.,  a  charter  member  of  Jackson  Camp  No.  113, 
S.  v.,  in  which  he  has  served  as  Captain,  was  Ad- 
jutant of  the  State  Camp,  and  is  now  Junior  Vice- 
Commander  of  Illinois.  He  takes  a  very  promi- 
nent part  in  the  work  of  this  organization  and  is 
widely  known  in  its  circles.  He  also  belongs  to 
Carbon  Lodge,  K.  H.,  is  Grand  Dictator  of  .Illi- 
nois, and  representative  of  the  state  in  the  Su- 
preme Lodge.     A  well  informed  man  and  a  brill- 


iant speaker,  he  is  winning  the  prominence  in 
his  profession  that  he  has  gained  in  society  circles. 

<X^^»^^^^■^•^^^-^••i•»^^•^^^^i•♦•»^^^i•^M^^i•^i•^i•^i-i■X> 

<^LBERT  SHERMAN  MARLOW,  Superin- 
(^jOj     tendent  of  schools  of  Perry  County,  was 

///  li  born  three  miles  east  of  Pinckneyville, 
^'  111.,  March  29,  1865.     His  ancestors  were 

residents  of  North  Carolina,  and  were  descendants 
of  good  old  Revolutionary  stock.  The  fatlier,  M. 
M.  Marlow,  was  a  native  of  Tennessee,  and  had 
six  brothers,  two  of  whom,  Cale  and  Alex,  were 
killed  in  the  Mexican  AVar;  two  others,  Baitiey  and 
Samuel,  live  near  Pinckneyville,  the  latter  being 
eighty  years  of  age.  The  father  is  also  living  and 
makes  his  home  on  his  farm  east  of  Pin ckne}- ville. 

Our  subject's  mother  bore  the  maiden  name  of 
Mary  Metcalf,  and  was  born  in  Tennessee.  Her 
father,  Thomas  Metcalf,  was  one  of  the  early  set- 
tlers of  Perry  County,  and  was  a  prominent  man 
in  his  community,  serving  as  Justice  of  the  Peace 
for  several  years,  and  occupying  other  positions  of 
honor.  Our  subject  is  the  youngest  of  a  family  of 
six  children,  there  being  four  brothers  and  two 
sisters.  Of  them  we  note  the  following:  William 
C.  is  one  of  the  most  extensive  and  successful  far- 
mers in  this  county;  Marion  is  a  farmer  residing 
near  Du  Quoin,  and  has  served  as  Deputy  Sheriff; 
James  C.  lives  with  his  father;  Melvina  married 
Edward  Hane  and  lives  on  a  farm,  and  Lulu  is  a 
teacher. 

Upon  the  home  farm  our  subject  grew  to  man- 
hood, receiving  his  education  in  the  schools  of 
Pinckneyville.  At  the  early  age  of  seventeen  he 
was  a  school  teacher,  and  followed  that  profession 
for  six  years.  He  was  Principal  of  the  Pinckney- 
ville schools,  when  he  resigned  to  go  into  business 
at  this  place,  continuing  in  that  line  for  two  and 
one-half  years.  In  1890  he  was  elected  County 
Superintendent  of  schools,  which  position  he  is 
now  filling  with  marked  credit  to  himself.  He  has 
a  finely  improved  farm  of  eighty  acres  adjoining 
the  city  of  Pinckneyville,  where  he  lives. 

In  1891  Mr.  Marlow  married  Miss  Anna,  daugh- 
ter of  G.  G.  Williams,  the  present  Clerk  of  Perry 
County.     Mrs.  Marlow  was  educated  in  Shurtleff 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


767 


College,  at  Alton,  111.,  and  was  a  teacher  in  the 
Pinckneyville  schools  prior  to  l]er  marriage.  One 
child  has  blessed  the  union,  Howard.  Socially,  Mr. 
Marlow  is  a  Mason  and  a  Knight  of  P3'thias.  He 
has  also  been  quite  prominent  in  tiie  Independent 
Order  of  Odd  Fellows,  having  passed  the  chairs, 
and  being  a  member  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  In  pol- 
itics, like  all  the  members  of  the  Marlow  family, 
he  is  a  Democrat.  He  and  his  wife  are  members  of 
the  Baptist  Church. 


[(S).  ...^li)^. .@J 

(®^ 'y^^^'" "~^ 

/^)  ^^'"  ^^'  ^'  INGRAM,  an  old  and  highly  re- 
(l\  r  ^I'^cted  citizen  of  Jackson  Count3',  who  is 
^^y  engaged  in  the  practice  of  medicine  and 
surgery'  in  Murphysboro,  and  is  President  of  the 
Board  of  Pension  I^xaminers,  has  long  been  con- 
nected with  the  interests  of  this  community,  and 
has  ever  been  prominent  in  the  advancement  of 
those  interests  which  are  calculated  to  promote  the 
general  welfare.  The  Doctor  was  born  November 
8,  1830,  in  Greenville,  Ky.  His  father,  .lames 
Ingram,  was  born  near  Culpeper  Court  House,  Va., 
in  1808,  and  the  grandfather,  Isaac  Ingram,  was 
also  there  born  and  reared.  He  became  an  early 
settler  of  Kentuckj',  and  was  a  large  planter,  cul- 
tivating an  extensive  tobacco  farm  on  the  Green 
River.  His  death  occurred  in  1862.  The  family 
was  originally  of  English  origin,  the  great-grand- 
father, Benjamin  Ingram,  having  come  to  this 
country  from  Leeds,  England. 

The  Doctor's  father  was  reared  in  Kentucky, 
and  in  1850  emigrated  to  Jefferson  County,  111., 
where  he  carried  on  farming  until  his  death,  in 
1855.  He  married  Nancy  Reno,  a  native  of  Cul- 
peper Court  House,  and  a  daughter  of  John  Reno, 
who  was  born  in  Virginia  and  in  1810  emigrated 
to  Kentucky-.  He  was  a  pioneer  school  teacher  of 
that  state,  and  followed  his  chosen  profession  un- 
til eight3'-five  years  of  age.  He  died  in  Green- 
ville, K\'.,  at  the  age  of  ninety-five.  His  parents 
were  natives  of  Paris,  France,  and  in  that  countiy 
the  name  was  spelled  Renault,  but  after  coming  to 
America  the  present  mode  was  adopted.     Mrs.  In- 


gram died  June  11,  1877,  at  the  age  of  sixty-eight. 
She  was  a  faithful  member  of  the  Methodist  Epis- 
copal Church. 

In  the  family  were  five  sons  and  three  daughters. 
John  W.,  who  enlisted  in  Company  II,  Eightieth 
Illinois  Infantry,  was  wounded  at  Perryville,  and 
received  his  discharge  at  Nashville  in  1863.  He 
was  a  physician  and  died  near  Benton,  III.,  in 
1874.  Isaac  A.,  who  was  Second  Lieutenant  of 
Company  F,  was  wounded  atShiloh  in  April,  1862, 
and  died  in  June.  The  Doctor  brought  his  remains 
home  and  he  was  laid  to  rest  near  Centralia.  Ed- 
ward W.  is  now  a  practicing  phj'sician  of  Mt.  Erie, 
111.;  W.  S.  is  a  farmer  living  near  Ashley,  III.;  Mrs. 
Martha  Cameron  resides  in  Ashley. 

Col.  W.  T.  Ingram  is  the  eldest.  He  was  reared 
on  a  farm  in  Kentucky,  attended  the  common 
schools,  and  for  two  years  was  a  student  in  Green- 
ville Academy.  He  afterwards  entered  a  drug 
store  and  began  the  stud}'  of  medicine  under  Dr. 
Yost,  of  Greenville.  In  1850,  he  entered  the  Uni- 
versity of  Kentucky  and  pursued  a  course  of  study 
in  the  department  of  medicine.  In  the  spring  of 
1852,  he  went  by  boat  to  St.  Louis,  thence  in  a  four- 
horse  stage  to  Vandalia,  the  capital  of  the  state, 
where  he  taught  school  for  six  months.  He  then 
engaged  for  a  time  in  medical  practice  in  Xeuia, 
111.,  after  which  he  went  to  Johnsonville.  His 
next  place  of  residence  was  at  Webb's  Prairie,  in 
Franklin  County,  where  he  continued  practice  un- 
til the  war.  On  the  25th  of  July,  1861,  our  sub- 
ject joined  Company  F,  Fortieth  Illinois  lufantiy, 
and  became  First  Lieutenant.  He  was  always  at 
the  front,  aad  after  the  battle  of  Shiloh  was  made 
Captain.  He  participated  in  the  engagements  at 
Tallahoochie  and  Holly  Springs,  and  in  1863  re- 
signed his  commission  on  account  of  sickness.  Re- 
turning to  Benton,  111.,  he  there  remained  until  the 
spring  of  1864,  when  he  aided  in  raising  the  One 
Hundred  and  Thirty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry,  and 
was  commissioned  Lieutenant-Colonel  by  Gover- 
nor Yates.  He  took  his  men  to  Columbus,  thence 
to  St.  Louis,  and  bore  a  part  in  the  raid  after  Price 
in  the  fall  of  1864.  He  was  mustered  out  at 
Springfield,  October  22,  and  in  December,  1864, 
entered  the  Secret  Service,  doing  duty  along  the 
Mississippi  until  June,  1865.     He  was  also  Provost- 


768 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD 


Marshal  in  Franklin  County,  111.,  until  the  close  of 
the  war. 

When  his  public  service  was  over,  Dr.  Ingram 
located  in  De  Soto,  wliere  he  engaged  in  the  prac- 
tice of  medicine  until  1876,  since  which  time  he  has 
been  numbered  among  the  medical  practitioners  of 
Murph3'sboro.  While  in  Wajne  County,  in  1865- 
66,  he  took  his  last  course  of  lectures  in  Louisville 
and  was  graduated  with  the  degree  of  M.D.  He 
has  been  very  successful  in  practice,  and  his  skill 
and  ability  have  won  for  him  a  good  business. 

Dr.  Ingram  was  married  in  Kentuck3'  to  Miss 
Susan  Vaught,  a  native  of  that  state,  and  they  be- 
came the  parents  of  four  children:  M.  Frances,  wife 
of  George  W.  Hill,  ex-Senator,  and  a  leading  attor- 
ney of  Murphysboro;  William  E.,  conductor  on  the 
Mobile  &  Ohio  Railroad;  Robert  E.,  conductor  on 
the  Houston  A-  Texas  Central,  and  a  resident  of 
Houston;  and  Mrs.  Ollie  B.  Landerville,  who  died 
in  1890.  In  Wayne  County,  Dr.  Ingram  wedded 
Mary  A.  (Moore)  Rinard,  who  was  born  in  .Saline- 
ville,  Columbiana  County,  Ohio,  and  is  a  daughter 
of  John  Moore.  In  1853,  her  father  removed  to 
Wayne  County,  111.,  where  he  owned  a  large  farm 
of  eighteen  hundred  acres,  all  entered  in  one  body. 
His  death  occurred  in  December,  1869.  His  wife, 
a  native  of  Ohio,  now  makes  her  home  with  the 
Doctor  and  his  wife,  at  the  age  of  eighty-five. 
Mrs.  Ino-ram  was  educated  in  Earlham  College,  of 
Richmond,  Ind.,  and  the  Cleveland  Episcopal  Col- 
lege, and  is  a  cultured  and  refined  lady. 

The  Doctor  has  served  as  Alderman  of  the  First 
Ward  of  Murphysboro,  holding  the  otHce  when  the 
water  works  and  electric  lights  were  put  in.  He 
was  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Education  for  three 
years  and  served  as  its  President.  From  1885  un- 
til 1889,  he  was  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Pension 
Examiners,  and  in  1893  was  re-appointed  by  Presi- 
dent Cleveland.  He  is  surgeon  for  the  St.  Louis, 
Alton  &  Terre  Haute  Railroad,  is  a  member  of  the 
National  Association  of  Railway  Surgeons  and  of 
the  Southern  Illinois  Medical  Association.  He 
also  belongs  to  the  Odd  Fellows'  society,  the 
Knights  of  Honor,  and  Worthen  Post  No.  128, 
G.  A.  R.  He  is  also  Medical  Examiner  for  about 
ten  insurance  companies.  In  religious  belief  he  is 
a  Methodist,  serves  as  Trustee  and  Steward  of  the 


church,  and  was  the  Chairman  of  the  building  com- 
mittee. In  1877,  he  established  the  Industrial  Trib- 
une, a  Greenback  paper,  which  he  published  until 
1880,  when  he  sold  out.  The  Doctor's  life  has 
been  a  successful  one  financially,  and  an  upright, 
honorable  career  has  won  him  the  esteem  of  all. 


W  GUIS  RODRIQUE  is  the  owner  and  occu- 
I  ^  pant  of  fourteen  acres  on  lot  12,  third  sub. 
jl'— ^'^  division,  Kaskaskia  Commons,  Randolph 
County.  He  was  born  on  the  island  between  Doza- 
ville  and  Kaskaskia,  in  this  county,  August  10, 
1846.  He  was  reared  and  has  spent  his  entire  life 
within  a  few  miles  of  the  place  of  his  birth. 

Our  subject  is  the  son  of  Augustus  and  Florence 
(Buatte)  Kodrique,  natives  of  Kaskaskia.  The  Ro- 
drique  famil}'  is  of  Spanish  origin, and  the  Buatte 
family  of  Creole  descent.  Our  subject  attended 
the  Old  Kaskaskia  schools  until  about  seventeen 
years  of  age,  but  his  parents  having  died  when  he 
was  a  very  small  boy,  little  interest  was  taken 
in  his  education  or  welfare,  and  his  school  days 
were  few  and  far  between.  Louis  la  Chapelle 
was  his  guardian,  and  he  made  his  home  with  that 
gentleman  and  workeci  on  his  farm  until  his  nine- 
teenth j'ear.  At  the  age  above  mentioned,  3'oung 
Rodrique  began  farming  for  himself  on  land  left 
bv  his  parents  and  also  adjoining  land,  which  lie 
rented.  Here  he  has  always  made  his  home,  and 
is  well  known  and  respected  in  the  community 
in  which  he  has  so  long  lived. 

December  31, 1871,  Louis  Rodrique  and  Theresa 
Derousse  were  united  in  marriage.  Mrs.  Rodrique 
was  the  daughter  of  Poulite  and  Ellen  (Menard) 
Derousse,  and  was  born  on  Kaskaskia  Commons. 
Here  her  death  occurred  February  10,  1878.  Of 
this  marriage  were  born  three  children:  Mary 
Genevieve,  Florence  Ellen  and  Joseph  H.  Our 
subject  was  a  second  time  married  May  13,  1879, 
to  Seraphene  La  Fleur,  daughter  of  Lexon  and 
Pelagi  (Danis)  La  Fleur,  and  a  native  of  Kaskas- 
kia, who  was  born  in  1846,  and  died  March  31, 
1893.  Four  children  came  to  bless  this  union: 
Maggie  Cecelia,  Estella,  James  Augustus;  and 
Erma,  who  is  deceased.     Like  all  the  early  French 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


769 


people  of  Old  Kaskaskia,  our  subject  has  been  rear- 
ed a  Catholic,  as  were  both  his  wives.  He  has  been 
a  life-long  Democrat  and  is  always  a  supporter  of 
its  candidates. 


bOUIS  C.  GENDRON.  Among  those  who 
^  cultivated  a  portion  of  the  soil  of  Old  Kas- 
^  kaskia  Commons,  Randolph  County,  to 
good  advantage,  may  be  mentioned  the  subject 
of  this  sketch,  who  departed  this  life  .January  6, 
1893.  He  w.as  born  in  Old  Kaskaskia  March  4, 
183.3,  and  wns  a  son  of  Luke  and  Mary  (Toulier) 
Gendron,  also  natives  of  Kaskaskia.  They  were 
members  of  old  French  families  and  came  original- 
ly from  Canada. 

Our  subject  spent  his  early  life  in  the  village  of 
Kaskaskia,  and  acquired  the  most  of  his  knowledge 
after  reaching  mature  j-ears,  and  even  attended 
school  after  his  marriage.  His  early  years  were 
spent  in  farming  in  connection  with  his  brother, 
but  on  attaining  his  majority  our  subject  departed 
for  Minnesota,  where  he  rafted  on  the  Mississippi 
River  for  fourteen  years. 

April  22,  1861,  Louis  C.  Gendron  and  Miss 
Harriet,  daughter  of  Anton  and  Mary  P^ugenia 
(Lasourse)  Lonvall.  were  united  in  marriage.  The 
parents  of  Mrs.  Gendron  were  also  natives  of  Kas- 
kaskia, and  the  father  was  of  Spanish  descent. 
The  mother  was  the  daugliter  of  Paschal  and  Har- 
riet (Dennis)  Lasourse  and  reared  a  family  of  six 
children,  of  whom  Harriet  was  the  third  in  order 
of  birth.  She  was  born  February  18,  1843,  in  Old 
Kaskaskia,  where  her  girlhood  was  spent  and 
where  her  marriage  in  the  old  French  Church  was 
celebrated.  For  the  first  four  years  after  estab- 
lishing a  home  of  his  own  our  subject  operated  a 
farm  in  what  is  known  as  the  Big  Fields,  a  tract 
of  land  that  has  since  been  swept  away  by  the 
river.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time,  desiring  to 
visit  his  brother  who  lived  in  California,  .and  with 
a  view  to  bettering  his  own  condition  financially, 
Mr.  Gendron  started  overland  in  April,  1865,  for 
the  Golden  State.  On  reaching  Salt  Lake  City  he 
was  induced  to  join  a  partv  going  to  Montana, 
where  rich  discoveries  had  been  made  in  gold  and 


silver  near  Helena  and  Virginia.  Not  succeeding 
as  he  had  desired,  and  longing  for  his  home  and 
family,  he  in  the  fall  of  the  above  year,  in  com- 
pany with  other  men  similarly  inclined,  started 
down  the  Yellow  Stone  River  in  flat-boats,  which 
had  to  be  covered  thickly  with  hides  of  deer  and 
buffaloes  in  order  to  protect  them  from  the  assaults 
of  Indians. 

The  two  years  succeeding  his  return  home,  our 
subject  was  engaged  in  rafting  on  the  Upper  Mis- 
sissippi, and  in  the  spring  of  1868  he  took  a  flft3'- 
years'  lease  of  fort^'  acres  of  land  on  Kaskaskia 
Commons.  There  he  continued  to  reside  until  his 
decease,  which  occurred  .January  6,  1893.  His  wife 
has  since  added  sixty  acres  to  the  estate  and  is 
conducting  affairs  in  a  very  profitable  manner.  To 
Mr.  and  Mis.  Gendron  have  been  born  the  follow- 
ing children:  Annie,  Eugenia  Adelia, .l.acob  Perry, 
Jacob  and  John  (twins),  Ellen,  Francis,  Elmer  E., 
Virgil  A.  and  Lillian  L. 

Like  most  of  the  old  settlers  of  Kaskaskia,  Mrs. 
Gendron  and  her  family  are  of  the  Catholic  faith, 
and  worship  in  the  church  where  hangs  the  old 
bell  sent  here  by  King  Louis  of  France  in  1742. 
It  was  exhibited  in  the  Convent  of  La  Rabida  at 
the  World's  Fair  in  Chicago,  and  as  a  curiosity  is 
to  be  taken  on  a  tour  through  the  United  States. 
The  congregation  in  K.askaskia,  which  is  presided 
over  by  Father  Goosen,  is  the  oldest  in  the  Mis- 
sissippi Vallej',  dating  back  over  two  hundred 
years. 

. c^jB^p . 

AUNCY  L.  ADAMS,  a  resident  of  township 
6,  range  6,  and  one  of  the  foremost  agri- 
culturists of  Randolph  County,  was  born 
here  on  the  30th  of  November,  1850.  In  order  of 
birth  he  is  the  fourth  child  of  David  and  Margaret 
(Douglas)  Adams,  the  former  of  whom  was  born 
in  Scotland  and  accompanied  his  parents  to  Amer- 
ica when  a  young  man.  The  paternal  grandfather, 
James  Adams,  was  a  shoemaker  by  trade,  which  he 
followed  in  Scotland,  but  after  coming  to  Illinois 
lived  in  retirement  until  his  death.  David  Adams 
was  a  farmer  by  occupation  and  was  thus  engaged 
until  his  death,  which  occurred  in  1854.  Margaret, 
his  wife,  was  a  daughter  of  Lot  Douglas,  who  came 


770 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


from  Scotland  to  America  and  died  in  Randolph 
County. 

Our  subject  was  early  orphaned  by  the  death  of 
his  father,  which  occurred  when  he  was  a  child  of 
four  years.  His  education  was  received  in  District 
No.  3,  township  6,  range  6,  in  this  county.  He  re- 
mained on  the  home  farm  with  his  mother  until 
twenty-two  years  of  ao^e,  when  he  commenced 
farming  for  himself  and  he  has  since  engaged  in 
agricultural  pursuits.  June  11,  1873,  he  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Mary  E.  Livesy,  daugh- 
ter of  Charles  and  Minerva  (Smith)  Livesy.  Of 
this  union  there  were  born  nine  children,  of  whom 
one  died  in  infancy.  Those  living  are,  Luella  M., 
Charles  R.,  James  A.,  David  L.,  Margaret  M., 
Minnie  G.,  Carrie  B.  and  Elmo  H.,  all  of  whom  re- 
side with  their  parents.  Mrs.  Adams  and  the  chil- 
dren are  members  of  the  Presbyterian  Church. 
Politically,  Mr.  Adams  supports  the  principles  of 
the  Republican  party,  and  in  social  matters  he  is 
connected  witli  the  American  Legion  of  Honor. 


"1^^ 


E^" 


WfelLLIAM  DOZA,  a  well  known  resident  of 
'  Randolpli  County,  who  successfully  car- 
ries on  farming  in  township  7,  range  8,  is 
a  native  of  Tennessee.  He  was  born  in  the  city  of 
Natchez,  and  is  the  eldest  child  of  Elese  and  Eliza- 
beth (Pledger)  Doza.  The  Doza  family  were  among 
the  first  settlers  at  Kaskaskia.  Elexe  Doza,  Sr., 
the  grandfather  of  our  subject,  was  a  great  Indian 
fighter,  and  also  a  famous  hunter,  as  was  his  son 
Elexe.  The  latter  was  born  in  Kaskaskia,  and  when 
a  3'oung  man  made  a  hunting  trip  to  Tennessee. 
While  there  he  met  and  married  Miss  Pledger,  and 
continued  his  residence  in  Tennessee  for  two  years. 
Soon  after  the  birth  of  our  subject,  he  returned 
with  his  wife  and  son  to  Kaskaskia,  where  he  fol- 
lowed farming  and  hunting  until  his  deatli,  which 
occurred  about  1860.  His  wife  died  when  AVilliam 
was  a  youth  of  ten  summers. 

Mr.  Doza  of  this  sketch  had  very  limited  school 
privileges  in  his  }'Outh,for  he  was  needed  at  home 
to  aid  in  the  labors  of  the  farm.  He  was  reared  to 
agricultural  pursuits,  and  early  in  life  became 
familiar  with  all  the  arduous  tasks  connected  with 
agriculture.     When  he  began  business  for  himself 


he  continued  in  the  same  pursuit  which  lie  has  fol- 
lowed through  all  the  years  of  his  manhood,  ex- 
cept for  a  period  of  four  years,  when  he  was  en- 
gaged in  merchandising  in  Dozaville,  a  small  town 
in  Randolph  County',  which  was  laid  out  by  our 
subject  and  named  in  his  honor.  He  has  been  very 
prosperous,  and  as  the  result  of  his  close  economy 
and  industry  he  to-day  enjoys  a  goodly  portion 
of  this  world's  goods. 

In  February,  1850,  Mr.  Doza  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Harriet  Lincoln,  a  second  cousin 
of  Abraham  Lincoln.  Her  parents  were  natives  of 
Massachusetts,  and  from  the  Bay  State  emigrated 
to  Kaskaskia,  III.  Unto  our  subject  and  his  wife 
were  born  thirteen  children,  but  three  died  in  in- 
fancy', while  Maiy,  who  became  the  wife  of  Addi- 
son Dobbs,  was  called  to  the  home  be^'ond  in  1888. 
Those  who  still  survive  are,  William  H.,  who  mar- 
ried Mary  LaFleur;  Philip;  Lexe,  who  married 
Sarah  (iondron;  John,  who  married  Sarah  Curry; 
Joseph,  who  married  Mary  Derouse;  Edward,  who 
married  Maggie  Menard;  Laura,  wife  of  William 
Gendron;  Alonzo,  who  married  Lydia  McFadden, 
and  James,  at  home.  The  members  of  the  fam- 
ily are  all  living  in  the  neighborhood  of  Doza- 
ville. Our  subject  and  his  children  are  all  mem- 
bers of  the  Catholic  Church,  and  he  and  his  sons 
are  supporters  of  the  Democrac}'.  He  is  recog- 
nized as  one  of  the  influential  and  leading  citizens 
of  the  communitj-,  a  man  deeply  interested  in  the 
welfare  of  the  neighborhood,  and  does  all  in  his 
power  for  its  advancement  and  upbuilding.  He 
is  also  one  of  the  substantial  citizens  of  the  com- 
munity, and  his  success  in  life  is  well  deserved. 

yn.LIAM  H.  DOZA,  a  son  of  William  Doza, 
was  born  September  12,  18,52,  on  the  banks 
of  the  Grand  Coole)',  two  miles  east  of 
Dozaville,  where  the  family'  then  resided.  He  well 
remembers  when  there  was  water  in  the  Grand 
Cooley  and  fine  fishing  where  is  now  diy  land 
under  cultivation,  the  fine  old  forest  that  once 
lined  its  banks  having  disappeared  and  given  place 
to  smiling  fields  of  wheat  and  corn.  William  H. 
was  about  five  or  six  years  of  age  when  his  father 
removed  to  his  present  home  a  half-mile  north  of 
Dozaville,  and  well  remembers  when  the  fine  farm 


=Tj-4^-.y5-*-,-*iii-«5>.-v-,.«^yyiiJ^i^'i  ,<t  -.^*  -»-4^^^^^.;^^A..((^.■J^^' 


0*      ^^sb 


M-^MW. 


^ 


RESIDENCEIOF    vA/.  H     DOZA,    DOZAvlLLE    RAIIDOlPH    Cu     I  L. 


j_^_«s.^        •<^<!*'V 


^^ 


yw^^r^i 


'h. 


l^''    '^Y 


iw* 


3-~i~T:~t--=^i3 


RESlDEflCE    OF    WILLIAM    DOZA,     DOZAVILLE,    RAMDOLPH     CO.,  ILL 


RESIDENCE  or    W!!?.  B  .  B  U  ATTE  =  CLAI  M     668.,  KA5KA5KIA  ,  RANDOLPH   CO.,  ILL, 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


773 


was  still  all  in  timber.  So  small  was  he  that  once 
in  going  'coon  liuuting  he  was  carried  on  their 
man's  shoulder. 

Our  subject's  education  was  secured  in  the 
school  a  mile  north  of  Dozaville.  The  first  build- 
ing was  constructed  of  logs  and  was  later  replaced 
by  a  frame  structure,  which  is  now  the  residence 
of  J.  G.  Burch.  A  short  time  at  Cape  Girardeau 
completed  his  education  so  far  as  schools  go,  but 
in  the  school  of  experience  in  the  affairs  of  men, 
he  lias  made  a  place  for  himself  such  as  few  of  his 
colleagues  have  done.  When  twenty-  years  of  age 
he  took  a  trip  to  Colorado  for  his  health,  which 
has  never  been  good.  He  remained  some  eight 
months,  visiting  San  Leonis  Valle3',  Pueblo,  and 
Wet  Mountain  Valley,  near  the  pf)Stoflice,  Ula, 
where  he  worked  for  a  stockman  on  his  horse  and 
cattle  ranch. 

During  the  holidays  of  1874  our  young  traveler 
reached  home  and  began  farming  on  his  own  ac- 
count, working  for  his  father  when  his  own  crops 
did  not  demand  his  time.  After  two  years  thus 
occupied,  in  the  spring  of  1876,  Mr.  Doza  and  two 
neighbors  started  for  California,  leaving  home  on 
the  25th  of  March.  This  trip  to  the  west  occupied 
a  year.  Going  first  to  Los  Angeles  and  then  on 
down  as  far  as  San  Diego,  where  they  remained 
but  a  short  time,  our  travelers  set  out  for  Port- 
land, Oregon.  Then  they  worked  for  two  months 
on  a  farm  near  that  place.  It  was  on  the  trip  from 
San  Francisco  to  Portland  that  our  subject  first 
experienced  a  sail  on  the  ocean  and  the  delights  of 
mal  cle  mer. 

After  three  months  in  Oregon  our  travelers  re- 
turned to  San  Francisco  and  went  out  to  Antioch, 
a  small  town  near  b}',  and  worked  some  days  for  a 
thresherman,  running  the  engine.  While  in  this 
situation,  Mr.  Doza  met  a  Mr.  Veale  from  St. 
Clair  County,  111.,  who  took  a  fancy  to  William 
and  invited  him  to  make  his  home  with  liim  while 
there.  He  also  secured  an  agreeable  situation  for 
him  on  levee  work  at  Grand  Island,  in  wliich  po- 
sition he  continued  for  six  months.  After  finish- 
ing the  levee  work  he  returned  home,  bought  a 
team,  and  in  eompanj'  with  his  father  conducted 
farming  operations  and  purchased  a  threshing  ma- 
chine, which  they  operated  in  common. 


William  H.  remained  under  his  father's  roof 
until  the  time  of  his  marriage,  which  took  place 
October  21,  1884.  The  bride  was  Maggie  E., 
daughter  of  Eli  and  Mary  (Carpelspin)  linger, 
natives  of  Kaskaskia  Point.  Her  birth  took 
place  in  March,  1 8 14.  Mrs.  Doza  was  second  in 
order  of  birth  of  a  family  of  three  children  born 
to  her  parents.  To  our  subject  and  his  wife  have 
been  born  five  children,  as  follows:  Maiy  E.,  Ra_v- 
mond  B.,  Ada  F.,  Leon  G.  and  Alma  E. 

Mr.  Doza  has  operated  quite  extensively  for  a 
St.  Louis  firm,  sending  out  from  twelve  to  fifteen 
barge  loads  from  near  Dozaville,  and  one  3'ear 
rafted  logs  from  up  the  Missouri  near  St.  Charles. 
He  has  also  supplied  large  quantities  of  piling  for 
the  Government  contractors  for  use  in  improving 
the  Mississippi.  He  is  operating  altogether  about 
one  hundred  and  eighty  acres  of  land.  Mr.  Doza 
is  a  stirring  business  man,  alwaj'S  keeping  some- 
thing for  his  hand  to' do.  His  experience  in  Cal- 
ifornia mode  him  a  suitable  person  to  take  charge 
as  foreman  of  the  extension  levee  work  done  near 
Dozaville  in  the  winter  of  1893-94,  of  which  he 
was  also  one  of  the  Directors. 

In  public  affairs  Mr.  Doza  has  served  as  Coasta- 
ble,  was  School  Director  for  a  number  of  j-ears, 
and  also  Road  Commissioner,  which  place  he  has 
recently  resigned.  In  the  spring  of  1892  he  se- 
cured a  piece  of  land  near  Dozaville  and  pur- 
chased the  old  Governor  Bond  House  in  Kaskas- 
kia, wrecked  it,  and  built  a  flue  brick  residence  in 
the  village  which  bears  his  father's  name.  Here 
he  makes  his  home,  surrounded  b3^  an  interesting 
famil}',  enjoj'ing  the  comforts  of  life.  He  and  his 
wife  are  members  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church 
of  Kaskaskia,  the  oldest  congregation  in  the  Mis- 
sissippi Valley.  In  politics  he  is  a  Democrat,  sup- 
porting the  principles  and  candidates  of  that  party. 
He  is  one  of  the  leading  men  on  the  Island  and  is 
respected  by  all  who  know  him. 

y^ILLIAM  B.  BUATTE,  who  for  many  years 
has    resided   in    Randolph  County  and  is 
^^^     now  serving  as  County  Commissioner,  has 
the  honor  of  being  a  native  of   Illinois.     He  was 
born    in    Kaskaskia,  Randolph    County,  July  30, 
1849,  and  is  a  son  of  Felix   Buatte,  who  was  also 


774 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


born  in  Kaskaskia.  The  family  is  of  French  de- 
scent and  was  the  second  family  that  located  in 
the  old  historic  town  in  which  our  subject  was 
born.  He  was  the  third  in  order  of  birth  in  a 
familj'  of  four  children.  His  mother  died  when 
he  wasonlj'  two  j'ears  old,  and  his  father  removed 
to  Iowa,  where  he  lived  for  nine  years.  He  was 
four  times  married. 

Our  subject  attended  the  subscription  schools  of 
the  Hawkeye  State,  and  after  the  return  of  the 
family  to  Kaskaskia,  there  completed  his  educa- 
tion. He  worked  on  a  farm  with  his  father  until 
fourteen  3ears  of  age,  when  he  started  out  in  life 
for  himself  as  a  farm  hand.  In  that  way  he  earned 
his  livelihood  for  seven  years,  after  which  he  be- 
gan farming  for  himself.  His  time  and  attention 
have  since  been  devoted  to  that  pursuit,  and  his 
enterprise  and  industrj',  together  with  his  well 
directed  efforts,  have  made  him  one  of  the  leading 
farmers  of  this  locality.  He  knew  the  old  time 
capital  in  the  days  of  its  prominence,  as  well  as 
after  the  Mississippi  had  largely  carried  it  away. 
His  family  was  among  the  first  pioneers  here,  and 
his  great-great-grandfather's  name  was  on  the  old 
belUwhich  was  taken  to  the  World's  Fair  in  1893, 
among  the  Kaskaskia  exhibits. 

Mr.  Buatte  has  been  twice  married.  In  No- 
vember, 1871,  he  was  united  in  marriage  with  Mrs. 
Elizabeth  (Dobbs)  Danis,  daughter  of  Jackson 
Dobbs,  of  Kaskaskia,  and  a  native  of  Georgia.  By 
their  union  were  born  six  children,  of  whom  three 
are  j-et  living,  John  S.,  Robert  and  Hon.  William 
Bernard  Buatte.  The  mother  of  the  famil}-  died 
in  November,  1891.  In  April,  1892,  the  father 
married  Mrs.  Margaret  (Caudle)  Milligan.  One 
child  graces  this  marriage,  Felix  Ulmont. 

Mr.  Buatte  holds  membership  with  the  Roman 
Catholic  Church,  and  his  wife  belongs  to  the  Bap- 
tist Chuich.  In  politics  he  is  a  Democrat,  having 
been  a  stalwart  supporter  of  that  party  since  at- 
taining his  majority.  He  has  been  honored  with 
a  number  of  public  positions,  has  held  school  and 
road  offices,  and  in  1890  he  was  nominated  by  the 
Democratic  party  as  County  Commissioner  for 
Randolph  County,  and  was  elected  by  a  handsome 
majority.  He  was  made  Chairman  of  the  Board, 
and   so  well  did   he  fill  the  office  that  at  the  con- 


vention in  Kaskaskia,  in  September,  1893,  he  was 
renominated  by  acclamation.  The  election  returns 
showed  him  to  be  the  successful  candidate,  and  when 
his  present  term  has  expired  he  will  have  held  the 
office  for  six  consecutive  yeare.  He  is  prompt  and 
faithful  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties  and  is  filling 
the  position  with  credit  to  himself  and  satisfaction 
to  his  constituents.  He  is  always  true  to  a  trust, 
whether  public  or  private,  and  by  an  honorable, 
upright  life  he  has  won  the  confidence  and  high 
regard  of  all  with  whom  he  has  been  brought  in 
contact.  In  his  business  relations  he  has  met  with 
success  and  is  now  a  substantial  citizen,  one  well 
worth}-  of  representation  in  this  volume. 


ri^-^  GRACE  W.  CLARKE,  a  well  known  citi- 
ll[)j^  zen  of  Murphysboro,  who  occupies  the  po- 
^y^  sition  of  Division  Superintendent  of  the 
1^3/  St.  Louis  Division  of  the  Mobile  k  Ohio 
Railroad,  was  born  on  the  27th  of  September,  1854, 
in  Cumberland,  Md.,  and  at  the  age  of  eighteen 
entered  the  railway  service.  His  father,  who  is^ 
President  of  the  road,  lias  through  life  been  con- 
nected with  this  work,  .and  it  seemed  but  natural 
that  the  son  should  take  up  the  same  business. 

From  January,  1872,  until  1876,  Mr.  Clarke 
served  as  an  apprentice  in  the  machine  shops  of 
the  Northern  Central  Railroad,  and  from  1876  un- 
til 1877  he  was  clerk  in  the  draughtsman's  office 
of  the  Illinois  Central.  In  the  latter  year  he  be- 
came section  foreman  and  conductor  on  the  ditch- 
ing train  of  the  Chicago,  St.  Louis  <fc  New  Orleans 
Railroad,  and  in  1878  he  was  made  trainmaster  on 
the  same  road,  which  position  he  filled  for  five 
years.  From  1883  until  1884  he  was  Division 
Superintendent  of  the  Louisiana  Division  of  the 
Illinois  Central,  and  from  1884  until  the  1st  of 
August,  1886.  was  Assistant  Division  .Superintend- 
ent of  the  Mississippi  Division   of  the  same  road. 

At  the  latter  date  Mr.  Clarke  succeeded  to  the 
office  of  Superintendent,  which  position  he  filled 
until  June  23,  1890,  when  he  entered  the  service 
of  the  Mobile  it  Ohio  Railroad  as  Superintendent. 
He  devotes  himself  untiringly  to  his  work.  He  is 
also  interested  in  the  Clarke  <i:  Logan  Addition  to 


PORTRAIT  AKD  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


775 


Murphysboro,  and  is  connected  with  the  City  Na- 
tional Bank  as  a  stockholder.  Pleasant  and  genial 
in  manner,  he  has  won  popularity  in  this  eom- 
nuinity  and  has  gained    a    wide    circle    of    warm 


friends. 


z^mc^ 


jILLIAJI  MAEYS,  a  leading  merchant  and 
prominent  business   man  residing   in   the 


'^^'  village  of  Maeystown,  has  the  honor  of  | 
being  a  native  of  Monroe  Countv,  his  birth  hav-  ' 
ing  occurred  near  Columbia  on  the  4th  of  July, 
1842.  His  parents,  George  and  Elizabeth  (Reaup) 
Mae3's,  were  both  natives  of  Germany,  and  bj'  their 
union  they  had  six  children,  two  of  whom  are  now 
deceased.  Those  yet  living  are  Jacob,  Henrj', 
Matilda  and  William.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Maeys  spent 
their  childhood  and  youth  in  the  Fatherland. 
They  were  members  of  the  Lutheran  Church,  and 
were  highlj'  respected  people.  A  record  of  their 
lives  appears  elsewhere  in  this  volume. 

No  event  of  special  im[jortance  occurred  during 
the  boyhood  of  our  subject,  who  was  reai-ed  in  the 
usual  manner  of  farmer  lads,  attending  the  district 
schools  during  the  winter  months,  and  aiding  in 
the  labors  of  the  field  in  the  summer  season.  He 
continued  with  his  parents  until  eighteen  years  of 
age,  and  then  started  out  in  life  for  himself.  He 
first  earned  his  livelihood  by  working  as  a  farm 
hand  for  §7  per  month,  but  wishing  to  engage  in 
commercial  pursuits,  he  went  to  Red  llud  in  1861 
and  there  began  clerking.  He  was  thus  employed 
in  Red  Bud  and  Maeystown  for  thirty  years,  being 
a  most  successful  salesman.  In  1893,  he  purchased 
the  store  of  which  he  is  now  proprietor  and  has 
since  been  doing  business  for  himself. 

In  1868,  Mr.  Mae3"s  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Christina  Riffle,  a  native  of  Monroe  County. 
Their  only  child  is  now  deceased,  and  Mrs.  Maeys 
died  at  the  early  age  of  twenty  years.  She  held 
membership  with  the  Lutheran  Church.  In  1870, 
our  subject  was  again  married,  his  second  union 
being  with  Miss  Margaret  Studt,  a  native  of  Ger- 
many. She  spent  her  maidenhood  days  in  that 
land  and  in  its  public  schools  acquired  a  good  edu- 
cation. In  1867,  she  left  the  home  of  her  girlhood, 
and  with  her  sister  crossed  the  Atlantic  and  came 


direct  to  Monroe  County,  111.  By  this  union 
were  born  ten  children,  Anna  E.,  Jacob,  George, 
Bertha,  Caroline,  William,  Matilda,  Alvin  and  two 
now  deceased.  The  children  are  attending  the 
Maeystown  school.  It  is  the  intention  of  their  par- 
ents to  give  them  good  educational  privileges  and 
thus  fit  them  for  life's  practical  duties.  The  fam- 
ily is  one  of  prominence  in  the  community,  the 
Maeys  home  is  the  abode  of  hospitality,  and  the 
members  of  the  household  rank  high  in  social 
circles. 

Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Maeys  hold  membership 
with  the  Lutheran  Church  and  contribute  liberally 
to  its  support.  He  votes  with  the  Democratic 
partv  and  does  all  in  his  power  to  insure  its  suc- 
cess. He  is  now  a  successful  merchant,  enjoying  a 
splendid  trade,  and  he  and  his  estimable  wife  are 
numbered  among  the  highly  respected  citizens  of 
his  native  county. 


MX 


D.  KIMMEL  is  a  noted  horseman  and 
rainer  of  horses  of  Elkville,  near  which 
lace  he  was  born  September  13,  1862. 
His  parents,  David  and  Susan  Kimmel,  are  num- 
bered among  the  honored  pioneers  of  this  locality. 
On  the  old  homestead  the  subject  of  this  sketch 
grew  to  manhood.  While  yet  a  lad  he  often  sur- 
prised his  neighbors  by  his  superior  horsemanship. 
He  has  been  a  lover  of  the  noble  steed  from  early 
boyhood.  He  studied  their  habits  and  what  was 
best  adapted  to  their  welfare. 

Considering  the  animals  which  Mr.  Kimmel  has 
had  under  his  training,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  he 
maj'  well  be  classed  witli  the  best  amateurs  of  the 
turf.  He  was  the  first  man  to  breed  a  standard- 
bred  horse  in  Jackson  County;  that  is,  starting 
with  a  common  breed  of  horses,  he  inbred  until 
the  offspring  was  eligible  to  registration  and  was 
accepted  and  registered  by  the  "  American  Trotting 
Register  "  as  a  standard  trotting  animal.  He  was 
the  first  man  to  introduce  in  this  count}'  the  blood 
of  "Nutwood"  No.  600,  record  2:18J,  and  the  great- 
est living  sire,  the  sire  of  "Manager,"  2:06f,  and 
one  hundred  and  eight  other  standard  performers, 
through   his   grandson,  "Brockman,"   No.    18382, 


776 


PORTRAIT  AKD  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


■which  he  bought  from  the  Montgomer}'  Stock  Farm, 
of  E.  W.  Barker,  St.  Bethlehem,  Tenn.,  in  1892.  He 
is  sired  b}'  "Sylvan"  Xo.  3667,  record  2:27^;  son  of 
"Nutwood,"  first  dam  "Cliquot"  b>'  "Nutbotirne" 
No.  1399,  full  brother  to  "Nutwood,"  and  son  of 
"Miss  Russell,"  dam  of  "Maud  S."  2:08J,  etc. 

In  1884,  Mr.  Kimmel  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Mattie  Schwartz,  a  daughter  of  Edward 
Schwartz.  To  them  has  been  born  a  family  of  four 
children:  Maude,  deceased;  Mercie,  Lucj-and  Ned. 
Thej-  reside  in  Elkville,  where  the^'  have  a  pleas- 
ant home  and  are  well  known  people. 


•  ~s*e^  -^fi^  ^^^^  ^3j£^  -ALt^  jaa  ^9K^  ^V'-^  ^W'  -afc*  ,^3<a^  ~W«* 

.  ^TOv  -^;^rT5«^  ^^^  -^*^  WAf  -*!*»  --Ai^  -fi^  .^1*^  -»«^  -IT** 


<A  feTLLlAM  LEMEN.  who  for  some  years  has 
\rJ//  successfully  engaged  in  school  teaching, 
^1/^1/  aud  is  now  a  well  known  and  highly  re- 
spected citizen  of  Burksville,  is  numbered  among 
the  native  sons  of  Monroe  County.  His  parents, 
Josiah  and  Susan  A.  (Bales)  Lemen,  were  also  born 
in  Illinois.  In  the  public  schools  the  father  ac- 
quired his  earl}'  education,  which  was  supplemented 
by  a  college  course.  He  remained  at  home  until 
his  marriage  with  Miss  Bales  in  1851.  To  them 
were  born  six  children,  Lewis,  William,  Albert, 
Jennie,  and  two  who  died  in  infancy. 

After  his  marriage,  Mr.  Lemen  purchased  the 
old  homestead,  and  carried  on  farming  until  his 
death,  which  occurred  September  27,  1875.  He 
held  the  office  of  School  Director,  and  also  served 
as  election  judge.  He  exercised  his  right  of  fran- 
chise in  support  of  the  Republican  party.  In 
every  dutj'  ol  life  he  was  thoroughly  conscien- 
tious, and  was  a  kind  father,  true  husband  and 
loj'al  citizen.  His  wife  held  membership  with  the 
Baptist  Church,  and  died  in  that  faith  December 
7,  1863. 

The  great-grandfather  of  our  subject  built  the 
firet  brick  house  west  of  the  Ohio  River.  One 
evening,  as  Captain  Dent,  the  father-in-law  of 
General  Grant,  was  on  his  way  home,  night  over- 
took him,  and  he  came  to  this  house  seeking  shel- 
ter. The  lady,  a  very  kind-hearted  woman,  who 
was  then  at  home  alone,  consented  to  allow  him  to 
remain.  The  family  consisted  of  father,  mother 
and  seven  sons,  all  of  whom  were  grown  young 


men,  large  and  robust.  As  night  drew  near,  the 
sons  came  home  after  a  daj-'s  hunt.  Captain  Dent 
trembled  as  he  saw  them  enter,  their  hands  and 
clothes  covered  with  blood,  for  he  thought  he  was 
at  the  mercy  of  a  gang  of  robbers.  The  father 
soon  inquired  of  the  bo^'S  concerning  tiieir  success 
and  was  answered,  "We  laid  one  cold."  This 
frightened  the  Captain  more  than  ever;  he  feared 
these  were  his  last  moments  on  earth,  and  he 
would  never  see  his  home  and  family  again.  The 
evening  to  him  passed  slowly  awav,  and  at  last 
the  hour  of  retiring  drew  near.  The  old  gentle- 
man remarked,  "Well  I  guess  its  time,"  but  did  not 
say  time  for  what.  He  walked  to  the  fireplace  and 
reached  above  the  mantle-piece,  where  hung  a 
large  rifle,  but  instead  of  the  rifle,  as  was  looked 
for  by  the  traveler,  he  took  the  family  Bible  and 
commenced  the  evening  worship.  The  Captain's 
relief  ma}'  be  imagined  when  he  found  that  in- 
stead of  being  among  a  gang  of  robbers,  he  was  in 
a  home  of  ministers,  for  the  seven  sons  were  all 
preachers. 

We  now  take  up  the  pei-sonal  history  of  Will- 
iam Lemen,  who  was  educated  in  a  high  school  of 
Monroe  County,  and  spent  his  boyhood  and  youth 
in  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads.  Having  ar- 
rived at  years  of  maturity,  he  chose  as  a  com  pan 
ion  and  helpmate  on  life's  journej'  Miss  Louisa  E. 
Briegel.  B}'  their  marriage  was  born  one  child,  a 
girl,  Hulda  E.,  who  is  the  light  and  joy  of  the  par- 
ents' home.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lemen  have  always  re- 
sided on  the  old  Lemen  homestead,  which  is  car- 
ried on  by  our  subject,  who,  in  addition  to  his 
farm  labor,  spends  eight  months  of  the  3'ear  in 
teaching  school.  He  has  always  been  a  close  stu- 
dent, and  has  spent  much  of  his  leisure  time  in 
deep  research  in  various  directions.  He  began 
teaching  at  the  age  of  twent^'-one,  and  has  fol- 
lowed the  profession  for  twelve  years,  becoming  a 
most  capable  instructor.  He  also  has  two  broth- 
ers who  are  engaged  in  school  teaching.  He  was 
also  for  four  years  engaged  in  operating  a  saw- 
mill, operated  a  threshing  machine  for  twelve 
years,  and  was  the  founder  of  Lemen  Station,  on 
the  Mobile  &  Ohio  Railroad. 

In  politics,  Mr.  Lemen  has  been  a  stalwart  Re- 
publican since  casting  his  first   Presidential  vote 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


777 


for  R.  B.  Hayes.  He  belongs  to  the  Farmers'  Mu- 
tual Benefit  Association,  and  is  a  man  whose  many 
excellencies  of  character  have  gained  liim  high  re- 
gard throughout  the  community.  B_v  his  industry 
and  enterprise  he  has  made  for  his  family  a  fine 
home.  He  carries  forward  to  a  successful  comple- 
tion whatever  he  undertakes,  and  has  therefore 
won  a  prominent  place  among  the  leading  farmers 
and  teachers  of  the  count}'. 


HARLES  H.  SUNDMACHER.  one  of  the 
self-made  men  of  Jackson  County  and  a 
leading  attornej'-at-law  of  Murphysboro,  is 
a  native  of  the  neighboring  state  of  Missouri,  his 
birth  having  occurred  in  St.  Louis,  July  25,  1857. 
His  father,  Ferdinand  Sundmacher,  was  a  native 
of  Germany  and  a  carpenter  by  trade.  When  a 
young  man  he  came  to  the  United  States,  locat- 
ing in  St.  Louis,  where  he  followed  carpentering 
for  some  time.  During  the  war  he  carried  on 
farming  near  Dc  Soto,  Jefferson  Count}-,  Mo.,  and 
in  1865  went  to  Belleville,  St.  Clair  County,  III. 
Two  years  later  he  came,  to  Murphj'sboro,  where 
he  was  engaged  as  a  carpenter  for  some  time,  but 
is  now  living  retired.  His  wife,  Mrs.  Mary  (Bo- 
deker)  Sundmacher,  was  born  in  the  Fatherland, 
and  during  her  infancy  was  brought  b}-  her  par- 
ents to  America.  She  died  in  Murpln'sboro  at  the 
age  of  fort}-,  leaving  one  son  and  two  daughters. 
The  former,  Charles  IL,  was  a  lad  of  only  ten 
summers  when  he  located  in  Murphysboro.  He 
attended  the  public  schools  until  fifteen  years  of 
age  and  then  went  to  the  west,  where  he  was  en- 
gaged in  mining  and  prospecting  in  the  moun- 
tains of  California  in  various  places  on  the  coast. 
He  was  in  a  number  of  states  beyond  the  Missis- 
sippi from  1872  until  1882.  The  following  year 
however,  he  made  a  permanent  location  in  Mur- 
physboro, and  began  reading  law  under  the  di- 
rection of  George  W.  Smith,  Member  of  Congress. 
He  has  since  engaged  in  practice,  and  was  ad- 
mitted to  the  Bar  in  Mt.  Vernon  in  1887.  In  the 
spring  of  1885  he  was  elected  City  Attorney,  and 
after  faithfully  filling  that  office  for  a  term  of 
tw-o  years  w-as  re-elected,  in  1887.     He  was  one  of 


the  revisers  of  the  city  ordinances  of  Murphys- 
boro, and,  in  connection  with  R.  J.  Stephens,  pre- 
pared the  copy  for  the  press,  a  work  of  one  hun- 
dred and  eighty-four  pages. 

The  marriage  of  Mr.  Sundmacher  and  Jliss  Mag- 
gie Blue  was  celebrated  in  Murphysboro  in  1887. 
The  lady  was  born  in  Kentucky,  but  her  girlhood 
daj's  were  spent  in  Williamson  County,  111.  They 
have  a  little  daughter,  Mary. 

Our  subject  takes  considerable  interest  in  civic 
societies,  is  a  member  of  Amity  Lodge,  I.  O.  ().  F., 
and  the  encampment,  and  is  a  very  prominent 
Mason.  He  belongs  to  the  blue  lodge  and  chap- 
ter of  Murphj-sboro,  being  Past  High  Priest  of  the 
latter;  to  the  Knight  Templar  Commandery  of 
Cairo;  and  the  Medina  Temple  of  the  Mystic 
Shrine  and  the  Oriental  Consislor}-,  both  of  Chi- 
cago, having  attained  the  thirty -second  degree.  He 
has  served  as  representative  to  the  Grand  Chap- 
ter of  the  state.  He  also  belongs  to  the  Knights 
of  Pythias.  In  his  political  views  he  is  a  Demo- 
crat. His  service  as  City  Attorney'  gave  great 
satisfaction,  and  in  this  community  he  is  recog- 
nized as  a  lawyer  of  ability,  who  is  rapidl}-  win- 
ning a  prominent  place  among  his  professional 
brethren.  In  January,  1894,  he  was  one  of  the 
corporators  of  the  Logau  Investment  Company 
of  Murphysboro.  of  which  he  is  now  manager. 


^.g^^^tffl^l^  ^i^"^^^^ 


y 


ILLIAM  CARLILE.  Among  the  men  who 
are  cultivating  a  portion  of    the  soil  of 

ipfj  Old  Kaskaskia,  Randolph  County,  to  good 
advantage  is  the  gentleman  above  named,  whose 
pleasant  home  is  located  on  lot  4,  third  sub-division 
of  Kaskaskia  Commons.  Like  man}-  of  the  most 
progressive  citizens  of  this  section, our  subject  is  a 
native  of  this  county,  having  been  born  near  Ches- 
ter, July  15,  1857.  He  is  the  son  of  James  and 
Mary  (Shark)  Carlile.  who  were  born  in  Paisley, 
Scotland. 

William  Carlile,  of  this  sketch,  prosecuted  his 
studies  in  the  Fleming  schoolhouse,  located  some 
five  miles  from  Chester,  near  where  his  father  was 
operating  a  farm.  He  remained  under  the  parental 
roof  and  aided  in  cultivating  the  home  place  un- 


778 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


til  reaching  his  majority,  when  he  started  out  to 
begin  the  battle  of  life  on  liis  own  account.  He 
first  began  farming  on  Kaskaskia  Commons,  which 
has  been  the  scene  of  his  operations  ever  since, 
with  tlie  exception  of  one  j-ear,  when  he  put  in  a 
crop  on  the  hills.  He  is  now  cultivating  a  tract  of 
fifty-seven  acres,  liaving  a  fifty-j'ear  lease  on  the 
old  commons,  where  he  has  planted  a  j'oung  or- 
chard and  made  manj'  other  valuable  improve- 
ments. 

August  28,  1883,  our  suijjeet  was  married  to 
Miss  Olive,  daughter  of  Robert  E.  and  Mary  B. 
(Carpenter)  Phillip,  natives  respectively  of  Vigo 
County,  Ind.,  and  Old  Kaskaskia,  this  county.  Six 
children  have  come  to  brighten  their  home,  as  fol- 
lows: Willie,  May,  Edward  and  Edna  L.  (twins), 
Harr^' and  Sadie.  Maj-  and  Edward  are  deceased. 
Mrs.  Carlile  is  a  working  member  of  the  Mission- 
ary Baptist  Church  and  is  a  most  excellent  lad_v.  In 
politics  our  subject  always  votes  the  straight 
Democratic  ticket,  and  in  every  enterprise  to 
whicii  he  gives  his  support  he  maintains  a  deep 
and  unwavering  interest. 


^^  AMI'EL  HARRIS.     The    agricultural  dis- 
^^^    tricts  of  this  great  commonwealth  are  the 
\£-M  homes  of  many  worthy  men    whose    lives 
liave    been   spent  in  sucli  a  manner  as  to 
win  the  respect  of  their  associates,  while  their  well 
directed  efforts  have  resulted  in  comfortable  homes 
and    valuable   jiroperties.     In    Randolpli    County 
representatives  of  this  class  may  be  found  in  large 
numbers,  and  one  of  them  is  he  whose  biographical 
record  is  outlined  in  these  paragraphs.     His  home 
is  located    in  township  6,  range  5,  where  he  has  a 
thoroughly  tilled  farm,  improved   by  such   build- 
ings as  are  made    necessary   by  the   extent  of  his 
work. 

Born  in  Randolph  County.  111.,  October  1,  1856, 
our  subject  is  the  fourth  surviving  son  of  John 
and  Amanda  (Threlkel)  Harris,  natives  of  Ken- 
tucky, who,  coming  to  Illinois  in  an  early  daj',  set- 
tled five  miles  west  of  Steeleville,  Randolph 
County.  Mr.  Harris  became  one  of  the  most 
prominent  farmers  of  the  county,  and  his  death 


in  1872  was  universally  mourned  by  the  people 
of  this  communitj'.  His  wife  p.assed  away  De- 
cember 31,  1883.  Members  of  the  Harris  and 
Threlkel  families  were  among  the  verj'  earliest 
settlers  of  Randolph  County,  and  east  of  Kaskas- 
kia, near  Percj',  there  still  st.ands  a  building 
erected  by  Mr.  Threlkel  that  has  the  distinc- 
tion of  having  been  one  among  the  first  struct- 
ures built  in  Randolph  Countv. 

Alternating  attendance  at  the  district  school 
with  work  on  the  home  farm,  Samuel  Harris  passed 
the  days  of  boyhood.  At  the  age  of  fourteen 
he  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  attending  school  for 
one  year  at  Chester,  and  two  years  later  he  en- 
tered the  college  at  Lebanon,  III.,  where  he  pros- 
ecuted his  studies  for  about  two  j'ears.  While 
at  Lebanon  his  health  failed,  and  for  four  years 
he  was  an  invalid.  Hoping  to  regain  the  vigor 
of  former  years,  he  went  to  Colorado  and  spent 
one  year  recuperating.  Then  he  returned  to 
Steeleville  and  with  E.  M.  Harris  embarked  in 
the  meat  business,  which  he  followed  for  five 
years.  Later  he  engaged  in  the  grain  and  feed 
business  for  one  and  one-half  years. 

On  account  of  ill  health  Mr.  Harris  was  once 
more  obliged  to  seek  the  western  part  of  the 
United  States,  and  for  a  year  he  traveled  and  ul- 
timately succeeded  in  regaining  strength.  In  the 
spring  of  1883  he  settled  on  the  farm  where  he 
has  since  resided,  engaged  in  mixed  farming  and 
stock-raising.  He  is  one  of  the  moneyed  men  of 
the  county,  and  is  prominently  identified  with 
many  of  the  most  important  enterprises  of  the  com- 
munity. In  politics  he  is  a  Democrat,  but  has 
never  aspired  to  office,  although  he  has  been  chosen 
to  serve  as  School  Director  and  Constable.  Socially 
he  is  connected  with  Alma  Lodge  No.  497,  A.  F. 
&  A.  M.,  at  Steeleville. 

In  the  spring  of  1883  Mr.  Harris  married  Miss 
Elizabeth  Hoke,  who  was  born  in  AVashington 
County,  III.,  and  for  some  time  prior  to  her  mar- 
riage cng.aged  in  teaching  school  in  Washington 
and  Randolph  Counties.  Her  parents,  George  T. 
and  Rebecca  (Fulton)  Hoke,  natives  respectively 
of  Indiana  and  Illinois,  are  both  living,  and  will 
in  October,  1894,  celebrate  their  golden  wedding 
anniversary.     The  Fulton  family  came  from  New 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


779 


Hampshire,  while   the    Hokes   were   residents  of 

Pennsylvania  for  several  generations.  Mrs.  Harris 
is  a  member  of  the  Methodist  Church,  and  her  two 
children,  Samuel  L.  and  Murray  Hoke,  are  attend- 
ants at  the  Sunday-school. 


(^ 


^m\<®^ 


L-T- 


■-s^ 


1^^' 


^ 


^ 


STf^j  ARRET!  P.  HARMON  was  born  near  Pal- 
L>V  estine,  Randolph  County,  111.,  on  the  1st  of 
/AMljl:  February,  1841,  and  was  a  son  of  George 
\~<f'  and  Mary  (Caudle)  Harmon.  His  father 
was  born  in  South  Carolina,  and  when  a  young 
man  came  with  his  parents  to  Illinois.  He  was  a 
cooper  by  trade  and  followed  that  business  for  a 
number  of  years,  but  later  in  life  he  turned  his  at- 
tention to  farming,  whicli  he  continued  until  his 
death.  He  was  a  successful  agriculturist  and  ac- 
quired a  comfortable  competence.  His  wife  sur- 
vived bim  only  three  ^-ears. 

B.  P.  Harmon  was  reared  in  the  usual  manner  of 
farmer  lads.  He  acquired  his  education  in  the  dis- 
trict schools,  which  he  attended  through  the  winter 
season,  while  in  the  summer  months  he  aided  in 
the  labors  of  the  field.  He  continued  to  give  his 
father  the  benefit  of  his  services  until  he  had  at- 
tained his  majority,  when  he  started  out  in  life 
for  himself  and  followed  the  pursuit  to  which  he 
was  reared.  He  made  farming  his  life  work,  de- 
voting his  energies  to  no  other  pursuit.  His  place 
was  always  neat  and  tlirifty  in  appearance,  and  its 
well  tilled  fields  and  the  many  imiirovements  seen 
tliereon  indicated  the  careful  suiiervision  of  the 
owner. 

On  the  30th  of  August,  1864,  Jlr.  Harmon  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  IMarjie  C.  Jones, 
daughter  of  Armstead  and  Sarena  J.  (Garner) 
Jones.  Her  father  was  a  native  of  Tennessee,  and 
her  mother  was  born  in  this  county.  Oilr  subject 
and  his  wife  became  the  parents  of  a  familj'of  eight 
children,  but  Sarena,  the  second  child,  died  after 
reaching  womanhood.  Those  still  living  are, 
Charles,  who  married  Harriet  Hunt  and  lives  on  a 
farm  near  Ellis  Grove;  Lizzie,  wife  of  W.  H. 
Haynes,  a  prominent  young  man  of  Monroe  Coun- 
ty, 111.;  Carroll,  Arthur  G.,Emma  J.,  Olive  V.  and 


Barrett  R.,  all  of  whom  are  still  with  their  mother 
on  the  old  homestead. 

For  seven  years  prior  to  his  death,  Mr.  Harmon 
was  in  poor  health.  He  made  two  trips  to  Califor- 
nia in  the  hope  of  being  benefited  thereby,  and 
also  went  to  Kansas  for  the  same  purpose,  but  to 
no  avail.  In  politics,  he  was  a  stanch  Democrat, 
and  held  school  offices  for  a  number  of  years.  He 
was  also  Justice  of  the  Peace  for  twelve  years,  and 
his  faithfulness  to  duty  is  indicated  by  his  long 
continued  service.  Socially,  he  was  connected 
with  Kaskaskia  Lodge  No.  86,  A.  F.  ct  A.  M.  He 
and  his  wife  were  for  many  years  connected  with 
the  Methodist  Church,  but  afterwards  became  con- 
verted to  the  belief  of  Christian  .Science.  He  vvas 
a  true  and  loyal  citizen,  a  faithful  neighbor  and 
friend  and  a  kind  and  loving  husband  and  father, 
and  throughout  the  community  in  which  he  lived 
his  death  was  widely  and  deeply  mourned.  His 
wife,  who  possesses  many  excellencies  of  character 
and  is  held  in  iiigh  regard,  still  resides  with  her 
children  on  the  old  homestead. 


«)DWARD  C.  RENDELL,  chief  clerk  for  the 
Superintendent  of  the  St.  Louis  Division  of 
9  the  Mobile  &  Ohio  Railroad,  is  a  pleasant 
and  affable  gentleman,  and  is  thoroughly  conver- 
sant with  everj'  detail  of  the  railroad  business. 
He  was  born  in  Petersburg,  Va.,  October  4,  1863, 
and  is  a  son  of  I.  J.  Rendell,  whose  birth  occurred 
in  the  vicinity  of  Bangor,  Me.  The  father,  who 
was  a  locomotive  engineer  by  trade,  w.as  in  the 
employ  of  various  roads  at  different  times,  and 
during  the  Civil  AVar  ran  an  engine  for  the  Union 
army  in  Virginia.  At  the  close  of  the  Rebellion 
he  went  to  Mississippi,  where  he  ran  an  engine  on 
the  old  Mississippi  Central  Railroad.  After  resid- 
ing for  a  time  in  Jackson,  Tenn.,  he  came  to 
Cairo,  111.,  in  1878,  and  was  general  foreman  for 
the  old  Chicago,  St.  Louis  &  New  Orleans,  now  the 
Illinois  Central  Railroad.  His  death  occurred  in 
1888. 

Our  subject's  mother,  whose  maiden  name  was 
Ella  Newsome,  was  born  in  Petersburg,  Va.,  where 
her  father,  F.  P.  Newsome^  was  a  tailor.     She  now 


780 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


makes  her  home  with  our  subject.  Of  the  family, 
two  brothers  and  three  sisters  are  cleceaseci,  while 
one  son  and  one  daughter  are  living.  Edward  C. 
was  reared  in  Mississippi  and  at  Jackson,  Tenn., 
wiiere  he  was  a  student  in  the  common  schools. 
In  1878  he  removed  to  Cairo,  where  he  prosecuted 
his  studies  in  the  liigh  school.  He  was  also  a  stu- 
dent in  the  Clinton  Baptist  College,  at  Clinton, 
Ky.,  for  two  j-ears. 

In  the  meantime,  as  earlj^  as  1880,  Mr.  Rendell 
entered  the  emploj'  of  the  Illinois  Central  Rail- 
way Company  and  ran  a  stationary  engine  at 
East  Cairo,  K}'.,  where  he  continued  until  1888. 
He  then  took  his  father's  place  as  general  foreman, 
and  after  two  months  was  relieved  by  A.  B.  Min- 
tou.  Later  he  accepted  a  clerkship  with  W.  H. 
Clark,  at  Jackson,  Tenn.,  where  he  was  Division 
Superintendent  of  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad, 
remaining  in  that  position  until  June  of  1890, 
since  which  time  he  has  been  at  Murphysboro  as 
Mr.  Clark's  chief  clerk.  Socially,  he  is  identified 
with  the  Uniformed  Rank,  K.  of  P.,  at  Cairo,  and 
in  his  political  belief  he  is  a  Democrat.  He  is  a 
member  of  the  Christian  Church,  and  is  an  ear- 
nest and  active  worker  in  that  denomination. 


WILLIAM  H.  SMITH,  Chairman  of  the  Coun- 
tj'  Board  of  Commissioners,  and  one  of 
the  prominent  and  most  highly  respected 
citizens  of  Perry  County,  makes  his  home  in 
Pinckneyville.  As  he  is  so  widely  and  favora- 
bly- known,  we  feel  assured  that  many  of  our  read- 
ers will  receive  with  interest  this  record  of  his  life 
work.  His  career  has  been  an  honorable  and  up- 
right one,  well  worthj'  of  emulation. 

Mr.  Smith  was  born  in  Kentucky',  October  30, 
1835.  His  father's  name  was  AVillis,  and  the  grand- 
father bore  the  name  of  William  Smith.  The  for- 
mer was  a  native  of  Ken  tuck}',  and  the  latter  of 
South  Carolina,  whence  he  removed  in  an  early 
day  to  Kentucky.  When  our  subject  was  only 
About  four  j'ears  of  age,  his  parents  came  to  Perry 
Count}',  settling  three  miles  from  Pinckneyville. 
His  father  was  for  several  years  Justice  of  the 
Peace,  and  was  a  leading  citizen  of  the  community. 


He  died  when  his  son  William  was  only  fourteen 
years  of  age.  His  wife  bore  the  maiden  name  of 
Phcebe  Taylor,  and  was  also  a  native  of  Kentucky. 
Her  father,  Ileniy  Taylor,  was  a  farmer,  and  emi- 
grating to  Pen-}'  County,  here  spent  his  last  days. 
After  tiie  death  of  his  father,  his  mother  was  again 
married,  and  died  in  this  county.  Our  subject 
was  the  only  sou  in  the  Smith  family,  but  had  five 
sisters,  of  whom  four  are  still  living:  Ruth  Eliza- 
beth, wife  of  Valentine  McClurkin,  who  resides 
two  miles  north  of  Pinckne^'ville;  Louisa,  who 
wedded  Archie  McClurkin,  and  is  living  in  this 
county;  Josephine,  who  is  now  Mrs.  Vinyard,  a 
widow;  and  Mrs.  Julia  A.  Taylor,  who  resides  in 
Tamaroa. 

The  subject  of  this  record  spent  his  early  ^outh 
upon  his  father's  farm,  and  in  earl}-  life  attended 
the  public  schools,  but  after  his  father's  death  he 
began  earning  his  own  livelihood  by  working  as  a 
farm  hand  by  the  month.  He  chose  as  a  compan- 
ion and  helpmate  on  life's  journey  Miss  Margaret 
J.  Davis,  the  marriage  being  celebrated  iu  1857. 
The  lady  was  born  in  Perry  County,  where  her 
father,  William  Davis,  had  settled  in  pioneer  days. 
Eleven  children  graced  this  union,  of  whom  seven 
are  now  living:  Crede  P., a  farmer  living  near  Pinck- 
neyville; Lavaiicha  A.,  wife  of  Monford  Lemon, 
of  Pinckneyville;  William  W.,  who  carries  on  his 
father's  farm;  Julia  A.,  wife  of  John  H.  Miller, 
who  is  also  living  on  the  home  farm;  Charles,  who 
is  engaged  iu  business  witii  his  father;  Harry  E. 
and  Scott,  who  complete  the  family. 

After  his  marriage  Mr.  Smith  rented  a  farm  on 
the  Pinckneyville  and  Nashville  road,  but  in  a  short 
time  purchased  land,  to  which  he  has  added  from 
time  to  time,  until  he  now  owns  one  of  the  fine 
farms  of  the  county.  It  comprises  three  hundred 
and  forty  acres  of  valuable  land,  and  is  under  a 
high  state  of  cultivation.  He  also  owns  consider- 
able property  in  Pinckneyville,  including  his  com- 
fortable home  and  his  store,  for  he  is  a  dealer  in 
farm  machinery,  and  along  that  line  is  •doing  a 
good  business.  He  has  prospered  in  his  under- 
takings, and  his  industry  and  enterprise  have 
brought  him  a  handsome  competence. 

Mr.  Smith  is  now  serving  his  third  year  as 
County  Commissioner,  and  at  this  writing  is  Chair- 


'^ 


^^^^^^^^^   C^/zX^ 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


783 


man  of  the  Board.  He  takes  quite  an  active  part 
in  local  politics,  and  supports  the  Democratic 
party,  of  whose  principles  he  is  a  warm  advocate. 
Both  he  and  his  wife  are  active  workers  and  faith- 
ful members  of  the  Baptist  Church,  in  which  Mr. 
Smith  serves  as  Deacon.  Both  have  a  host  of 
warm  friends  in  this  community,  and  have  the 
confidence  and  high  regard  of  all. 


■^^- 


^p^USTAVUS  PAPE,  a  native  of  Prussian  AVest- 
Itl  ,-— _  phalia,  w.is  born  in  the  city  of  Ilirschberg, 
"^^^  Januar3'  18,  1826.  He  is  a  son  of  Caspar 
Antoine  and  Therese  (Hillebrandt)  Pape,  both  of 
whom  were  Prussians.  The  former  was  born  in 
1789,  and  the  latter  about  ten  ^-ears  later.  To 
them  were  born  seven  children,  of  whom  our  sub- 
ject is  the  second  m  order  of  birth.  There  were  a 
half-brother  and  half-sister  born  of  a  former  mar- 
riage of  our  subject's  father.  Of  this  familj'  of 
nine,  only  three  remain,  our  subject  and  two  sis- 
ters 3'ounger  than  he. 

While  in  the  Old  Country  Caspar  Pape  held  offi- 
cial position  under  the  king,  as  did  his  father  be- 
fore him,  the  latter  being  a  magistrate.  The  ma- 
ternal grandfather  was  also  a  magistrate  in  earlier 
life,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  a  privy  coun- 
cilor. He  came  to  his  death  while  out  on  a  hunt, 
being  shot  b\-  a  near-sighted  friend  who.  seeing  his 
deer  skin  poucli  through  the  bushes,  mistook  him 
for  a  deer  and  shot,  killing  him.  Tlie  date  of  the 
marriage  of  our  subject's  parents  was  about  the 
year  1820.  The}'  emigrated  with  their  family  to 
America  in  the  spring  of  1834,  landing  in  Phila- 
delphia after  a  passage  of  fort3-nine  d.aysout  from 
Bremen,  their  port  of  departure  on  the  sailing-ves- 
sel "Champion."  From  the  vessel  their  goods  were 
moved  to  a  river  steamer,  by  which  they  journeyed 
to  Baltimore. 

After  a  week's  sojourn  at  Baltimore,  the  family 
traveled  to  Frederick  on  one  of  the  first  railroads 
in  the  country;  the  coaches  were  of  the  old  fashioned 
kind,  each  one  having  a  seating  capacity  of  but 
six  or  eight.  From  Frederick  they  went  to  Cave- 
town,  a  small  place  near  Ilagerstown,  where  they 
remained  a  month.  From  there  to  Wheeling,  W. 
30 


Va.,  they  progressed  by  the  freight  wagons  plying 
across  the  Alleghan}-  Mountains,  a  trip  that  occu- 
pied a  week  or  ten  dajs.  At  Wheeling  our  travel- 
ers were  compelled  to  wait  a  week  for  a  steamer  to 
take  them  to  Cincinnati,  the  water  being  so  low 
that  boats  were  ver^'  irregular. 

Reshipping  at  Cincinnati  on  another  steamer, 
no  more  delay's  were  suffered,  and  in  course  of 
time  the  famil}'  were  disembarked  at  Kaskaskia 
Landing  on  the  Mississippi,  opposite  the  ancient 
town.  Mr.  Pape  was  a  propert}'  owijor  in  the  Old 
Countr3',  and  disposing  of  his  possessions  the  year 
before  his  emigration,  was,  unlike  many  emigrants, 
in  comfortable  circumstances  when  he  reached  his 
new  home.  On  his  arrival  at  K.askaskia,  he  bought 
the  Atkins  farm,  on  the  bluflfs  of  the  Okaw,  about 
nine  miles  above  Kaskaskia.  Here  our  subject  re- 
sided until  the  death  of  his  father,  in  September, 
1851,  when  the  family  scattered.  The  mother  de- 
parted this  life  in  1859,  at  the  house  of  one  of  her 
daughters  on  an  adjoining  farm,  and  her  body  and 
that  of  her  husband  lie  buried  on  the  farm  that 
was  for  so  many  years  their  home. 

After  the  death  of  his  father,  Gustavus  went  to 
St.  Louis  and  secured  a  clerkship  in  a  grocery 
store,  where  he  remained  three  years.  At  the  end 
of  that  time  he  came  to  Kaskaskia,  and  in  the 
spring  of  1854  took  a  position  with  and  clerked 
six  years  for  George  W.  Stale}',  now  of  Chester, 
who  kept  a  general  store.  From  1861  to  1865  our 
subject  was  in  partnership  witii  his  old  einplojer. 
Dissolving  partnership  at  that  time,  Mr.  Pape  a 
year  later  purchased  a  building  and  began  business 
for  himself,  in  which  he  has  continued  ever  since, 
and  by  careful  management  he  has  accumulated  a 
comfortable  fortune  to  keep  him  in  old  age.  Be- 
sides his  store  in  Kaskaskia,  he  has  a  farm  of  one 
hundred  acres  in  the  rich  bottom  lands  above  the 
"cut-oflf,"  and  a  tract  of  two  hundred  and  eighty 
acres  in  Perry  County. 

Owing  to  the  encroachment  of  the  river,  the 
town  is  fast  washing  away,  and  when  Mr.  Pape  may 
be  forced  to  move,  he  will  retire  from  active  busi- 
ness and  take  life  easy  the  rest  of  his  days.  The 
building  in  which  he  conducts  his  business  and 
makes  his  home  is  the  oldest  brick  house  in  the 
State,     The  brick  from  which  it  was  made  was  man- 


784 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


ufactured  in  Pittsburg,  whence  it  was  transported 
on  keelboats  down  the  Ohio,  and  "cordelled"  up 
the  Mississippi  to  Chester,  and  thence  up  the  Okaw 
to  Kasliaskia  in  1803.  In  this  building  the  first 
Territorial  Legislature  was  organized,  and  there 
its  first  sessions  were  held. 

November  30,  1867,  Mr.  Pape  was  married  to 
Mary  K.  Feaman,  a  native  of  Flardinsburg,  Ky., 
where  she  was  born  January  9,  1836.  She  is  a 
daughter  of  William  and  Elizabeth  (Jeffries)  Fea- 
man, natives  of  Virginia  and  Kentuckj-  respect- 
ively. The  two  children  born  to  our  subject  and 
his  wife  died  in  infancy.  Mrs.  Pape  is  a  strict 
member  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  as  were  the 
parents  of  Mr.  Pape,  who,  owing  to  the  distance 
from  a  place  of  worship  in  the  earl3'  days  of  his 
life,  fell  awa}'  from  the  church.  Sociall}',  he  is  a 
member  of  the  Masonic  fraternit3',  holding  mem- 
bership in  the  blue  lodge  at  Ellis  Grove  and  the 
chapter  at  Chester.  In  politics  he  has  been  a  Dem- 
ocrat all  Iiis  life,  but  believes  in  voting  for  the  man 
rather  than  the  part}'.  Since  1872  he  has  been 
Postmaster  at  Kaskaskia,  holding  that  office 
through  all  the  changes  of  administration. 

^  JACOB  MAEYS,  one  of  the  most  prominent 
I  and  influential  farmers  of  Monroe  Count}', 
-j^i  resides  in  the  village  of  Mae3stown.  As 
'^^  he  is  so  widely  and  favorably  known  in 
this  community  we  feel  assured  that  this  record  of 
his  life  will  prove  of  interest  to  many  of  our 
readers,  and  therefore  gladl}' give  it  a  place  in  this 
volume.  He  was  born  in  Germany  October  4, 
1828,  and  is  a  son  of  George  and  Elizabeth  (Reap) 
Maejs,  who  were  also  natives  of  that  country. 
Their  family  numbered  nine  children,  three  of 
whom  died  in  infancy.  The  others  were  Jacob, 
Henry,  Elizabeth,  Matilda,  Catherine  and  William. 
The  father  was  a  daj"  laborer  and  worked  hard  to 
support  his  famil}-.  In  1832  he  came  with  them 
to  the  United  States,  hoping  to  thereby  better  his 
financial  condition.  He  first  located  in  Lancaster 
Count}-,  Pa.,  where  he  worked  as  a  farm  hand  by 
the  day.  lu  1841  he  removed  to  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
and   thence    came    to   Monroe   County,  III,    He 


rented  a  farm  near  Columbia  and  carried  on  agri- 
cultural pursuits  until  his  death,  which  occurred 
in  1845,  at  the  age  of  forty-five  yeai-s.  In  poli- 
tics he  was  a  supporter  of  Democratic  principles. 
His  wife  died  in  the  home  of  our  subject  when 
about  seventy-two  years  of  age.  She  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Lutheran  Church. 

Jacob  Maeys  was  only  four  years  of  age  when 
brought  by  his  parents  to  this  country.  He  con- 
tinued to  live  witli  tliem  throughout  their  lives, 
and  was  reared  and  educated  in  Pennsylvania. 
Although  his  school  privileges  were  quite  limited, 
he  has  been  a  great  reader  from  boyhood  and  has 
thus  become  a  well  informed  man,  for  which  fact 
he  deserves  great  credit. 

At  the  age  of  twenty-five  Mr.  Maeys  was  united 
in  marriage  witii  Miss  Barbara  Fisher,  who  was 
born,  reared  and  educated  m  Germany  and  came 
with  her  parents  to  this  country  when  a  young 
lady  of  twenty  years,  the  family  settling  in  Jlon- 
roe  County.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Maeys  became  the 
parents  of  five  children,  but  two  died  in  infancy. 
Those  still  living  are  George,  Catherine  and  Eliza- 
beth. The  daughters  are  both  married.  The 
mother  of  tiiis  family,  who  was  a  faithful  member 
of  the  Lutheran  Church,  was  called  to  her  final 
rest  when  fifty-two  years  of  age.  Mr.  Maeys  after- 
wards wedded  Christina  Driemyer,  a  native  of 
Germany,  who  crossed  the  Atlantic  with  her  par- 
ents when  a  maiden  of  thirteen  summers  and 
became  a  resident  of  Perry  County,  111.  She  is  a 
most  estimable  lady  and  her  excellencies  of  charac- 
ter have  gained  for  iier  many  friends.  Six  chil- 
dren were  lx)rn  to  this  union,  but  four  died  in 
infancy,  and  Henry  Edward  and  Charles  Care  the 
only  ones  now  living. 

Mr.  Maeys  began  life  for  himself  by  working  as 
a  farm  hand  in  Monroe  County  for  ?4  per  month. 
He  was  industrious,  economical  and  persevering, 
and  as  he  acquired  some  capital  he  made  judicious 
investments  in  land  and  added  to  his  property 
from  time  to  time,  until  tiis  lauded  possessions  now 
aggregate  about  two  thousand  acres.  He  also 
owns  other  property  and  securities  and  is  now 
numbered  among  the  wealthiest  citizens  of  Monroe 
County,  a  position  he  has  attained  through  his 
own  efforts.     He  certainly  deserves  great  credit  fov 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


785 


Lis  success  in  life  and  his  example  may  well  serve 
to  encourage  others. 

In  his  political  views  Mr.  Maeys  is  a  Democrat. 
He  has  held  tiie  office  of  County  Commissioner 
and  a  number  of  other  local  positions,  the  duties 
of  which  he  has  ever  disciiarged  with  promptness 
and  fidelity.  He  and  his  wife  are  faithful  mem- 
bers of  the  Lutheran  Church.  He  has  justly  risen 
to  a  prominent  position  among  his  fellow-towns- 
men, and  the  name  of  Maeys  is  inseparable 
from  the  history  of  tlie  eommunitv. 


Vt/  OUIS  HAMMER,  Alderman  from  the  Fourth 
I  (^  Ward,  and  a  prominent  clothier  of  Mur- 
/l'--^Y-,  physboro,  was  born  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y., 
December  19,  1855.  He  is  the  sou  of  Monroe 
Hammer,  an  European,  who  came  to  America  and 
resided  for  a  time  in  New  York.  About  1857  he 
came  to  Illinois  and  settled  in  Chester.  Thence, 
about  three  years  later  he  went  to  Memphis,  Tenn., 
and  in  that  city  carried  on  a  store  during  the  war- 
He  died  there  of  the  yellow  fever  in  1873.  His 
wife,  Rosa  David,  who  was  born  in  Posen,  died  in 
Little  Rock,  Ark. 

There  were  three  children  in  the  family,  two  of 
whom  attained  mature  years.  The  other  beside 
our  subject  is  Carrie,  the  wife  of  L.  Pahotski,  a 
grocer  of  Ft.  Smith,  Ark.  Louis  was  reared  in 
Memphis,  where  he  received  his  education  in  the 
common  schools  and  the  commercial  college.  After 
his  father's  death,  in  1873,  he  took  charge  of  the 
mercantile  business,  which  he  conducted  until  1874, 
and  then  disposing  of  the  store,  came  to  Mur- 
phj'sboro.  Shortly'  afterward  he  opened  a  store 
at  Du  (^uoiu,  where  he  engaged  in  the  dry -goods 
business  for  two  and  one-half  years.  Then  selling 
the  establishment  he  returned  to  Murphysboro  and 
bought  an  interest  with  Samuel  Desberger  in  the 
dry-goods  and  clothing  business. 

The  establishment  of  Desberger  &  Co.,  was  lo- 
cated on  the  corner  of  Main  and  Chestnut  Streets, 
and  was  widely  and  favorably  known  as  one  of  the 
centers  of  trade  in  the  town.  In  the  year  188C  the 
firm  name  was  changed  to  L.  Hammer  &  Co.,  Mr. 
Desberger  still  retaining  his  connection  with  the 


enterprise.  For  a  time  they  conducted  two  stores, 
the  "Famous"  and  the  "Union."  In  1891  Mr. 
Hammer  consolidated  the  two  stores  into  one  large 
establishment,  located  in  the  Logan  Block.  Here 
he  has  a  double  store,  -15x80  feet  in  dimensions, 
and  stocked  with  a  full  line  of  men's  furnishing 
goods,  hats,  caps  and  clothing.  The  stock  is  the 
largest  and  most  complete  in  southern  Illinois,  and 
the  firm  justly  enjoys  an  enviable  reputation  for 
reliability  of  dealings  and  courtesy  to  customers. 
They  have  the  exclusive  agency  in  southern  Illi- 
nois for  Schloss  Brothers,  merchant  tailors,  of  Bal- 
timore, Md. 

In  Murphysboro,  in  April  of  1879,  Mr.  Hammer 
married  Miss  Jennie  Hammer,  who  was  born  in  Ger- 
many, but  grew  to  womanhood  in  Boston.  One 
child.  Manning,  has  blessed  their  union.  Mr.  Ham- 
mer is  a  charter  member  of  the  Board  of  Trade.  In 
the  spring  of  1893  he  was  elected  Alderman  from 
the  Fourth  Ward  on  the  Democratic  ticket,  a  fact 
which  shows  his  popularity  with  the  people,  as 
that  ward  is  strongly  Republican.  He  has  served 
as  Chairman  of  the  Cemeter}'  Committee  and  the 
Committee  on  Appropriations,  and  is  also  a  member 
of  the  Finance  Committee.  Socially  he  affiliates 
with  Mt.  Carbon  Post  No.  434,1.  0.0.  F.,  belongs 
to  the  encampment,  and  is  a  charter  member  of 
the  Knigiits  of  Pythias,  belonging  to  the  Uni- 
formed Rank. 

,^?=^EORGE  N.  ALBON,  junior  partner  in  the 
ll  (=   firm  of  Walker  &  Albon,  dealers  in  general 

^^J  merchandise  at  De  Soto,  Jackson  County, 
was  born  in  Canada,  February  4,  1858,  and  is  the 
son  of  James  and  Sarah  (Pickett)  Albon.  The 
father  is  a  native  of  England,  having  been  liorn  in 
Lincolnshire,  whence  he  emigrated  to  Canada  in 
1856.  He  was  a  miller  by  trade,  and  after  coming 
to  the  States,  in  1860,  located  in  this  county  and 
operated  the  De  Soto  Mill  for  about  five  years. 
Later  he  removed  to  Cairo,  and  on  again  returning 
to  De  Soto,  carried  on  the  mill  successfully  for 
ten  years  more. 

The  mother  of  our  subject,  also  a  native  of  Eng- 
land, was  born  near  London  and  is  yet  living.    She 


786 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


had  four  sons  and  four  daugbters,  namely:  John; 
James  and  Sarah  (twins),  Lizzie,  George  N.,  Ger- 
trude, Freddie  and  Alice.  Our  subject  spent  the 
years  intervening  between  his  second  and  ninth 
}-ears  in  Jackson  County,  and  was  then  taken  by 
his  parents  to  Cairo,  where  thej-  remained  for  four 
years.  Returning  to  De  Soto,  he  has  ever  since 
made  this  his  liome.  His  education  was  prosecuted 
in  the  common  schools. 

When  reaching  his  fifteenth  year,  Mr.  Albon  was 
compelled  to  earn  his  own  living,  and  accepted  a 
clerkship  in  the  store  of  Henry  Ileiple,  of  this  |ilace, 
in  whose  employ  he  remained  for  two  3'ears.  Later 
he  filled  a  similar  position  in  the  store  of  J.  M. 
Gutter,  also  in  De  Soto,  with  which  establishment 
he  continued  through  its  various  changes  until  he 
now  owns  a  one-half  interest  in  the  concern.  The 
elder  Mr.  Walker  having  died  in  1887,  the  widow 
was  given  his  interest  in  the  store,  and  the  busi- 
ness has  since  been  conducted  under  the  style  of 
Walker  ii  Albon.  Mr.  Albon  has  been  continu- 
ously engaged  in  the  dry-goods  business  for  the 
last  eighteen  and  a-half  years,  and  during  that 
time  has  had  only  six  months  vacation  altogether. 
He  possesses  the  necessary  shrewdness  and  fore- 
thought to  be  successful  in  life,  and  is  classed 
among  the  prosperous  business  men  of  his  town- 
ship. The  establishment  is  neat  and  well  managed. 
The  firm  carries  a  stock  of  ^8,000,  and  does  an  an- 
nual business  of  *30,000. 

For  the  past  two  years  in  addition  to  his  other 
interests,  Mr.  Albon  has  been  engaged  in  the  lum- 
ber trade  in  De  Soto,  which  he  is  conducting  on  a 
paying  basis.  The  lad}-  whom  he  married,  Febru- 
ary 7,  1881,  was  Miss  Blanche  Friedline,  who  was 
born  in  this  count}'  and  departed  this  life  March 
31,  1889.  She  had  a  family  of  three  children: 
Alice,  Lucile  and  Nellie,  of  whom  Lucile  is  the 
only  survivor. 

In  April,  1890,  our  subject  married  Miss  Abbie 
Walker,  and  by  this  union  has  become  the  father 
of  two  children,  George  N.,  Jr.,  and  Arthur.  Mr. 
Albon  takes  a  deep  interest  in  the  welfare  of  the 
village,  and  has  served  on  the  School  Board  for 
six  years.  He  has  also  been  Village  Trustee  for 
three  j-ears,  and  is  one  of  the  substantial  business 
men  of  the  place.     In  politics  he  uses  his  influence 


for  the  Democratic  party  and  cast  his  first  vote  for 
Hancock.  His  parents  were  members  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church,  but  he  and  his  wife  adhere  to  the 
doctrines  of  the  Lutheran  Church.  They  are  ex- 
tremel}'  popular  in  the  neighborhood  and  much 
respected. 

,  ■ £)#P •  . 

OHN  BROWN,  a  practical  and  progressive 
farmer  residing  on  section  5,  township  6, 
range  4,  Perry  County,  was  born  August  24, 
1844,  near  Glasgow,  Scotland,  and  is  a  son 
of  Allen  and  Ann  (Grej')  Brown.  Tlie  parents  were 
also  natives  of  that  count}-.  The  father  w-as  reared 
on  a  farm,  but  afterward  learned  and  followed 
the  carpenter's  trade.  At  length  he  determined  to 
seek  a  home  and  fortune  in  America,  and  in  1849 
he  crossed  the  Atlantic,  landing  in  New  Orleans  on 
Christmas  Day  of  that  year.  He  first  went  to 
Chester,  111.,  and  thence  removed  to  Six  Mile  Prai- 
rie, Perry  County,  where  he  engaged  in  faiming 
until  his  death. 

In  the  Brown  family  were  seven  children,  all  of 
whom  are  yet  living:  William  N.,  a  farmer  resid- 
ing near  Cutler,  111.;  Robert,  who  also  carries  on 
agricultural  pursuits  near  Cutler;  Margaret  J., 
wife  of  William  H.  Irwin,  a  farmer  of  Randolph 
Count}-;  Ann  E.,  wife  of  John  T.  Irwin,  who  car- 
ries on  fanning  near  Cutler;  David,  who  resides  on 
the  old  homestead;  Mary,  wife  of  Matthew  Robb, 
a  farmer  of  Lost  Prairie;  and  John. 

Mr.  Brown  of  this  sketch  was  only  five  years 
old  when  with  his  parents  he  came  to  the  United 
States.  In  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads  the 
days  of  his  boyhood  and  youth  were  passed,  and 
the  district  schools  of  the  neighborhood  afforded 
him  his  educational  privileges.  He  remained  upon 
the  home  farm,  aiding  in  its  cultivation  and  im- 
provement, until  his  thirty-fifth  year,  when  he 
went  to  Cutler,  where  he  engaged  in  trading  in 
various  products.  He  was  thus  employed  for  five 
years,  after  which  he  opened  the  general  merchan- 
dise store  that  he  yet  carries  on. 

December  6,  1882,  Mr.  Brown  was  married  to 
Mrs.  Jessie  Gaston,  widow  of  Alexander  H.  Gas- 
ton, and  a  daughter  of  Albert  Sprague,  who  emi- 
grated from  Maine  and  became  oae^  of  the  pione^\- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


787 


settlers  of  Perry  County.  Three  children  have 
been  born  of  their  union:  Mabel  G.,  born  October 
10,  1883;  Harvey,  September  4,  1885;  and  Helen, 
May  14,  1890.  Mrs.  Brown  had  two  children  b}- 
her  former  marriage,  but  one  is  now  deceased. 
Lydia  A.  still  resides  with  her  mother. 

P^or  four  years  Mr.  Brown  held  the  office  of  As- 
sessor and  Treasurer  of  Perr}-  County,  and  proved 
a  capable  official.  He  h.as  several  times  been  Road 
Supervisor,  has  been  Justice  of  the  Peace  for  three 
consecutive  years,  and  is  now  filling  that  position. 
His  official  record  attests  his  populariti'  and  the 
high  regard  in  which  he  is  held.  He  studies  closely 
the  interests  of  his  county  and  labors  untiringly' 
for  the  welfare  of  its  citizens.  He  votes  with  the 
Republican  party,  and  he  and  his  wife  are  mem- 
bers of  the  Reformed  Presbyterian  Church. 


"ifiOHN  HEIDGER,  who  is  engaged  in  the 
hotel  and  saloon  business  in  Harrisonville 
has  the  honor  of  being  a  native  of  Monroe 
'^  County-.  He  was  born  August  .3,  1844,  to 
the  union  of  John  and  Maggie  (Weber)  Ileidger, 
who  were  natives  of  Germany.  Their  family 
numbered  seven  children,  of  whom  three  are  yet 
living:  Mathias,  Mary  and  John.  The  parents 
were  reared  and  educated  in  Germany,  and  there 
the  father  learned  the  trade  of  blacksmithing.  In 
1843  they  crossed  the  Atlantic  to  America,  and 
came  direct  to  Monroe  County.  Mr.  Heidger 
purchased  one  hundred  acres  of  land  near  Water- 
loo and  carried  on  farming  and  blacksmithing  un- 
til his  death,  which  occurred  at  the  advanced  age 
of  eighty-one.  His  wife  died  near  Madonnaville, 
at  the  age  of  thirty-three  years.  They  were  both 
members  of  the  Catholic  Church.  In  politics  he 
was  a  supporter  of  the  Democracy. 

In  the  usual  manner  of  farmer  lads,  John  Heid- 
ger spent  the  days  of  his  ix)yhood  and  youth,  and 
in  the  common  schools  acquired  a  good  education. 
He  remained  under  the  parental  roof  until  seven- 
teen years  of  age,  when,  on  the  1 6th  of  September, 
1861,  he  enlisted  in  the  country's  service  as  a 
member  of  Company  H,  Forty-ninth  Illinois  In- 
fantry.    He  participated  in  a  number  of  important 


engagements,  including  the  battles  of  Ft.  Donel- 
son,  Shiloh,  siege  of  Corinth,  Little  Rock,  Ft.  De 
Ruse,  Pleasant  Hill,  Yellow  Bayou,  Meridian, 
Tupelo  and  Price's  last  raid  through  Missouri  in 
1864.  After  the  expiration  of  his  three  years  and 
three  months'  service,  he  was  honorably  discharged 
in  Springfield,  November  19,  1864. 

Mr.  Heidger  at  once  returned  to  his  home  in 
Monroe  County,  and  continued  to  work  for  his 
father  upon  the  home  farm  until  twenty-five  years 
of  age.  He  was  then  united  in  marriage  with  Miss 
Henrietta  Kohler,  a  native  of  Monroe  County,  and 
to  them  were  born  two  children,  of  whom  one  is 
yet  living,  John  P.  The  wife  and  mother,  who 
was  a  consistent  member  of  the  Catholic  Church, 
died  at  the  earl^-  age  of  twenty  3'ears,  and  her  loss 
was  deeply  mourned.  Mr.  Heidger  has  been  again 
married,  his  second  union  being  with  Lizzie  Not- 
ter,  who  was  born,  reared  and  educated  in  Monroe 
Count}'.  The}'  had  two  children,  but  both  are 
now  deceased,  and  the  mother  died  at  the  age  of 
twenty-two  years.  The  lady  who  now  bears  the 
name  of  Mrs.  Ileidger  was  in  her  maidenhood 
Mary  A.  F.  Notter,  and  she  too  is  a  native  of  Mon- 
roe County.  Eight  children  graced  this  union,  of 
whom  six  are  yet  living:  Cecelia  C,  Armin  S.  W., 
Hugo  J.,  Mollie  N.,  Etna  F.  and  Herbert  N.  Mrs. 
Heidger  is  a  representative  of  one  of  the  earliest 
families  of  this  county,  her  parents  having  here  lo- 
cated in  1839,  when  the  entire  community  was  in 
a  wild  and  unimproved  state,  and  the  work  of  civ- 
ilization and  progress  seemed  scarcely  begun. 

Our  subject  is  recognized  as  one  of  the  success- 
ful and  progressive  farmers  of  the  neighborhood. 
In  1869  he  purchased  seventy  acres  of  land,  and 
has  since  extended  the  boundaries  of  his  farm,  un- 
til it  now  comprises  three  hundred  and  thirty 
acres  of  the  rich  land  of  the  Mississippi  Valley. 
His  farm  is  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation  and  is 
well  improved  with  all  modern  accessories  and 
conveniences.  In  connection  with  this  property, 
he  owns  real  estate  in  town,  including  the  hotel 
and  saloon  which  he  is  now  conducting.  He  has 
been  a  hard  worker  through  life,  and  being  an  ex- 
cellent financier,  and  possessing  good  business  and 
executive  ability,  he  has  acquired  a  handsome 
competence.     In  politics,   he  is  a  Democrat,  and 


PORTRAIT  AJSTD  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


from  1883  to  1888  held  the  office  of  Drainage 
Commissioner  of  the  Moredock  and  Ivy  Landing 
Drainage  District,  No.  1.  Both  he  and  his  wife 
are  members  of  the  Catholic  Church,  and  are  highly 
respected  citizens,  who  occupy  an  enviable  posi- 
tion in  social  circles,  and  well  deserve  representa- 
tion in  this  work. 


^p^,EORGE  KENNEDY,  Jk.,  agent  for  the 
III  ==,  Southern  .and  Adams  Express  Companies 
^^Jl  and  Secretar}'  of  the  Board  of  Trade  at 
Murphysboro,  is  a  son  of  George  Kennedy,  of 
whom  further  mention  is  made  elsewhere  in  this 
volume.  lie  was  born  in  Murphysboro,  March  30, 
1859,  and  was  educated  in  the  schools  of  this 
place,  graduating  from  the  high  school  in  1875. 
Later  he  entered  the  Southern  Illinois  Normal, 
at  Carboudale,  from  which  institution  he  was 
graduated  in  1878  in  the  scientific  and  Latin 
courses.  After  teaching  in  the  citj^  schools  for 
six  months  he  embarked  in  the  hardware,  furni- 
ture and  mercantile  business  vvith  M.  A.  Ross,  the 
firm  title  being  Kennedy'  &  Ross.  The  store  was 
located  on  the  corner  of  Walnut  and  Main  Streets. 

In  1883.  M.  A.  Ross  disposed  of  his  interest  in 
the  enterprise,  after  which  our  subject  continued 
in  business  with  his  father  at  the  same  place  for  a 
time.  Later  he  engaged  in  dealing  in  grain  and 
hay,  and  also  did  a  large  contracting  business.  On 
resuming  his  connection  with  the  firm  of  Kennedy 
<fe  Sons,  he  continued  thus  employed  until  1887, 
when  he  purchased  his  father's  interest  in  the 
store  and  afterward  conducted  the  largest  and 
most  lucrative  business  in  the  cit}'.  Meantime  he 
also  continued  as  a  contractor,  and  started  the 
foundations  for  the  Mobile  (k  Ohio  Railroad  shops 
and  roundhouse,  also  the  opera  house  and  water 
works.  He  was  one  of  the  committee  that  organ- 
ized and  established  the  water  works,  and  served 
as  a  Director  and  superintended  the  building  of 
the  works  for  the  company.  In  addition  to  other 
enterprises  he  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  brick 
for  some  years. 

Since  18'J0,  Mr.  Kennedy  lias  been  the  Adams 
and  Southern  lixpress  agent.     In  1891,  he  sold  a 


one-half  interest  in  the  hardware  business  to  Huth- 
niacher  Brothers,  and  later  disposed  of  the  business 
to  .John  Stoetzle.  In  1887,  he  entered  the  milling 
business  under  the  firm  name  of  Neal,  Ross  &  Ken- 
ned^-,  but  three  years  later  sold  his  interest  in 
the  concern.  Since  1890,  he  has  been  engaged  in 
the  livery  business  here,  and  finds  that  venture, 
like  his  others,  a  remunerative  one.  He  is  the 
owner  of  two  hundred  acres  in  the  southwestern 
corner  of  Somerset  Township,  which  he  superin- 
tends personally-,  and  has  about  thirtv  acres 
planted  to  apple,  pear  and  peach  trees,  and  other 
small  fruits. 

In  Carbondale  in  1881,  Mr.  Kennedy  married 
Miss  Kate  Harwood,  who  was  born  in  Tennessee. 
They  arfe  the  parents  of  four  children,  Myrtie, 
Metta,  Eula  and  Doris.  In  1891,  Mr.  Kennedy 
was  one  of  the  prime  factors  in  the  orgamzation 
of  the  Board  of  Trade  and  has  been  its  Secretaiy 
up  to  the  present  time. 


3: 


IL-^ENRY  GILLENBERG,  one  of  the  repre- 
jfjll  sentative  and  well  known  agriculturists 
l^y^  of  township  7,  has  the  honor  of  being  a 
(^^  native  of  Randolph  County,  his  birth  hav- 
ing occurred  on  his  father's  farm  near  Chester,  111., 
on  the  25th  of  February,  1868.  He  is  the  sixth 
child  of  Jacob  and  Wilhelmina  (Gussenberg)  Gil- 
lenberg.  His  father  was  born  in  German}',  and 
came  with  his  parents  to  America  in  1842,  the 
family  locating  in  Randolph  Count)',  111.,  where 
the  grandfather  died  when  Jacob  was  a  lad  of  only 
twelve  j-ears.  The  j'outh  then  lived  with  his 
mother  and  worked  upon  the  home  farm  until 
twenty-one  3'ears  of  age,  when  he  began  farming 
for  himself.  In  1873  he  purchased  land  near 
Dozaville  and  located  thereon.  When  a  3'oung 
man  he  learned  the  cooper's  trade,  but  did  not  fol- 
low it  after  his  marriage.  Instead  he  turned  his 
attention  to  farming  and  stock-raising,  and  by  his 
well  directed  efforts,  his  enterprise  and  business 
ability,  he  became  one  of  the  prosperous  agricult- 
urists of  Randolph  Count)',  and  left  at  his  death 
more  than  five  hundred  acres  of  valuable  land. 
While  driving  into  Chester  about  the  1st  of  April, 


PORTRAIT  A^'D  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


789 


1892,  his  horse  became  frightened;  he  was  thrown 
from  the  buggy  and  received  injuries  which  re- 
sulted in  death  a  few  days  later.  He  passed  away 
April  6,  1892.  His  widow  still  survives  him,  and 
is  living  on  the  old  homestead. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  obtained  his  education 
in  the  district  schools  of  the  neighborhood,  and 
worked  upon  his  father's  farm  until  twenty-four 
yeai-s  of  age,  when  he  began  to  earn  his  own  liveli- 
hood by  still  following  the  pursuit  to  which  he  was 
reared.  He  is  recognized  as  one  of  the  wide-awake 
and  leading  young  agriculturists  of  the  communitj'. 
Upon  his  farm  are  good  buildings  and  all  modern 
improvements,  and  the  well  tilled  fields  indicate 
the  careful  supervision  of  the  owner. 

On  the  29th  of  November,  189.3,  was  celebrated 
the  marriage  of  Mr.  Gillenberg  and  Miss  Margaret 
I.  Hylton,  daughter  of  M.  B.  and  Nancy  E.  (Lind- 
say) H^iton,  botli  of  whom  are  natives  of  Virginia. 
The  young  people  are  prominent  in  this  com- 
munit}',  have  a  large  circle  of  warm  friends  and 
agreeable  acquaintances,  and  receive  the  high  re- 
gard of  all  who  know  them.  In  religious  belief 
the^'  are  Baptists,  and  Mr.  Gillenberg  is  Clerk  in 
the  church  to  wliich  thej-  belong.  In  politics  he 
votes  with  the  Democratic  party,  but  has  never 
sought  or  desired  the  honoi-s  or  emoluments  of 
public  office,  preferring  to  devote  his  entire  time 
and  attention  to  his  business  interests.  He  is  a 
worth}-  representative  of  an  honored  pioneer  fam- 
ily, and  it  is  with  pleasure  that  we  present  to  our 
readers  this  record  of  his  life  work. 


FRANK  R.  McATEE,  Proprietor. 


SUBSCRIPTION  PRICE,    -    -    -   $1.50  PER  A/IINUM. 
SPECIMEN  COPY  FREE. 


•5- 


♦•!"i"5- •}•!••!•  •5"^•^••5••!••^•^•5••{•+•{••^••^•^-:-^•^-^•^•5••5••5••5••5• 


\I/_^  ENRY  IMHOFF,  a  well  known  agricultur- 
[(Jjj  ist  of  Jackson  County  and  a  successful  and 
/^^^  progressive  citizen  of  .Somerset  Township, 
V^)  was  born  in  Somerset  County,  Pa.,  July  5, 
1836.  His  father,  Andrew,  was  a  son  of  Henry 
Imhoff,  and  was  born  in  the  same  count}'  and 
state  as  that  in  which  our  subject  first  saw  the 
light.  He  married  Miss  Eliza,  daughter  of  David 
and  Susan  Burkit  .and  a  native  of  Bedford  Coun- 
ty, Pa.  Their  union  resulted  in  the  birth  of 
eight  children:  Henry,  James,  Joseph,  Ananias, 
Augusta,  Lemuel,  Lewis  and  Frank.  Ananias  was 
a  member  of  Company  D.  Thirty-first  Hlinois  In- 
fantry, during  the  late  war,  and  was  killed  at 
Vicksburg  June  28,  1863. 

In  the  spring  of  185.5  Mr.  Imhoflf,  Sr.,  came  to 
Illinois  and  settled  in  Levan  Township,  Jackson 
County,  where  for  a  time  he  rented  a  farm.  As 
soon  as  he  was  able,  he  purchased  eight}-  acres,  to 
which  he  added  from  time  to  time,  until  at  the 
date  of  his  death  he  owned  one  hundred  and 
twenty  acres.  This  property  h.as  been  accumu- 
lated through  his  indefatigable  industry  and  the 
exercise  of  strict  economy.  Though  a  stanch 
Democrat,  he  was  not  a  politician  and  never 
sought  official  honors  or  emoluments.  In  relig- 
ious belief  he  was  a  Lutheran.  His  death  occurred 
at  two  o'clock  on  the  afternoon  of  April  22,  1881, 
and  his  remains  now  lie  in  Mt.  Joy  Cemetery. 

In  his  youth  the  subject  of  this  sketch  learned 
the  trade  of  a  blacksmith  and  remained  in  Penn- 
sylvania until  1857.  In  the  fall  of  that  year  he 
came  to  .Jackson  County  and  immediately  built  a 
shop  and  commenced  to  work  at  his  trade,  con- 
tinuing thus  engaged  for  about  twenty  years. 
Later  he  abandoned  his  trade  in  order  to  embark 
iu  agricultural  pursuits,  and  is  now  the  owner  of 
six  hundred  acres  in  Jackson  County,  a  portion  of 
which  he  rents  to  desirable  tenants.  In  politics  he 
is  a  Democrat,  and  for  eighteen  years  has  served 
as  School  Director.  Socially,  he  is  identified  with 
the  Independent  Order  of  Odd  Fellows  and  the 
Knights  of  Honor,  and  in  religious  belief  his  con- 
nections are  with  the  Lutheran  Church. 

Mr.  Imhoff  first  married  Miss  Mary  M.  Young, 
and  they  became  the  parents  of  twelve  children, 
of  whom   five  are  now   living,  viz.:  Elenora,  the 


790 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


wife  of  James  McCari';  Martin  C.,  Charles  A., 
John  E.  and  Wilej-  B.  Mrs.  Mary  M.  Imhoff  passed 
awaj-  August  22,  1887.  Afterward  our  subject 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Mrs.  Carrie  Deriekson, 
daughter  of  Jcdrick  and  Justine  Waldleusser,  of 
Levan  Township.  One  child  has  blessed  this  union, 
Xorman.  Thougli  Mr.  Imhoff  has  met  with  his 
share  of  reverses,  lie  has  never  become  discouraged, 
but  has  labored  diligently  and  tirelessl}',  and  as  a 
result  of  his  efforts  he  is  now  recognized  as  one 
of  the  foremost  residents  of  Somerset    Township. 


O^^.^MM.»^.»»»4'^^^^^"i-^^^^^^^^•^i-5^^M•^i^^^y> 

ILLIAM  LAWDER,  a  resident  of  section  4, 
f  township  8,  range  5,  Randolph  County,  is 
'S^  the  owner  of  one  of  the  finest  wheat  farms 
in  this  part  of  the  state.  He  was  born  in  County 
Down,  Ireland,  Februar3'  29,  1824,  and  is  the 
eldest  of  a  family  of  two  boys  and  two  girls  born 
to  Savage  and  .Jane  (AVeir)  Lawder,  natives  of  the 
Emerald  Isle. 

Our  subject  emigrated  to  this  country  January 
10,  1844,  landing  in  New  Orleans,  and  coming  di- 
rect by  boat  to  Rockwood  about  the  1st  of  the 
following  April.  Upon  his  arrival  here  his  entire 
capital  was  exhausted  with  the  exception  of 
twenty-flve  cents.  With  this  amount  he  com- 
menced life  among  strangers  in  a  strange  land. 
During  the  first  three  jearsof  his  residence  in  this 
county  he  labored  among  the  few  settlers  as  a 
farm  hand  for  the  munificent  sum  of  fifty  cents 
per  da}-,  and  worked  for  James  Brown  for  llOO  per 
3'ear.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time  he  took  up 
a  claim  of  eight}'  acres  at  *1.25  per  acre,  which 
formed  the  nucleus  of  his  present  magnificent 
farm,  consisting  of  four  hundred  acres  on  the 
home  place  and  one  hundred  and  twenty  acres  in 
an  adjoining  tract. 

In  the  year  1847,  at  Newtownards,  County 
Down,  Mr.  Lawder  married  Elizabeth,  a  daughter 
of  Samuel  and  .Jane  Cleland,  of  the  same  county. 
To  thern  were  born  five  sons  and  nine  daughters, 
three  of  whom  are  dead,  Elizabeth,  John  William 
and  Sarah  Clementine.  The  living  are  as  follows: 
James;  Jane,  who  is  the  wife  of  Henry  Rodgers,  of 


Campbell  Hill;  Sophie,  the  wife  of  Benjamin  Se- 
bastian; Rebecca,  who  married  Edward  Pinkcrton, 
a  resident  of  Jackson  County;  Anna  Belle,  the 
wife  of  Henrj-  Tudor,  of  Rockwood;  Edith,  Samuel, 
Grant;  Mar}',  who  is  the  wife  of  Albert  Barber,  of 
Rockwood;  Sherman  and  Nettie.  Samuel  was 
married  in  1883  to  Sarah  Samantha  Malone  and 
IS  now  living  on  section  5,  township  8,  range  5. 
Their  children  are,  Jennie  Adell,  Madie  Ger- 
trude, Bessie  Beulah  and  Sylvia  Bernice.  The  wife 
of  our  subject  was  born  April  2,  1825.  and  came 
to  America  with  her  husband,  enduring  the  hard- 
ships and  privations  incident  to  the  settlement 
of  a  new  country.  She  bore  her  share  of  the 
labor  of  caring  for  the  household,  and  reared  a 
large  family.  She  faithfully  kept  her  place  by  her 
husband's  side  until  July  8,  1881,  wheii  she  was 
called  from  this  life. 

Mr.  Lawder  has  been  a  life-long  member  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church,  as  was  his  good  wife  and  all 
the  children.  Politically  he  has  been  a  member  of 
the  Repul)lican  party  ever  since  its  first  campaign 
in  which  the  martyred  Lincoln  was  the  standard 
bearer.  In  the  Old  Country  Mr.  Lawder  was  a 
member  of  the  Orangeman  society,  and  after  be- 
coming a  citizen  of  the  United  States  he  joined  the 
Independent  Order  of  Odd  Fellows,  though  he  has 
not  for  many  yeai-s  been  an  active  member.  For  a 
number  of  years  he  served  as  .School  Director,  and 
though  urged  to  continue  in  that  position,  de- 
clined to  do  so. 

The  homestead,  consisting  of  large  and  substan- 
tial buildings,  is  beautifully  located  on  a  hill  com- 
manding a  magnificient  view  of  the  Father  of 
Waters  and  the  bluffs  along  its  banks,  as  pictur- 
esque surroundings  as  can  be  found  in  the  state. 
At  the  time  of  Mr.  Lawder's  arrival  here,  game  was 
plentiful,  and  many  a  deer  and  wild  turkey  he  has 
brought  down  while  standing  in  his  doorway. 


^^ 


I 


JAMES  LAWDER,  one  of  the  prominent 
agriculturists  of  township  8,  range  5,  Ran- 
dolph  County,  is   the   son   of  Savage  and 


>5^^    Jane    (Weir)    Lawder,  natives    of   County 
Down,  Ireland.     The  paternal  grandfather  of   our 


RE51DENGE0F   JAME5     L  AW  D  E  R  ,  SEC  .4. ,  T.   8,  R  .    5.    RAN  DOLPH    CO., ILL. 


^s^^^  « 


\2^' 


RESIDENCE  OF  WILLIAM     L  AW  D  ER  ,  SEC. ''■^. ,  T.  8  .,  R.  5.,  RAN  DO  LPH    CO., ILL. 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


793 


subject  was  Williain  Lawder,  a  native  of  Seotlancl, 
whence  he  emigrated  some  time  in  the  eighteenth 
century.  The  Weirs  were  of  Irish  birth,  though 
they  probably  came  originally  from  Scotland. 

The  father  our  subject  was  born  about  the 
year  1793,  just  previous  to  a  rebellion  known  in 
common  parlance  as  "Pike  times,"  and  his  grand- 
mother took  him  when  an  infant  to  visit  his  fa- 
ther in  camp,  who  had  been  pressed  into  the  ranks 
of  the  rebels.  The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  born 
March  22,  1829,  and  spent  his  bo3'hood  years  in 
his  native  county,  where  he  received  his  education 
in  the  country  schools,  principally  under  tiie  tute- 
lage of  one  Robeit  Ritchie,  wiio  for  twenty-two 
years  presided  over  the  same  school.  At  the  age 
of  twenty-four  j'ears  he  left  his  native  land,  atout 
the  4th  of  March,  1853,  and  after  a  passage  of  fifty 
days  landed  in  the  port  of  New  York,  whence  he 
came  to  Rockwood  a  week  later,  .arriving  here  on 
the  1st  of  May. 

To  illustrate  modern  progress  in  transportation 
facilities,  it  is  of  interest  to  relate  that  in  order  to 
get  here,  Mr.  Lawder  went  by  way  of  the  Hudson 
River  to  Albany,  thence  by  rail  to  Buffalo,  from 
there  by  lake  to  Detroit,  and  from  the  latter  pl.ace 
b}'  rail  to  the  present  magnificent  city  of  Chicago. 
At  that  time  the  entire  place  could  be  seen  in  five 
minutes'  time,  as  three  or  four  stores  on  the  lake 
front  and  a  few  cabins  in  the  marshes  constituted 
the  town.  Having  been  defrauded  of  his  monej', 
as  were  many  other  newcomers,  he  was  obliged  to 
pawn  his  watch  in  order  to  secure  money  for  his 
passage  down  the  Illinois  and  Mississippi  Rivers 
to  Rockwood,  and  on  his  arrival  here  his  purse 
contained  but  a  quarter  of  a  dollar.  No  time  was 
lost,  however,  and  with  willing  hands  he  com- 
menced to  work  for  James  M.  Brown, and  eng.aged 
in  "grubbing"  and  making  rails,  about  the  only 
industry  the  country  afforded  at  that  time.  Money 
was  a  scarce  article  in  that  early  day,  and  for  one 
year's  labor  he  received  no  cash    return   whatever. 

After  some  time  spent  in  his  new  liome,  our  sub- 
ject succeeded  in  securing  a  yoke  of  oxen  in  pay- 
ment for  the  above  debt,  and  purchasing  three 
hundred  and  twent^^  acres,  for  which  he  paid 
twelve  and  a-half  cents  an  acre,  he  set  to  work  to 


clear  and  improve  the  land.  That  property  now 
forms  a  portion  of  the  home  farm,  which  consists  of 
three  hundred  and  eighty-five  acres.  He  gave  a 
quarter-section  to  his  son  Joseph.  Mr.  Lawder  has 
removed  from  the  farm  and  now  resides  in  a  large 
house  which  is  situated  on  an  eminence  and  com- 
mands a  fine  view  of  the  silvery  waters  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi a  mile  or  two  distant. 

January  1,  1851,  Mr.  Lawder  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Eliza,  daughter  of  William  and 
Margaret  Karr,  natives  of  County  Down,  Ireland. 
The  family  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lawder  includes 
eleven  children,  all  of  whom  are  living  near  their 
father's  home.  Mary  was  born  in  Ireland  and  is 
now  the  wife  of  Samuel  Carruthers,  of  Jackson 
County.  The  other  children  were  born  in  Amer- 
ica, and  of  them  we  note  the  following:  AVilliam 
John  is  a  prosperous  farmer  near  Campbell  Hill; 
Henry  is  engaged  in  agricultural  pursuits  on  sec- 
tion 5,  township  8,  range  5;  Margaret  Jane  is  the 
wife  of  Kimbel  Jones,  a  farmer  in  Jackson  Coun- 
ty; Josei)h  conducts  a  farm  near  Mill  Creek,  Ran- 
dolpii  County;  Walter  owns  a  farm  near  that  of 
his  brother  at  Campbell  Hill;  Albert,  a  resident  of 
Kansas,  owns  a  farm  in  Martin  County;  Eliza 
p]llen  resides  with  her  father;  Letitia  is  the  widow 
of  Milton  W.  Carr;  Alfred  and  Arthur  (twins) 
remain  at  home. 

Jlrs.  p;iizabeth  Lawder  departed  this  life  Septem- 
ber 2,  1875,  at  the  age  of  forty-six  years.  While 
on  a  visit  to  his  native  land,  our  subject  again 
married,  the  lady  of  his  choice  being  Miss  Mary 
Kerr,  a  cousin  of  his  former  wife.  Mrs  Lawder  is 
the  daughter  of  James  and  Margaret  (Sloan)  Kerr, 
also  natives  of  County  Down.  Our  subject  and 
all  the  members  of  his  family  are  Presbyterians. 
In  his  political  relations  he  has  been  a  Republican 
for  man}'  years,  and  prides  himself  on  having 
voted  with  the  Democratic  party  but  once.  In  his 
native  country  he  was  identified  with  the  Orange- 
men, and  during  the  late  Rebellion  was  connected 
with  the  Union  League.  For  six  or  eight  years  he 
served  creditably  as  Town  Treasurer,  which  office 
he  still  holds.  For  some  time  he  was  Road  Super- 
visor and  School  Director.  He  has  never  been  an 
office-seeker,  and  has  consented  to   fill  these  posi- 


794 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


tions  only  at  the  soliciUitions  of  his  friends  and 
neighbors. 


-^j'  BRAM  BROWN,  one  of  the  prominent  and 
((Ss/lJI,  progressive  farmers  of  Randolph  Countj', 
now  living  on  township  6,  range  7,  was 
horn  near  Diamond  Cross,  July  26,  1854. 
His  fatiier,  Charles  Brown,  was  born  in  Franklin 
County  in  1828,  and  when  a  young  lad  removed 
to  Kaskaskia  witli  his  mother,  his  father  having 
died.  His  school  privileges  were  exceedingly  lim- 
ited. He  worked  as  a  farm  hand  until  twent}--one 
years  of  age,  and  then  worked  on  tlie  Mississippi 
River,  which  business  he  followed  for  five  j'cars, 
during  which  time  he  saved  enough  money  to 
enter  land.  Entering  a  claim  near  the  present 
home  of  our  subject,  he  developed  a  large  tract  of 
wild  land  and  continued  farming  throughout  his 
remaining  days.  He  married  Sarah,  daughter 
of  Abraham  Harmon.  His  death  occurred  April 
11,  1888,  but  his  widow  still  survives  him.  They 
became  the  parents  of  thirteen  children,  all  of 
whom  are  j-et  living.  Richard  and  Mrs.  Callie 
Uliles  are  residents  of  Spokane,  Wash.;  Mrs.  Anna 
Taggart  and  Mrs.  Jennie  Dean  reside  in  Chester; 
Charles,  a  physician,  and  Noah,  a  telegraph  opera- 
tor, live  in  Indianai)olis,  Ind.;  John  is  in  Los 
Angeles,  Cal.;  Joseph,  Thomas,  Frank,  Addie  and 
Nellie  are  still  at  home  with  their  mother. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  attended  the  district 
schools  near  his  home  and  worked  upon  a  farm, 
giving  his  father  the  benefit  of  his  services  until 
he  had  attained  his  majority.  He  then  began 
farming  in  his  own  interest  and  has  since  carried 
on  agricultural  i)ursuits  with  most  excellent  suc- 
cess. 'He  was  also  engaged  in  te.aching  in  the  dis- 
trict schools  of  the  county-  for  three  3^ears,  but  his 
main  business  has  been  the  cultivation  of  his  land, 
and  he  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  model  farmers 
of  the  communit}',  for  his  place  is  complete  in  all 
its  appointments. 

October  18,  1876,  Mr.  Brown  w.as  joined  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Alice  Nixon,  daughter  of  William 
I.  and  Liicretia  (Stipe)  Nixon.  Her  father,  a  na- 
tive of  Ohio,  lived  in  that  state  until  a  ^oungman, 
when  he  came  to  Randolph  Countj'.     The  Stipe 


family  removed  from  Virginia  to  Illinois  in  an 
earl}-  day.  By  the  marriage  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Brown 
have  been  born  three  briglit  and  intelligent  bo^-s, 
Clarence  N.,  Charles  L.  and  Murray  J.,  and  the 
family  circle  yet  remains  unbroken. 

Mr.  Brown  is  the  present  Master  of  Kaskaskia 
Lodge  No.  86,  A.  F.  &  A.  M.,  and  has  also  filled 
the  offices  of  Senior  and  Junior  Warden  and  Sec- 
retary. In  1893  he  i-epresented  his  lodge  in  the 
Grand  Lodge  in  Chicago.  He  holds  membership 
with  Chester  Lodge  No.  57,  I.  O.  O.  F.  His 
wife  is  a  memljer  of  the  Methodist  Church.  He 
and  all  his  father's  family  are  Democrats  in  poli- 
tics, and  he  takes  a  very  prominent  part  in  politi- 
cal affairs.  He  is  now  a  candidate  for  Assessor 
and  Treasurer  of  Randolph  County.  He  is  a  man 
of  sterling  worth,  and  a  well  spent  life  has  gained 
for  him  the  high  regard  of  all  with  whom  he  has 
been  brought  in  contact. 


\T/OSIAH  REIMAN.  Many  of  the  native- 
born  citizens  of  Jackson  County  have  turned 
their  attention  to  the  tilling  of  the  soil,  be- 
lieving that  therefrom  ma}-  be  gained  a 
competence  if  not  a  fortune.  Among  this  number 
is  the  well  known  resident  of  Levan  Tow^nship, 
whose  name  introduces  this  biographical  sketch, 
and  who  is  pleasantly  located  on  section  14.  Here 
he  owns  a  fine  farm  of  one  hundred  and  sixty 
acres,  upon  which  a  complete  line  of  substantial 
and  well  arranged  buildings  maj-  be  seen.  In  ad- 
dition to  this  property  Mr.  Reiman  is  the  owner  of 
one  hundred  and  twenty  acres  on  section  13,  Le- 
van Township.  He  has  pursued  his  chosen  voca- 
tion in  an  intelligent  manner,  bringing  to  bear 
upon  his  work  the  progressive  spirit  and  energetic 
nature  which  have  ever  been  his  characteristics. 

The  Reiman  family  is  one  of  the  most  prominent 
in  the  count}-  where  the  father  of  our  subject, 
Andrew  Reim.an,  made  settlement  in  1844.  Else- 
where in  this  volume  mention  is  made  of  the  fain- 
il}'  history,  to  which  the  reader  is  referred.  Josiah, 
of  this  sketch,  was  born  in  Jackson  County  March 
29,  1853,  being   the    fifth   among    nine  sons.     He 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


795 


grew  to  manhood  upon  the  home  farm  and  at  an 
early  age  became  a  practical  farmer,  well  fitted  to 
conduct  an  estate  of  his  own. 

At  the  age  of  twenty-two  Mr.  Reiman  married 
Miss  Almetha,  daughter  of  O.  J.  and  Amanda  C. 
Levan,  prominent  residents  of  this  township.  Mrs. 
Reiman  was  born  .Tune  26,  1857,  and  is  a  lad}'  of 
refinement  and  amiable  disposition,  highly  es- 
teemed in  the  community  and  prominent  in  the 
Christian  Church,  of  which  she  is  a  member.  Our 
subject  is  also  identified  with  that  denomination 
and  contributes  liberally  to  religious  and  benevo- 
lent projects.  In  politics  he  atliliates  with  the 
Democrats,  but  has  never  sought  or  held  of- 
fice, preferring  to  devote  his  attention  to  private 
duties.  lie  and  his  wife  are  the  parents  of  four 
children,  one  of  whom  died  in  infancy.  The 
others  are,  Harmon,  Ada  and  Fred. 


-i-^ 


--■^ 


_-^ENRY    LUCIISIXGER.      Tiiere    is    no    in- 

tll'  heritancc  so  rich  as  the  record  of  the  worthy 
/;  ■' 

j^'  lives  of  those  who  have  parted  with  friends 
§))  on  earth,  and  have  entered  upon  their  final 
rest.  Tlieir  example  and  the  success  which  has  re- 
warded their  efforts  inspires  the  j'oung  with  cour- 
age and  the  middle-aged  with  renewed  energy. 
For  many  years  Mr.  Lnehsinger  ranked  high 
among  the  business  men  of  Steeleville,  and  the 
city  in  his  demise  lost  one  of  its  most  progressive 
residents.  His  lot  was  cast  in  the  field  of  action, 
rather  than  in  the  field  of  meditation,  of  business 
and  commercial  enterprise.  Here  he  was  active, 
sagacious  and  daring,  and  in  all  his  dealings  was 
pronii)t,  conscientious  and  decisive.  Though  sub- 
jected to  two  dangerous  tests,  success  and  reverses 
of  fortune,  the  former  did  not  unduly  elate  him, 
nor  the  latter  daunt  his  spirit. 

A  native  of  Schwanden,  Germany,  and  born 
May  10,  1831,  the  subject  of  this  sketch  was  a  son 
of  Jacob  Lnehsinger,  who  died  in  his  native  coun- 
try, as  did  his  wife.  Henry  attended  school  in 
Germany  until  he  was  fourteen  years  of  age,  and 
then  entered  the  army,  and  served  for  four  3'ears 
in  the  war  between  France  and  Germany.     Having 


resolved  to  seek  home  and  fortune  in  the  land  be- 
yond the  seas,  he  emigrated  to  America  in  1855, 
and  for  a  short  time  sojourned  in  St.  Louis,  whence 
he  removed  to  Chester,  111.  A  shoemaker  by  trade, 
he  followed  that  occupation  in  Chester  for  six 
months,  and  then  came  to  Steeleville,  where  he 
opened  a  shop  and  entered  into  business  for  him- 
self. 

By  the  exercise  of  tireless  industry,  Mr.  Lneh- 
singer was  enabled  from  time  to  time  to  enlarge 
his  store,  and  finally  became  the  owner  of  a  fine 
establishment,  stocked  with  a  full  assortment  of 
boots  and  shoes.  He  continued  to  conduct  a  large 
and  profitable  trade  until  his  death,  August  29, 
1892.  In  the  midst  of  new  plans  and  enterprises, 
with  the  burden  of  business  interests  resting  upon 
him,  surrounded  by  the  objects  of  his  life-long 
care  and  love,  he  fell  asleep.  He  was  a  member  of 
the  Lutheran  Church,  in  which  faith  he  died. 
Though  not  active  in  political  affairs,  he  advo- 
cated the  principles  of  the  Democratic  party.  He 
is  survived  b\'  his  widow,  a  most  excellent  lad}', 
whom  he  married  in  1854  in  Germany,  and  who 
bore  the  maiden  name  of  Annie  Aebli. 


EDWIN  KEIMAN.  Intelligent,  thrifty  and 
progressive  farmers  form  the  greater  part 
^  y  of  the  population  of  Jackson  County,  and 
among  these  the  subject  of  this  sketch  occupies  a 
prominent  position.  He  is  the  owner  of  a  finely 
improved  farm  comprising  one  hundred  and  sixty 
acres  in  Levan  Township,  which  is  one  of  the  best 
managed  estates  in  this  part  of  the  county.  Pro- 
gressive in  all  things,  he  has  accumulated  a  hand- 
some property,  and  now  ranks  among  the  well-to- 
do  fanners  of  the  township. 

Mr.  Reiman  has  spent  his  entire  life  in  Jackson 
Countj-,  and  was  born  in  Murphysboro  Township, 
January  28,  1850.  Alternating  attendance  at  the 
district  school  with  woi'k  on  the  home  farm,  he 
grew  to  vigorous  manhood  well  fitted  to  superin- 
tend a  farm  of  his  own.  At  the  age  of  twenty- 
three,  on  the  22d  of  May,  1873,  he  was  united  in 
marriage   with   Miss   Alice,   daughter   of   Joseph 


796 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Breeden,  a  native  of  Indiana,  and  an  early  settler 
of  Somerset  Township,  Jackson  County.  Mrs.  Rei- 
man  was  born  March  16,  1856,  in  Indiana,  but 
has  spent  the  most  of  her  life  in  this  state. 

After  his  marriage  Mr.  Reiman  settled  upon  a 
farm  consisting  of  one  hundred  and  one  acres  of 
partly  improved  land.  Through  industry  and  un- 
remitting toil  he  has  acquired  one  hundred  and 
sixty  acres  of  highly  cultivated  land.  Upon  the 
place  he  has  introduced  all  the  improvements  of  a 
modern  estate,  including  farm  maehiner3',  good 
fencing,  and  all  the  buildings  necessary  for  the 
proper  conduct  of  the  farm.  His  residence,  a  com- 
modious and  conveniently  arranged  structure,  was 
erected  in  1883,  while  the  barn  was  built  six  vears 
later.  In  addition  to  mixed  farming  he  engages 
in  stock-raising,  in  which  he  has  met  with  success. 

The  union  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reiman  has  resulted 
in  the  birth  of  eight  children,  all  of  whom  reside 
with  their  parents.  They  are,  Nora,  George,  Frank, 
John,  Lillie,  Sylva,  Earl  and  Junius.  In  politics 
Mr.  Reiman  is  a  Democrat,  and  in  local  affairs  is 
quite  influential.  For  thirteen  j-ears  he  has  filled 
the  office  of  Justice  of  the  Peace,  and  is  still  serv- 
ing in  that  capacity.  In  religious  belief  he  is 
identified  with  the  Free  Will  Baptist  Church. 

[(s)^  ^iM^         .@J 

(^  ^^^"' -^ 

fOUIS  A.  MINNER,  a  practical  pharmacist 
(?S)  and  chemist,  who  is  doing  a  good  business 
J^^  as  a  druggist  in  Murphysboro,  claims  Ohio 
as  the  state  of  his  nativity.  He  was  born  near 
Zanesville,  July  14,  1861,  and  is  a  son  of  the  Rev. 
Frederick  and  Teckla  Minner,  both  of  whom  were 
natives  of  German}'.  The  father  was  born  in 
Stuttgart,  and  was  graduated  from  the  theological 
seminary  and  the  Berlin  University  with  the  de- 
grees of  M.  A.  and  B.  D.  He  became  a  minister 
of  the  German  Lutheran  Church,  and  after  emi- 
grating to  the  New  World  first  preached  in  Phila- 
delpliia.  He  was  then  employed  in  his  ministe- 
rial capacity  in  dififerent  places  in  the  Buckeye 
State  until  his  retirement  from  the  ministry,  when 
he  located  on  a  farm  near  Zanesville.     His  death 


there  occurred  at  the  age  of  sixt3'-two,  and  his 
wife  also  passed  awa}'  in  Ohio. 

Their  son  Louis  is  the  ninth  in  the  family  of 
ten  children,  all  of  whom  are  still  living.  Midst 
plaj'  and  work  his  bo_vhood  days  were  passed 
upon  the  farm  near  Zanesville,  where  he  contin- 
ued until  sixteen  years  of  age.  He  then  went  to 
Adamsville,  Ohio,  to  attend  school,  where  he  re- 
mained for  about  two  years.  For  three  terms  he 
engaged  in  teaching  school,  and  in  1880  entered 
the  Valparaiso  Normal  School  of  Indiana,  where 
for  nearly  two  years  he  pursued  the  scientific 
course  and  also  completed  the  commercial  course. 
In  1882  he  went  to  Sterling,  Kan.,  and  accepted  a 
clerkship  in  a  drug  store,  where  he  continued  one 
j'ear.  He  afterward  spent  three  years  as  a  drug- 
gist's clerk  in  St.  Louis  and  East  St.  Louis,  and  in 
order  to  perfect  himself  for  that  line  of  business 
pursued  a  course  of  pharmacy  in  tlie  St.  Louis 
College  of  Pharmacy  in  1886-87.  Oiv  the  expira- 
tion of  that  period  we  find  him  in  Chicago,  where 
he  worked  for  nearly  three  years.  Having  entered 
the  Philadeliihia  College  of  Pharmacj*  of  Phila- 
delphia, Pa.,  he  was  graduated  from  that  institu- 
tion in  1889,  with  the  degree  of  Ph.  G.  He  was 
also  graduated  as  a  chemist  from  both  schools. 

Returning  to  Chicago,  Mr.  Minner  there  re 
mained  until  the  1st  of  May,  1890,  when  he  ar- 
rived in  Murphysboro  and  bought  out  the  store 
and  stock  of  Charles  Muehehein,  a  druggist  at 
the  corner  of  Chesnut  and  Broad  Streets.  Here 
he  has  carried  on  business  continuously  since.  His 
store  has  been  improved  with  large  plate  glass 
windows  and  is  well  stocked  with  everything 
found  in  a  first-class  drug  store.  As  far  as  prac- 
ticable, he  manufactures  his  own  medicines,  and 
is  recognized  as  the  best  prescription  druggist  in 
the  city.  His  business  has  steadily  increased  from 
the  beginning  until  he  is  now  enjoying  a  fine 
trade.  He  is  connected  witli  the  Illinois  Pharma- 
ceutical Association,  and  is  also  a  member  of  the 
Alumni  Association  of  the  Philadelphia  College 
of  Pharmacy. 

Mr.  Minner  is  a  stockholder  in  the  Southern 
Illinois  Building  and  Loan  Association,  the  Jack- 
son County  Building  and  Loan  Association,  and 
is  a  Director  of  the  East  St.  Louis  Building  and 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


r97 


Loan  Association,  and  the  ^tna,  of  St.  Louis.  In 
politics  he  IS  a  Populist.  The  Minner  household 
numbers  three  members,  our  subject,  wife  and 
child.  Frem  K.  The  lady  was  formerly  Miss  Fan- 
nie King.  She  was  born  in  Dresden,  Ohio,  and 
their  marriage  was  celebrated  in  Zanesville,  Feb- 
ruary 4,  1891. 

'jf/     HENRY    D.  DEITMERING,  who   is  en- 

d'  gaged  in  the  jewelry  business  in  Steeleville, 
I  and  is  recognized  as  one  of  the  substantial 
.^^  business  men  of  this  place,  claims  Germany 
as  the  land  of  his  birth,  which  occurred  in  Decem- 
ber, 1848.  His  parents  were  Henry  .ind  Mary 
(Schrader)  Dettmering.  Thej-  were  also  natives  of 
German}',  and  in  that  country  the  mother  is  still 
living.  The  father  departed  this  life  some  3ears 
since. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch,  who  was  the  second 
in  their  family,  attended  the  public  schools  of  his 
native  land  until  fourteen  3ears  of  age,  when  he 
left  the  school  room  to  engage  in  business  for 
himself.  Since  that  time  he  has  been  dependent 
upon  his  own  resources,  and  whatever  success  he 
has  achieved  in  life  is  due  entirely  to  his  own  ef- 
forts. He  began  learning  the  trade  of  watch-mak- 
ing, serving  an  apprenticeship  of  four  j'ears,  dur- 
ing which  he  thoroughly  mastered  the  business. 
When  a  young  man  of  twenty,  he  enlisted  in  the 
German  army,  and  continued  in  the  service  for 
three  years.  After  his  return  lo  the  duties  of 
private  citizenship,  he  worked  at  the  jewelry  trade 
for  about  ten  years.  He  then  bade  adieu  to  friends 
and  native  land  and  sailed  for  America. 

It  was  in  1881  that  Mr.  Dettmering  crossed  the 
Atlantic.  Landing  in  New  York  Gitj%  he  there 
spent  nine  months  working  at  his  trade,  after 
which  he  left  the  eastern  metropolis  and  emigrated 
westward  to  Elgin,  HI.  Securing  work  in  the 
watch  factory  of  that  city,  he  there  continued  for 
a  year,  after  which  he  came  to  Steeleville,  and  for 
fifteen  months  worked  on  a  farm.  AVe  next  find 
him  in  Missouri,  where  he  spent  about  five  years, 
working  at  his  trade,  watch-making.  In  this  time, 
by  industry,  economy  and  good  management,  he  had 


acquired  some  capital  and  determined  to  engage  in 
business  for  himself.  He  came  to  Steeleville  in 
1890,  and  here  opened  the  jewelr}'  store  and  watch 
repairing  establishment  which  he  still  carries  on. 
He  has  built  up  a  good  trade,  and  is  recognized  as 
one  of  the  substantial  business  men  of  the  com- 
munit}'. 

In  1887  a  marriage  ceremonj'  was  ijcrformed 
which  united  the  destinies  of  Mr.  Dettmering  and 
Miss  Fredda  Roetger,  a  daughter  of  Frederick  and 
Anna  Roetger.  Her  parents  were  natives  of  Ger- 
many, and  in  that  country  spent  their  entire  lives. 
Both  father  and  mother  are  now  deceased.  Unto 
our  subject  and  his  wife  have  been  born  three  chil- 
dred,  one  son  and  two  daughters:  Amelia,  Albert 
andErma.  The  familj- circle  yet  remains  unbroken, 
for  thev  are  still  under  the  parental  roof. 

Our  subject  exercises  his  right  of  franchise  in 
support  of  the  Democratic  party,  but  has  never  as- 
pired to  official  preferment,  desiring  rather  to  give 
his  entire  time  and  attention  to  his  business  inter- 
ests, lie  may  truly  be  called  a  self-made  man. 
He  started  out  in  life  for  himself  at  the  age  of  four- 
teen; he  came  to  this  countiy  empty-handed,  but 
his  untiring  industry,  which  is  one  of  his  chief 
characteristics,  has  won  him  a  comfortable  compe- 
tence and  numbered  him  among  the  well-to-do  cit- 
izens of  the  communit_v.  He  and  his  wife  hold 
membership  with  the  Lutheran  Church,  and  are 
prominent  people  in  Steeleville,  who  have  a  wide 
circle  of  friends  and  .acquaintances,  by  whom  they 
are  held  in  high  regard. 


ry-^  noUA^  ROBERTSON,  M.  D.,a  well  known 
//T\  pr.acticing  physician  of  Steeleville,  and  a 
V^  prominent  representative  of  the  fraternitj' 
in  Randolph  County,  was  born  in  Nova  Scotia  on 
the  8th  of  November,  1858,  and  is  the  eldest  child 
of  John  and  Nellie  (McKenzie)  Robertson,  who 
were  also  natives  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  still  reside 
in  that  place. 

The  Doctor  attended  the  public  schools  of  his  na- 
tive town  until  eighteen  years  of  age,  thus  acquir- 
ing a  good  English  education,  and  then  started  out 
in  life  for  himself.     He  came  to  Illinois  and  made 


798 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


his  waj'  to  the  home  of  an  uncle,  Dr.  McKenzie,of 
Chester.  There  he  again  attended  school  for  two 
years,  after  which  he  began  earning  his  own  liveli- 
hood, securing  a  position  as  clerk  in  the  drug  store 
of  E.  E.  Holbrook.  There  he  was  employed  for  a 
year  and  a-half,  when  he  continued  in  the  same 
line  of  business  in  the  employ'  of  his  uncle,  Dr. 
McKenzie.  After  two  years  spent  in  this  way,  he 
engaged  in  other  work,  but  in  the  meantime  he 
had  been  reading  medisine  with  his  uncle.  In 
September,  1884,  he  entered  the  St.  Louis  Medical 
College,  pursuing  three  courses  of  lectures  in  that 
institution,  after  which  he  was  graduated  there- 
from, receiving  liis  diploma  on  the  3d  of  March, 
1887.  Some  months  later  he  located  in  Steeleville, 
where  he  has  since  successfully  engaged  in  general 
practice. 

On  the  10th  of  September,  1890,  was  celebrated 
the  marriage  of  Dr.  Robertson  and  Miss  Minnehaha 
Cameron,  a  daughter  of  Archibald  and  Maggie 
(Eraser)  Cameron,  both  of  whom  are  natives  of 
Nova  Scotia.  The  young  couple  are  prominent  in 
this  communit}',  hold  an  enviable  position  in  social 
circles,  and  have  many  warm  friends  and  agreeable 
acquaintances.  They  were  both  reared  in  the  faith 
of  the  Presbyterian  Cliurch.  The  Doctor  is  now 
a  member  of  Steeleville  Lodge  No.  497,  A.  F.  & 
A.  M.  In  ]Jolitics  he  is  a  Republican,  and  though 
he  takes  a  warm  interest  in  the  success  of  his  party, 
be  has  never  sought  or  desired  political  prefer- 
ment, wishing  rather  to  give  his  entire  time  and  at- 
tention to  the  practice  of  his  profession. 


-^ 


^ 


E^'^^^xICHOLAS  SAUER,  one  of  the  pro|)rietors 
I  of  tlie  Evausville  Flour  Mill,  stands  fore- 
^  most  among  the  prominent  business  men 
of  Evansville,  who  have  contributed  so  largely  to 
the  financial  prosperit}'  of  this  part  of  the  county. 
With  true  public  spirit  and  characteristic  liberal- 
ity he  has  aided  every  enterprise  that  would  in 
any  way  advance  the  welfare  of  the  community  or 
promote  the  growth  of  the  city.  In  addition  to 
his  interest  in  the  mill  he  owns  valuable  real  estate 


in  other  portions  of  the  county,  which  he  rents  to 
good  advantage. 

Our  subject  is  a  native  of  this  state,  having 
been  born  in  Monroe  County,  March  21,  1831, 
and  is  a  son  of  Philip  and  P^lizabeth  (Sensel) 
Saner,  natives  of  Germany.  The  father  emigrat- 
ed to  tlie  United  States,  locating  in  one  of  the 
eastern  states,  and  after  a  residence  there  of  a  few 
years  came  to  Illinois,  where  he  married  and  car- 
ried on  fanning  until  his  decease,  in  January, 
1892,  when  eighty-three  years  of  age.  He  was 
one  of  the  pioneers  of  this  county,  having  come 
here  as  early  as  1837  and  settled  near  what  is  now 
the  present  site  of  Red  Bud.  He  was  a  prominent 
man  in  his  community  and  held  the  office  of 
Township  Treasurer  and  Justice  of  the  Peace. 

The  mother  of  our  subject,  who  came  to  the 
United  States  a  few  years  after  the  emigration  of 
Mr.  Sauer,  was  born  in  Germany.  She  had  eight 
children,  of  whom  all  are  living  with  one  ex- 
ception. Our  subject  remained  with  his  par- 
ents until  reaching  his  majority,  and  gained  his 
first  knowledge  of  books  in  the  common  schools  of 
Monroe  County.  Later  he  took  a  course  of  study 
in  the  Commercial  College  at  St.  Louis,  and  when 
beginning  life  on  his  own  account  taught  five 
terms  of  winter  school  and  farmed  during  the  sum- 
mer. 

Desiring  to  engage  in  business  in  the  city,  our 
subject  began  merchandising  in  St.  Clair  County, 
this  state,  and  after  nine  months  of  indifferent 
success,  sold  his  store.  In  company  with  his  fa- 
ther he  came  to  Evansville  in  1866, and  purchased 
the  gristmill  which  he  now  owns  in  partnership 
with  his  brother.  The  mill  which  then  had  a  ca- 
pacity of  one  hundred  and  fifty  barrels  per  day, 
now  turns  out  three  hundred  barrels.  Mr.  Sauer 
gives  employment  to  about  thirty  men,  and  by 
means  of  boats,  ships  the  flour  to  points  along  the 
river.  The  mill  is  supplied  with  the  most  im- 
proved machinery,  and  the  flour  which  they  turn 
out  is  of  the  finest  quality. 

Miss  Elizabeth  Gerlache  became  the  wife  of  our 
subject  in  1866.  She  was  born  in  Virginia,  and 
has  become  the  mother  of  the  following  five  chil- 
dren: John  W.,  Magdalena,  Philip,  AVilliam  and 
George.      His    prompt   and    methodical    business 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


799 


habits,  good  financial  talent  and  tact  in  the  man- 
agement of  affairs,  have  brought  Mr.  Sauer  before 
the  public  as  a  desirable  official,  lie  was  nomi- 
nated for  State  Senator  on  the  Republican  ticket, 
but  declined  to  accept  the  honor.  He  has  been 
Township  Trustee,  and  for  tweut3'-one}ears  was  a 
member  of  tlie  School  Board.  With  his  wife  he  is 
a  devoted  member  of  the  Evangelical  Church  and 
retains  the  stanch  decisive  principles  of  that  faith. 


'if]  OHN  REIMAN.  In  the  brief  and  imperfect 
outline  we  are  able  to  give  in  this  biograph- 
^^  '  ical  sketch  of  one  of  the  most  progressive 
i^^y  farmers  of  Jackson  County,  we  can  do  but 
little  more  than  merely  glance  at  some  of  the  prin- 
cipal events  with  which  he  has  been  connected  and 
identified  in  his  long  and  useful  career  as  a 
farmer  and  business  man.  The  life  and  cliaracter 
of  Mr.  Reiman,  rising  from  an  humble  position  by 
his  own  unaided  efforts  to  a  place  of  honor  among 
men,  presents  a  useful  lesson  to  the  ^'outli  of  tliis 
generation  and  adds  another  striking  illustration 
of  the  power  and  force  of  determined  purpose  and 
perseverance. 

The  landed  possessions  of  Mr.  Reiman  aggregate 
five  hundred  and  twenty-sis  acres,  the  larger  part 
of  which  has  been  pl.aced  under  cultivation.  His 
home  is  pleasantly  situated  on  section  35,  Levan 
Township,  where  he  has  erected  a  substantial  resi- 
dence, commodious  barns  and  other  buildings  ade- 
quate to  their  several  uses.  The  soil  has  been  fer- 
tilized by  a  proi)cr  rotation  of  crops,  and  every- 
thing about  the  place  gives  indication  of  the  en- 
terprising habits  of  the  proprietor. 

In  Somerset  County,  Pa.,  where  he  was  born 
February  4,  1838,  the  subject  of  this  sketch  spent 
the  first  six  years  of  his  life,  and  thence  in  1844  he 
accompanied  his  father,  Andrew  Reiman,  to  Illi- 
nois. Tliey  journeyed  up  the  Mississippi  River  as 
far  as  Chester,  and  at  their  place  of  landing  the 
Father  of  Waters  was  thirteen  miles  wide.  Arriv- 
ing in  Chester  in  June  of  1844,  the  family  pro- 
ceeded to  Jackson  Count}'  and  settled  one  and  one- 
fourth  miles  north  of  Murphysboro.  There  the 
boyhood  years   of    our  subject  were  passed,  and 


there  he  remained  until  he  attained  the  age  of 
twentj'-two,  meantime  devoting  his  time  almost 
exclusively  to  agricultural  labors  and  enjoying 
the  most  meager  of  educational  privileges. 

When  twenlj'-two  years  old,  Mr.  Reiman  pur- 
chased eighty  acres,  comprising  a  portion  of  his 
present  estate,  and  to  his  original  tract  he  has  from 
time  to  time  added,  until  he  is  now  the  owner  of  five 
hundred  and  twent3--six  acres  of  as  fertile  land  as 
is  to  be  found  in  Jackson  County.  He  has  wit- 
nessed the  wonderful  progress  made  by  the  county 
and  the  development  of  its  material  resources,  and 
by  his  enterprise  and  public  spirit  has  contributed 
to  the  growth  of  this  section  of  the  slate.  In  for- 
mer years  Chester  was  the  nearest  wheat  market 
and  the  surrounding  country  was  sparsely  settled. 
He  was  accustomed  to  go  to  mill  on  horseback, 
carrying  the  wheat  and  corn  that  was  to  be  ground. 

In  1860  Mr.  Reiman  married  Miss  Emily  K., 
daughter  of  William  Cooper,  a  Virginian,  who 
earl}-  settled  in  Illinois.  Seven  children  were 
born  of  the  union,  all  of  whom  died  in  infancy 
with  the  exception  of  William,  an  intelligent  and 
well  educated  young  man.  While  Mr.  Reiman  has 
devoted  his  attention  principally  to  his  jjrivate 
affairs,  he  has  found  time  to  keep  posted  upon  the 
national  and  local  issues  of  the  day,  and  in  poli- 
tics gives  his  support  to  the  Democratic  party. 
He  is  now  filling  the  position  of  Supervisoi, and  at 
the  expiration  of  his  present  term  will  have 
served  six  years  in  that  capacity.  For  twenty-one 
years  he  has  been  an  officer  in  the  Lutheran 
Church,  and  is  a  generous  contributor  to  religious 
enterprises. 


THURSTON  W.  TAGGART  was  known  and 
jv^^\  honored  throughout  Randolph  County, 
^"  being  a  native-born  citizen,  an  extensive 
agriculturist,  and  at  one  time  Postmaster  at  New 
Palestine.  His  birth  occurred  March  31,  1856, 
near  Blair,  he  being  the  eldest  child  of  Amos 
and  Sylvania  (Carsteller)  Taggart.  Both  families 
were  among  the  early  and  prominent  settlers  of 
Randolph  County.  The  father  is  yet  surviving 
and  is  greatly  esteemed  for  his  kindly  acts  of 
hand  and  heart. 

Our   subject  attended    the  common  schools  of 


800 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


his  district,  and  until  attaining  his  majority  aided 
his  father  on  the  lioine  farm.  At  this  period  in 
life  he  started  out  for  himself  and  continued  to 
conduct  his  chosen  occupation  with  the  exception 
of  a  3'ear  and  a-half,  during  which  time  he  was 
Superintendent  of  the  County  Farm.  His  farm 
comprised  at  his  death  eighty  acres,  wliich  he  had 
worked  hard  to  improve  and  cultivate. 

November  22,  1882,  Mr.  Taggart  and  Miss  Cath- 
erine R.,  a  daughter  of  George  and  Anna  (Will- 
inger)  Bauer,  were  united  in  marriage.  Her  par- 
ents were  both  born  in  German}',  but  came  to 
this  country  when  quite  young,  and  here  spent 
their  entire  lives.  By  the  union  of  our  subject 
and  his  wife  three  children  were  born:  Sydney, 
who  died  in  inf.ancy;  Francis  V.  and  Anna,  both 
of  whom  are  living  with  their  mother.  The  good 
wife  .and  children  were  deprived  of  a  loving  hus- 
band and  devoted  father  May  2,  1889,  when  Thur- 
ston Taggart  was  called  from  this  life  to  the  land 
beyond. 

Mrs.  Taggart  is  the  iiresent  Postmistress  at  New 
Palestine,  the  duties  of  which  she  is  discharging 
faithfully  and  with  credit  to  herself  as  well  as 
to  the  satisfaction  of  the  people.  She  is  a  clear- 
headed business  woman,  and,  in  addition  to  the 
management  of  the  postoflice.  is  also  conducting 
a  profitable  mercantile  business,  which  was  estab- 
lished by  her  husband  in  1886.  She  is  connected 
with  the  Catholic  Church,  with  which  Mr.  Tag- 
gart was  also  identified.  In  politics  he  was  a 
Democrat. 


If__^  ENRY  KRUEGER,  who  engages  in  general 
flj]  farming  on  section  31, township  3,  range  9, 
/^t^^  Monroe  County,  was  born  June  29,  1841, 
(^)  in  Germany,  and  is  the  only  survivor  of  a 
family  of  four  children,  the  other  three  having 
died  in  infancy.  The  parents,  Christian  and  AVil- 
helmina  (Susavendt)  Krueger,  were  also  natives  of 
Germany.  At  the  age  of  thirty-nine,  the  father 
accompanied  b}'  his  familj',  left  that  countiy  and 
crossed  the  broad  Atlantic  to  America.  He  landed 
in  New  Orleans,  and  thence  came  to  Monroe  Coun- 
ty, 111.,   where  he   engaged  in   farming  up  to  the 


time  of  his  death.  He  was  an  industrious  and  en- 
ergetic man,  and  placed  his  land  under  a  high 
state  of  cultivation.  He  passed  away  at  the  age 
of  seventy-five,  and  was  laid  to  rest  in  this  county. 
His  wife  died  several  years  previous  to  his  demise. 
Both  were  members  of  the  (jerman  Evangelical 
Church,  and  were  highly  respected  people  of  the 
cominunit}'.  In  his  political  attiliations  the  father 
was  a  stanch  Republican. 

Henry  Krueger  spent  the  first  thirteen  j-ears  of 
his  life  in  Germany,  and  then  came  witli  his  par- 
ents to  the  New  World.  He  attended  school  in 
the  Old  Countiy,  but  is  largely  self-educated. 
From  an  earl}'  age  he  was  inured  to  the  labors  of 
the  farm,  becoming  familiar  with  the  business  in 
all  its  details,  and  to  his  father  ho  gave  the  benefit 
of  his  services  until  his  marri.age.  This  important 
event  was  celebrated  on  the  29th  of  June,  1865, 
Miss  AVilhelmina  Brandt  becoming  his  wife.  The 
lady  is  also  a  native  of  Germany.  By  their  union 
were  born  thirteen  children,  but  eight  of  the  num- 
ber are  now  deceased.  Those  still  living  are,  Wil- 
helmina,  Christina,  Louisa,  AVilliam  and  Moritz. 
The  family  is  one  widely  and  favorably  known  in 
this  community,  and  its  members  rank  high  in  the 
social  circles  in  which  they  move.  Their  home  is 
the  abode  of  hospitality  and  good  cheer. 

Mr.  Krueger  hiis  lived  a  quiet  and  unassuming 
life,  devoting  his  entire  time  and  attention  to  agri- 
cultural pursuits,  with  which  he  has  been  familiar 
since  early  boyhood.  He  is  regarded  as  one  of 
the  enterprising  and  progressive  farmers  of  the 
neighborhood,  and  the  neat  appearance  of  the  place 
indicates  his  thrift  and  careful  supervision.  His 
land  is  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation,  and  is 
well  improved.  His  possessions  stand  as  a  monu- 
ment to  his  labors,  for  his  property  has  all  been 
acquired  through  his  own  unaided  efforts.  He 
may  therefore  truly  be  called  a  self-made  man. 

— v>> .o*o-@^vS)-o*o. s-^ 

jt_^  ENRY  W.  NICHOLLS,  Postmaster  at  Fin- 
llfjjj  ney,  and  a  successful  farmer  of  Somerset 
's^  Township,  Jackson  County,  cultivates  a 
^^  finely  improved  estate  of  two  hundred 
acres,  which,  with  its  comfortable  residence  and 
substantial  outbuildings  and  general  air  of  pros- 


RESIDENCE  OF    H  .W.  NICHOLLS  ,   S  EC.  ^.,  SOM  ER5  ET  TP, -JACKSON   CO., ILL. 


RESIDENCE  OF    HENRY    KRUGER,    5  EC.  31. ,  T.  3  .  R.  9.,  MON  RO  E   CO., ILL. 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


803 


perity,  indicates  the  existence  of  cultivated  tastes 
and  ample  means.  For  a  number  of  years  after 
locating  in  this  county  he  devoted  his  attention 
to  coal  mining  in  connection  with  farming,  and  of 
late  years  has  conducted  agricultural  pursuits  in 
addition  to  attending  to  his  duties  as  Postmaster. 

The  parents  of  our  subject,  Ilenr^'and  pjlizabeth 
(Richards)  NichoUs,  were  natives  of  England.  The 
father  emigrated  to  America  in  1817,  after  which 
lie  resided  in  Wisconsin  for  a  number  of  years  and 
then  removed  to  Michigan.  There  he  died  in  1856. 
Henry  W.  was  born  in  Cornwall  County,  England, 
May  31,  1831,  and  in  his  boyhood  attended  the 
pay  schools  of  that  country,  taking  advantage  of 
every  opportunity  for  acquiring  a  [(radical  edu- 
cation. When  about  nine  years  of  age  he  began 
to  work  in  the  tin  mines  of  Cornwall,  and  con- 
tinued thus  employed  until  he  emigrated  to  this 
country  in  1848.  He  took  passage  on  a  sailing- 
vessel  at  St.  Ives,  and  after  an  uneventful  voyage 
of  six  weeks  and  four  days  landed  in  Quebec, 
whence  he  proceeded  direct  to  Grant  County, 
Wis.,  his  father's  home.  In  this  journey  he  was 
accompanied  by  Ins  mother. 

For  a  number  of  years  Mr.  NicholLs  found  em- 
ployment in  the  lead  mines  of  Wisconsin,  whence 
in  1853  lie  removed  to  the  northern  peninsula  of 
Michigan  and  worked  in  the  copper  mines  there 
for  several  years.  His  next  home  was  in  Newton 
County,  Mo.,  where  he  was  employed  in  the  lead 
mines.  From  there  he  proceeded  to  Illinois  and 
engaged  in  lead  mining  in  Hardin  County.  The 
year  1808  witnessed  his  arrival  in  Jackson  Coun- 
ty, 111.,  where  for  some  time  he  engaged  in  mining 
for  coal,  as  well  as  in  general  farming. 

August  31,  1868,  Mr.  NichoUs  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Harriet  Cliancv,  who  was  born 
in  Hardin  County,  111.,  March  11,  1843.  She  is  a 
daughter  of  James  and  Ellen  (Keelen)  Chancy, 
natives  respectively  of  Ohio  and  Tennessee,  and 
early  settlers  in  Hardin  County.  Unto  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  NichoUs  there  have  been  born  four  children, 
Andrew,  James,  Thomas  and  William.  A  Repub- 
lican in  politics,  Mr.  NichoUs  was  in  1889  ap- 
pointed Postmaster  at  Finney  and  is  still  serving 
in  that  capacity,  as  well  as  in  the  position  of  High- 
way Commissioner.  With  his  wife  he  holds  mem- 
31 


bersliip  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  South, 
in  which  he  is  an  active  worker. 

As  one  of  the  representative  men  of  Jackson 
County,  Mr.  NichoUs  stands  second  to  none  in 
point  of  sterling  integrity  and  those  qualities 
which  go  to  make  up  the  responsible  citizen  and 
useful  member  of  the  community.  Here  he  has 
spent  the  best  years  of  his  life,  and  his  long  and 
arduous  labors  have  been  crowned  with  success. 
Under  his  careful  management  his  land  has  been 
brought  to  a  high  state  of  cultivation,  and  is  im- 
proved with  all  the  appliances  suggested  to  the 
enterprising  and  progressive  farmer,  while  his 
residence,  recently  com|)leted,  is  the  finest  in  the 
township. 

'jt-^  ERMAN  F.  MIDDENDOHF,  a  well  known 
lij  )j,  merchant  of  Chester,  is  a  native  of  this 
/iW^  place,  where  his  birth  occurred  August  30, 
i)^  1867.  He  is  the  son  of  John  George  Mid- 
dendorf,  who  was  born  in  Hanover,  Germany,  on 
the  8tli  of  August,  1824,  and  was  one  in  a  fam- 
ily of  nine  children.  As  was  the  custom  in  his 
native  land  he  attended  school  from  the  age  of 
six  to  fourteen  years.  His  father,  who  was  a  mer- 
chant tailor,  trained  him  to  follow  that  occupa- 
tion, but  upon  reaching  his  majority  he  left  the 
parental  roof  and  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  company 
with  an  elder  brothei',  landing  in  New  Orleans  in 
December,  1845. 

Two  years  later  .loliu  l\li<l(leM(l()rf  sailed  iq)  the 
Mississippi  to  St.  Louis,  where  he  worked  at  his 
trade  until  March  6,  1851,  the  date  of  his  advent 
in  Chester.  Having  visited  this  city  the  previous 
j'ear,  he  had  then  selected  and  purchased  resi- 
dence and  business  property, and  on  coining  hither 
brought  with  him  a  stock  of  goods  for  opening  a 
store,  which  was  the  first  establishment  of  its  kind 
in  the  place.  He  was  quite  successful  in  this  under- 
taking, and  a  few  months  later  put  in  a  stock  of 
dry  goods  and  conducted  a  very  successful  busi- 
ness as  a  general  merchant.  He  was  prudent  and 
judicious  in  the  management  of  his  affairs,  and 
honesty,  which  he  ever  found  to  be  the  best  pol- 
icy, was  the  corner-stone  of  his  success. 

The  father  of  our  subject  was  married  August 
1,  X851,  to  Miss  Minnie  T.  Triefte,also  a  native  of 


804 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


Germany,  who  had  come  to  America  three  years 
previous  to  her  marriage.  She  aided  her  hus- 
band very  materially'  in  attaining  his  high  stand- 
ing in  the  community,  and  during  her  entire  life 
has  manifested  her  ability  as  a  helpmate,  her  wis- 
dom as  a  parent  and  her  value  as  a  friend.  John 
Middendorf  departed  this  life  December  22,  1888, 
greatly  mourned  by  all  who  knew  him.  He  was 
very  prominent  in  local  affairs,  and  at  one  time 
was  honored  with  the  office  of  Mayor  of  Chestei'. 
The  brothers  and  sisters  of  our  subject  are: 
Anna,  Mrs.  John  F.  Naber,  of  St.  Louis,  Mo.; 
Caroline,  Mrs.  A.  11.  Senden;  Marj',  Mrs.  J.  T. 
Neely;  Fred  H.,  George  H.  and  F^dward.  Herman 
F.  was  given  a  good  education,  and  is  onfe  of  the 
bright  and  promising  young  men  of  the  county. 
He  is  a  stanch  Republican  in  politics  and  possesses 
hosts  of  friends  in  this  section. 

Vt^  LLES  B.  HUNTER  is  the  station  agent  and 
1^  telegraph  operator  at  Harrison,  Jackson 
U^^j  County,  on  the  Cairo  Short  Line  Railroad. 
Somerset  Township  contains  no  citizen  more  active 
or  energetic  than  he,  and  he  is  gifted  with  many 
worthy  attributes  that  render  him  respected  of  all 
men.  A  man  of  high  moral  character,  eminent 
public  spirit  and  a  wide  range  of  information,  he 
has  been  generous  in  his  support  of  all  enterprises 
that  will  in  anj-  w.ay  add  to  the  prosi)erity  of  the 
community  with  whose  interests  his  own  are  iden- 
tical. 

The  parents  of  our  subject,  John  and  Rhoda 
(Butts)  Hunter,  were  natives  of  Tennessee,  whence 
in  1848  they  removed  to  Illinois,  and  sojourned 
for  a  short  time  in  Williamson  County.  From 
there  they  moved  to  Union  County  and  located 
on  a  farm  twelve  miles  east  of  Anna.  Subsequently 
locating  in  Jonesboro,  they  resided  in  that  place 
for  several  years.  In  July,  1851,  the  father  became 
an  assistant  in  the  surveying  corps  under  J.  F. 
Ashley,  chief  of  the  corps,  and  aided  in  surveying 
a  portion  of  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad.  His 
death,  which  occurred  in  May,  1886,  was  the  result 
of  an  accident  on  the  railroad  at  Makanda,  111. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  born  in  Smith 


County,  Tenn.,  September  19,  1845,  and  was  a 
child  of  three  years  when  the  famil}'  came  to  Illi- 
nois. He  had  such  schooling  as  could  be  obtained 
in  those  daj's  of  limited  educational  advantages, 
when  the  rude  log  cabin  was  the  onl^'  literary  in- 
stitution of  this  section  of  country,  and  its  doors 
were  opened  to  the  children  only  for  a  few  weeks 
in  the  different  seasons.  Bred  to  the  life  of  a 
railroad  man,  he  was  only  twelve  years  old  when 
he  entered  the  employ  of  the  Illinois  Central  Rail- 
road, and  for  a  number  of  ^ears  was  connected 
with  station  work,  his  i)rincipal  occupation  being 
the  loading  of  fruit  on  the  cars.  For  several  years 
he  was  fencing  foreman  for  the  Illinois  Central 
Railroad,  his  duties  being  to  see  that  fences  were 
kept  in  good  repair  between  certain  points. 

For  a  time  Mr.  Hunter  filled  the  position  of 
station  agent  for  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad  at 
Dubois,  111.,  after  which,  on  the  18th  of  July,  1882, 
he  entered  upon  his  duties  as  agent  for  the  St. 
Louis  Coal  Road  Company,  at  Harrison,  111.,  and 
subsequentl_v  became  station  agent  at  the  same 
point  for  the  Cairo  Sh(Srt  Line  Railwa3'  Company, 
they' having  leased  the  road  and  the  station.  Mr. 
Hunter  is  the  owner  of  eighty  acres  of  valuable 
land  in  thiscounty,  and  is  well  situated  financially, 
his  prosperity  having  been  attained  solely  through 
his  own  exertions. 

May  8,  1864,  Mr.  Hunter  and  Miss  Serena  Cauble 
were  united  in  marriage.  The  latter  was  born  in 
Illinois  and  reared  in  Jackson  County,  where 
her  father,  the  late  Adam  Cauble,  was  a  resident. 
Iler  mother,  whose  maiden  name  was  Priscilla 
Baltzell,  was  three  times  married,  her  first  husband 
being  a  Mr.  Roricks,  the  second  William  Gentrj-, 
and  the  third  Adam  Cauble;  now  the  third  time 
widowed,  she  makes  her  home  with  her  children. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hunter  are  the  parents  of  five  chil- 
dren: John  F.,  Charles  J.,  Walter  S.,  Josephine 
(wife  of  W.  B.  Iloistman,  an  engineer  on  the  Cairo 
Short  Line  Railroad),  and  Dora,  who  married  W.  H. 
Davis. 

Mr.  Hunter  is  a  frank,  open-hearted  man,  gifted 
with  energy  and  stability  of  character.  His  public 
spirit  is  well  known,  and  every  enterprise  that  will 
in  anj'  way  promote  the  best  interests  of  the  town- 
ship is  sure  to  meet  with  his  cordial  approval  an<Ji 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD, 


805 


sulislantial  support.  In  his  political  afflliations  he 
is  actively  identified  with  the  Democratic  part}'. 
As  Director  of  Schools,  he  has  displayed  great  in- 
terest in  the  educational  advancement  of  the  com- 
munity, and  has  contributed  in  every  way  to  se- 
cure this  desired  result.  In  matters  of  religion,  he 
is  a  Baptist.  Socially  he  holds  membership  with 
Mt.  Carbon  Lodge  No.  43 1,  I.  0.  O.  F.,  at  Mur- 
phvsboro. 

• ^^(^=1^ 

SIGMUND  BRINKMAN,  of  the  firm  of  S. 
&  W.  Brinkman,  contractors  and  build- 
ers in  Chester,  is  a  native  of  this  city, 
where  his  birth  occurred  August  20,  1858. 
His  parents,  Frederick  and  Margaret  (Kipp)  Brink- 
man,  were  natives  of  Germany,  and  came  to  the 
United  Statesin  1848.  Landing  in  New  Orleans, 
they  made  their  waj'  up  the  Mississippi  River  to 
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  thence  a  few  years  later  came 
to  Chester,  where^thev  made  a  permanent  location. 
Frederick  Brinkman  was  a  builder  and  contractor 
by  occupation,  which  business  he  carried  on  witii 
great  success  until  his  decease,  which  occurred  in 
this  city  in  1885.  His  good  wife,  who  still  sur- 
vives, is  now  (1894)  in  her  seventy-fourth  year 
and  makes  lier  home  in  Cliester. 

Our  subject  is  the  youngest  in  the  parental  fam- 
ily of  seven  cliildreu,  only  three  of  whom  are  liv- 
ing: William,  Ileniy  and  Sigmund.  Edward  Brink- 
man  wasdrowned  in  Appletou  Creek,  at  Appleton, 
Mo.,  when  in  his  twentj'-fifth  year.  Our  subject 
first  attended  the  Lutlieran  school,  and  afterward 
continued  his  studies  in  the  public  schools  of  this 
city.  After  completing  his  education, and  desirous 
of  making  his  own  way  in  the  world,  he  learned  the 
cari)entei's  trade  under  liis  fatlier,  ami  continued  to 
work  with  him  until  the  death  of  the  latter.  Suc- 
ceeding to  his  father's  business,  our  subject  in  1881 
formed  a  partnership  with  F.  William  Brinkman, 
and  together  they  have  erected  some  of  the  finest 
buildings  in  the  county,  among  which  are  tlie 
(irand  View  Hotel  and  the  bank  block  of  Speakman 
&  Co.,  in  this  city. 

The  marriage  of  Mr.  Brinkman  willi  Miss  Laura 
Colbert  occurred  August  24,  1880.  Mrs.  Brink- 
man  was  born  in  Kaskaskia  County  in  .September, 


1859,  and  is  a  daughter  of  George  and  Louise 
(Bertel)  Colbert.  Their  union  has  been  blessed  by 
the  birth  of  seven  children,  Rnth,  Mabel,  Ada, 
Laura,  Sigmund,  Clara  and  Bertram.  By  all  who 
know  him, our  subject  is  honored  for  his  fine  char- 
acter and  business  ability'  and  is  well  liked  by  rea- 
son of  his  pleasing  qualities.  His  good  wife,  who 
is  a  member  of  St.  Johu's  Lutheran  Church,  is  a 
very  devoted  Christian  woman.  Mr.  Brinkman 
likewise  holds  membership  with  that  denomination. 
He  is  somewhat  active  in  the  political  affairs  of 
his  vicinity,  working  with  the  Democratic  party. 
He  has  served  his  fellow-citizens  in  various  capa- 
cities, and  in  1893  was  elected  Alderman  of  the 
Third  Ward. 

Frederick  Brinkman,  the  father  of  otir  subject, 
invented  the  steam  dium  washer,  obtaining  the 
patent  on  the  same  after  coming  to  the  United 
States.  He  was  a  very  earnest  worker  in  the  Lu- 
theran Church  and  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the 
congregation  in  Chester,  to  which  he  was  a  liberal 
contributoi'.  In  politics  he  was  rather  conserva- 
tive, but  always  active,  and  for  three  terms  was 
Alderman  of  the  Third  Ward  of  this  city. 


Cl^-  ERMAN  C.  SASSE,  a  progressive  farmer  of 
Ji  Randolph  County,  cultivates  a  tract  of 
three  hundred  and  thirty-seven  acres  situ- 
v(^;  ated  (m  section  7,  township  7,  range  5.  A 
native  of  St.  Louis,  ]\Io.,  he  was  born  December 
10,  1853,  to  Adolpli  II.  and  Can. Hue  (Wolter) 
Sassc,  natives  of  Haverla  and  Klein  Elba,  respec- 
tivel}',  in  the  province  of  Hanover,  German j'. 
The  i)arents  were  born  in  the  year  1820,  the  father 
on  the  20th  of  Februar}',  and  the  mother  on  the 
6th  of  December.  About  the  year  1846  the}-  were 
married  in  Haverla,  and  there  resided  until  the  fall 
of  1851.  Leaving  Bremerliaven  after  a  voyage 
of  sixty-four  days,  they  landed  in  New  Orleans 
and  proceeded  immediately  to  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
where  they  resided  about  five  years. 

In  the  year  1857,  accompanied  by  his  family, 
Mr.  Sasse  removed  to  the  farm  where  his  son,  Her- 
man C,  now  resided.  Here  he  made  his  home  un- 
til his  death,  which  occurred  July  12,    1878.     The 


806 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


mother  is  still  living,  and  makes  her  home  with 
her  son.  Of  seven  children  born  to  this  couple, 
our  subject  is  the  only  one  wlio  survives.  On  the 
18th  of  May,  1876,  Mr.  Sasse  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Caroline,  daughter  of  Peter  and 
Mary  (Oelman)  Gifhorn,  natives  of  the  villages  of 
Lobmachtersen  and  Gebhardshagen,  in  the  province 
of  Brunswick,  Germany.  They  were  born  March 
20,  1816,  and  April  3,  1821,  respectively.  Their 
marriage  occurred  in  1850,  and  in  January  of 
1852  they  emigrated  to  America,  landing  in  New 
Orleans,  and  going  thence  direct  to  St.  Louis. 
There  they  resided  until  April,  1876,  when  they 
came  to  Wine  Hill,  111.,  and  this  has  since  been 
their  home. 

Mrs.  Sasse,  the  second  and  only  survivor  of  two 
daughters,  was  born  April  28,  1854,  and  by  her 
union  has  become  the  mother  of  seven  children, 
six  of  whom  are  now  living.  They  are,  Freda  M., 
Adolph  P.,  Herman  J.,  Emma  W.,  Martha  T.  and 
Walter  C.  Louisa  M.  died  in  infancy.  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Sasse,  together  with  their  familj',  are  members 
of  St.  Paul's  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church  of 
Wine  Hill,  over  which  the  Rev.  C.  F.  Liebe  pre- 
sides. They  are  respected  by  a  wide  circle  of 
friends,  and  move  in  the  best  social  circles  of  the 
count}'. 

In  politics,  Mr.  Sasse  is  a  Democrat,  and  has 
affiliated  with  that  party  ever  since  attaining  liis 
majorit}'.  He  gives  the  party  candidates  and 
principles  iiis  earnest  support.  For  four  years  he 
has  served  as  Constable,  after  having  served  a 
year  in  tiie  same  position  b}'  appointment.  For 
three  3'ears  he  was  Road  Commissioner,  and  for 
the  same  period  served  as  Director  of  district 
schools.  For  the  past  six  years  he  has  been  a 
member  of  the  County  Central  Committee  of  his 
political  party.  In  addition  to  his  fanning  opera- 
tions, he  holds  twenty-tive  shares  in  the  Welga 
Creamery  Company,  of  which  he  is  Secretary.  He 
is  a  Director  of  the  Randolph  County  Mutual  In- 
surance Company,  an  organization  of  the  farmers 
for  protection  against  tire,  tornadoes,  lightning, 
etc.,  the  policies  of  which  amount  to  more  tiian  a 
million  dollars.  For  six  years  Mr.  Sasse  was  Trus- 
tee of  St.  Paul's  Lutheran  Church,  in  which  he 
is  a  prominent  worker.     He  is  true  to  every  public 


and  private  trust  reposed  in  him,  and  has  led  an 
honorable  life.  Charitable  and  benevolent,  the 
needy  and  distressed  find  in  him  a  friend,  and 
every  worthy  enterprise  receives  his  support. 

PW.  MOORE,  a  prominent  young  railroad 
man,  who  is  now  M.ister  of  Transportation 
/I — "^  of  the  St.  Louis  Division  of  the  Mobile  ck 
Ohio  Railroad  at  Murph^'sboro,  has  been  connected 
with  this  road  since  May,  1879,  and  his  continuance 
therewith  indicates  a  faithful  and  ellicieut  service. 
As  he  has  man}'  friends  throughout  this  commu- 
nit}',  we  feel  assured  that  the  record  of  his  life 
will  prove  of  interest  to  man}-  of  our  readers.  A 
native  of  Iowa,  he  was  born  in  Keokuk,  August 
7,  1859,  and  is  one  in  a  family  of  five  sons  and 
two  daughters,  though  only  two  of  the  number 
are  now  living.  The  parents  were  P.  W.  and 
Ellen  (Dunn)  Moore.  Both  were  natives  of  Ire- 
land. When  a  young  man  the  father  crossed  the 
Atlantic,  locating  in  Keokuk,  Iowa,  where  he  was 
placed  in  charge  of  the  transfer  department.  He 
also  served  us  County  Jailer  for  some  3'ears,  and 
died  while  filling  that  office.  His  wife  also  passed 
away  in  Keokuk. 

In  the  city  of  his  birth  E.  W.  Moore  was  reared, 
and  in  its  public  schools  was  educated.  At  the 
age  of  fifteen  he  became  brakeman  on  the  con- 
struction train  of  the  Des  Moines  Valle}'  Railroad, 
between  Keokuk  and  Des  Moines,  and  was  thus 
employed  until  1879.  He  then  served  for  two 
years  as  brakeman  on  the  Cairo  ife  St.  Louis,  a 
narrow  gauge  road,  after  which  he  was  made  con- 
ductor on  a  passenger  train  running  between  St. 
Louis  and  Cairo.  He  served  for  seven  years  in 
that  position,  until  in  October,  1890,  he  was  pro- 
moted, becoming  Master  of  Transportation.  He 
now  has  charge  of  all  trains  on  the  St.  Louis  Di- 
vision of  the  Mobile  i  Ohio  Road.  It  is  a  re- 
sponsible position,  but  it  is  capabl}'  and  efficiently 
filled. 

In  1 886  a  marriage  ceremony  was  performed 
in  St.  Louis  which  united  the  destinies  of  Mr. 
Moore  and  Miss  Ella  Wilson,  a  native  of  Cape 
Girardeau,  Mo.     They  make  their  home  in    Mur- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


807 


pli\sboro  and  are  well  known  people  of  the  com- 
munitj-.  In  politics  Mr.  Moore  is  a  Democrat,  but 
has  had  neither  time  nor  inclination  for  public 
office.  During  all  the  time  that  he  was  on  the 
road  as  brakeman  or  conductor  there  was  not  a 
single  passenger  in  his  charge  injured.  The  same 
painstaking  care  which  then  characterized  his  la- 
bors is  3'et  seen,  and  it  proved  an  important  factor 
in  his  promotion. 


^P"  NDREW  CLYDE,  proprietor  of  the  Clyde 
1@/4JI|  Hotel,  at  Percy,  is  a  man  widely  known 
li)  in  this  community  and  he  iiiis  the  high  re- 
gard of  all  with  whom  he  has  been  brought 
in  contact.  We  tlierefore  feel  assured  tiiat  the 
record  of  his  life  will  prove  of  interest  to  our 
readers  and  gladly  gives  it  a  place  in  this  volume. 
A  native  of  Sc-otland,  he  was  born  at  New  Battle, 
near  Edinburgh,  on  the  28th  of  July,  1851.  His 
parents,  Andrew  and  Jessie  (Rathby)  Cl3'de,  were 
also  natives  of  Scotland.  The  father  was  a  butcher 
and  cattle  dealer  in  his  native  land  and  carried  on 
that  business  for  a  number  of  years,  but  is  now 
living  a  retired  life.  The  mother  also  survives, 
and  has  reached  a  ripe  old  age. 

In  his  native  land  Andrew  Clyde  attended  the 
public  schools  until  fourteen  years  of  age,  when  he 
began  working  with  his  brother  Hugh,  a  cattle 
dealer,  with  whom  he  continued  for  two  years.  In 
1869  he  sailed  for  America.  He  was  then  a  j'oiing 
man  of  eighteen  3-ears  and  had  resolved  to  seek  a 
home  .and  fortune  bej'ond  the  Atlantic,  for  he  be- 
lieved that  better  opportunities  and  privileges 
were  afforded  in  the  New  World  than  in  the 
older  countries  of  Europe.  He  first  went  to  Mis- 
sissippi, where  an  elder  brotlier,  George,  lived 
upon  a  plantation,  and  there  remained  for  one 
year. 

Not  liking  the  country,  however,  Mr.  Clyde 
started  northward,  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  after 
spending  a  number  of  j'ears  in  the  west,  he  came 
to  southern  Illinois.  Here  he  turned  his  atten- 
tion to  coal  mining,  which  he  followed  for  a 
number  of  j'ears.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  j^ear 
1888    lie    embarked    in    the  retail  liquor  business 


at  Sparta,  where  he  remained  for  some  time,  and 
then  came  to  Percy,  111.,  where  he  entered  the 
hotel  business.  To  this  work  he  now  devotes  his 
energies,  being  proprietor  of  the  Clyde  Hotel, 
which  is  widely  and  favorabU'  known  throughout 
southern  Illinois  and  Missouri.  From  the  travel- 
ing public  he  receives  a  liberal  patronage,  for  he 
carefully  looks  after  the  interests  and  comfort  of 
his  guests. 

In  1881  W.1S  celebrated  the  marriage  of  Mr. 
Clyde  and  Miss  Ilattie,  daughter  of  Thomas  B. 
and  Margaret  Edwards,  of  Beaucoup,  Washington 
Countj-,  III.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Clyde  are  prominent 
and  well  known  people  of  the  community  and  have 
many  friends  in  this  neighborhood.  He  was  reared 
in  the  faith  of  the  Presb3-terian  Church,  but  is  not 
now  identified  with  anj-  religious  org^iization. 
Socially  he  is  a  member  of  Peebles  Kilwinning 
Lodge  No.  24,  of  Peebles,  Scotland,  and  is  a  Mas- 
ter Mason.  In  support  of  party  principles  he  is  a 
pronounced  Republican,  but  in  local  elections 
where  no  issue  is  before  the  people  he  supports  the 
man  whom  he  thinks  best  qualified  to  discharge 
the  duties  of  the  olBce,  regardless  of  party  affil- 
iations. 

In  former  vears  Mr.  Clyde  was  an  enthusiastic 
sportsman  and  made  frequent  excursions  with  gun 
and  dog  in  quest  of  game.  In  1878  he  was  awarded 
a  fine  gold  medal,  the  prize  offered  the  best  trap 
shot  at  the  Belleville  (111.)  contest.  In  his  business 
career  he  has  met  with  success,  as  the  result  of  his 
own  well  directed  efforts.  His  determination  to 
seek   a   home   in   America  has  proved  a  fortunate 


:£^K^ 


^iHOJIAS  TUDOR,  residing  on  section  30, 
townshi])  7,  range  5,  Randolph  County, 
owns  and  operates  a  farm  of  one  hundred 
and  fifty-six  .icres.  He  is  a  son  of  Thomas  and 
Elizabeth  Tudor,  natives  of  Shropshire,  England, 
the  former  having  been  born  August  7,  1789.  Mar- 
ried in  their  native  country,  they  removed  in 
1827  to  Paris,  France.  Prior  to  their  removal 
thej-  had  become  the  parents  of  the  following  chil- 
dren: Elizabeth,  Samuel,  William  and  Maiy.  John 
was  born  in  Paris.   France;  Harriet  first  saw   the 


808 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


light  of  da_v  on  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  her  birth  hav- 
ing occurretl  during  tiie  voj'age  of  the  fainil^^  to 
this  country-;  and  Thomas  was  born  in  Rockland 
County,  N.  Y.,  March  23,  1835. 

Three  of  the  family  are  still  living:  Elizabeth, 
widow  of  Thomas  Fulford,  of  Randolph  County; 
John,  also  a  resident  of  this  county;  and  Thomas. 
He  remained  with  his  father  until  the  death  of 
the  latter,  in  1851,  and  the  mother  also  passed 
away  during  that  year.  By  will  the  home  farm 
became  the  property  of  Thomas,  who  has  contin- 
ued to  reside  here  since  his  father  settled  upon  the 
place  in  1851.  While  living  in  New  York,  he  was 
a  pupil  in  the  public  schools,  and  to  the  knowledge 
there  gained,  has  since  added  by  reading  and  ob- 
servation until   he  is  now  a  well  informed  man. 

On  th#14th  of  November,  1854,  Mr.  Tudor  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Sarah  J.  Clifford, 
who  was  born  in  Beaver  Countj-,  Pa.,  August  8, 
1833.  The  parents  of  Mrs.  Tudor,  Cunigam  and 
Sarah  (Galbraith)  Clifford,  were  natives  of  Penn- 
sjivania,  who  in  1854  came  to  Illinois  and  located 
in  Randolph  County.  The  father  passed  away 
January  ■22,  1866,  and  the  mother,  Januar}'  29 
of  the  same  year.  Of  their  eleven  children,  only 
two  are  now  living:  Mrs.  Tudor  and  Eliza,  the 
latter  being  the  widow  of  WillLam  Conner,  and  a 
resident  of  Missouri.  Mrs.  Tudor  accompanied 
her  parents  to  Illinois  in  1854,  and  remained  with 
them  until  her  marriage.  She  has  been  the  mother 
of  four  children,  three  yet  living:  Eliza  C,  Savan- 
nah and  Leon.  Eliza  C.  is  the  wife  of  Henry  Wal- 
termate,  and  resides  in  Dakota.  The  others  are  at 
home.  They  have  received  excellent  educations 
in  the  public  schools,  and  are  intelligent  and  well 
informed. 

In  the  prosecution  of  his  chosen  calling,  that  of 
agriculture,  Mr.  Tudor  has  been  very  successful, 
and  through  good  management  has  accumulated  a 
sutlicient  amount  of  properly  to  enable  him  to 
live  somewhat  retired  from  active  labors.  How- 
ever, though  not  compelled  to  toil  so  incessantly 
as  in  the  past,  he  still  superintends  the  farm,  and 
finds  his  time  fully  occupied  in  managing  the 
many  details  connected  with  farm  work.  Politi- 
cally, he  is  a  Republican,  and  gives  that  party  the 
support  of  his  intluence  and   ballot.     He  and   his 


wife  are  members  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  to 
which  their  respective  parents  also  belonged,  and 
the}'  attend  services  at  the  Ebenezer  Church  in 
township  7,  range  5. 


•s-***" 


(»  jfe  S.  ROBERTS,  City  Treasurer  of  Murphys- 
\/\/l  boro,  and  a  prominent  merchant  of  this 
^^\ff  place,  was  born  in  Alma,  111.,  March  4, 
1866.  His  grandfather,  John  Roberts,  was  a  miner 
in  Wales,  whence  he  emigrated  with  his  family  to 
the  United  States,  landing  in  New  Orleans  and 
proceeding  from  there  to  St.  Louis.  Crossing  the 
Mississippi  to  Illinois,  he  opened  a  mine  at  Casey- 
ville.  Later  he  was  seized  with  the  western  fever, 
and  went  to  Salt  Lake  City  with  the  intention  of 
locating  there  or  at  some  other  favorable  point, 
but  a  little  of  life  there  was  suflicient  for  himself 
and  family,  and  they  returned  to  Illinois.  The 
long  jouiney  had  been  made  by  ox-teams.  Later 
Grandfather  Roberts  engaged  in  farming  in  Casey- 
ville,  where  his  death  occurred;  his  remains  were 
interred  at  CoUinsville. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  Albert  Roberts,  was 
born  in  AVales  and  was  reared  in  St.  Clair  County, 
111.,  where  he  engaged  in  raining  from  boyhood.  In 
1875  he  came  to  Murph^ysboro  as  Superintendent 
of  the  Gartside  Coal  Company.  By  the  unex- 
pected letting  down  of  a  cage  in  a  mine  he  was  so 
injured  that  paralysis  resulted,  and  he  remained 
an  invalid  until  his  death,  in  1887,  at  fiftj'-three 
years  of  age.  His  wife,  whose  maiden  name  was 
Margaret  Evans,  was  born  in  Wales,  and  is  now  a 
resident  of  Murphysboro.  In  the  Methodist  Epis- 
opal  Church  she  is  an  active  worker  and  is  a  ladj' 
of  sincere  Christian  character  and  amiable  disposi- 
tion. Her  father,  Richard  Evans,  emigrated  from 
Wales  to  America  and  died  in  Illinois. 

In  the  parental  family  there  were  thirteen  chil- 
dren, of  whom  six  attained  mature  3'ears.  Our 
subject,  who  was  the  fourth  in  order  of  birth,  re- 
moved from  Alma  to  Murphysboro  at  the  age  of 
eleven  years,  and  was  a  student  in  the  common 
schools  at  this  place.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  years 
he  became  an  employe  in  a  dry-goods  store,  re- 
maining in  that  position  for  six  years  and  spend- 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


809 


ing  a  like  period  with  C.  C.  Smith,  who  succeeded 
the  former  owner  of  tlie  estahlisliment.  After  Mr. 
Smith's  death,  in  November,  1892,  our  subject  and 
Mr.  Sliarpe  were  appointed  administrators  of  the 
estate,  and  these  two  gentlemen  in  1893  purchased 
the  stock  and  liave  since  continued  in  business. 
They  occupy  a  store  on  the  corner  of  Main  and 
Chestnut  Streets,  24x80  feet  in  dimensions,  and 
carry  a  complete  assortment  of  dry  goods,  shoes, 
carpets,  etc. 

In  1893  Mr.  Roberts  married  Anna  D.  Hay,  who 
was  born  in  Virginia  and  removed  with  her  father, 
William  D.  Ha^',  to  Leavenworth,  Kan.,  where  her 
marriage  occurred.  In  the  spring  of  1893  Mr. 
Roberts  was  nominated  and  elected  City  Treasurer 
on  the  Republican  ticket  for  a  term  of  two  years. 
He  has  ever  Ijeen  a  stalwart  supporter  of  the  Re- 
publican partj'  and  an  active  worker  in  its  ranks. 
Socially,  he  is  identified  with  the  Uniformed  Rank, 
K.  P.,  and  has  held  tlie  various  chairs  of  that  fra- 
ternity. 

^^ONRAD  WOLTER,  a  farmer  residing  on 
(I  section  4,  township   7,   range  5,   is    one  of 

'^^J'/  the  extensive  land  owners  of  Randolph 
County,  his  possessions  including  the  home  farm 
of  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres,  also  one  hundred 
and  sixty  acres  on  section  5,  township  7,  range  5, 
and  ninety-four  acres  elsewhere  in  this  county. 
The  success  which  has  resulted  from  Mr.  Wolter's 
efforts  and  the  high  position  he  now  occupies 
among  the  agriculturists  of  the  county  are  due  to 
his  untiring  energy,  indomitable  perseverance  and 
undoubted  honesty.  Beginning  in  life  without 
capital,  he  has  steadily  worked  his  way  upward 
until  he  is  now  numbered  among  the" substantial 
and  prosperous  citizens  of  his  locality. 

Born  in  Hanover,  Germany,  February  11,  1839, 
the  subject  of  this  sketch  is  the  son  of  Conrad 
and  AVilhelmcua  (Ilandlemann)  Wolter,  who  were 
born,  reared  and  married  in  Hanover.  Thence 
in  1852  they  emigrated  to  the  United  States  and 
settled  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  they  made  a  short 
sojourn.  Afterward  coming  to  Randolph  Coun- 
ty,   they    purchased    forty  acres   in    township    7, 


range  5,  where  the  father  engaged  in  farming  dur- 
ing the  remainder  of  his  life.  In  the  parental 
family  there  were  seven  children,  of  whom  the 
following  survive:  Conrad;  Christina,  now  Mrs. 
Werre,  of  Wine  Hill;  William  W.;  and  Lena  Car- 
oline, wife  of  John  Alwant,  of  this  county.  Three 
children  died  when  small.  The  mother  of  this 
family  died  in  October,  1870;  the  father  sur- 
vived a  number  of  years,  passing  away  March  11, 
1884. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  remained  with  his 
parents  until  his  marriage,  which  occurred  May 
23,  1862.  He  was  then  united  with  Miss  Louisa 
Dettmer,  who  was  born  in  Hanover  September  13, 
1839,  and  came  here  when  a  child  of  seven  or 
eight  years.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Frederick 
and  Maiy  (Mina)  Dettmer.  Of  this  union,  nine 
children  were  born,  five  yet  living,  as  follows: 
Herman,  Soiihia,  Martin,  Annie  and  Lena.  Louisa 
died  February  7,  1894,  at  the  age  of  fifteen  years. 
The  other  three  died  young. 

After  the  death  of  his  first  wife,  Mr.  Wolter 
was  a  second  time  united  in  marriage,  on  the  31st 
of  August,  1884,  choosing  as  his  companion  Miss 
Caroline  Cassel,  who  was  born  in  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
December  31,  1850.  Mrs.  Wolter  is  a  daugh- 
ter of  Conrad  and  Rachel  (Handermann)  Cassel, 
natives  respectively  of  Brunswick  and  Hanover, 
Germany.  The  father  came  to  the  United  States 
in  1845,  and  the  mother  two  years  later;  they 
were  married  in  St.  Louis  March  14,  1850.  Mr. 
Cassel  passed  away  July  6,  1882,  while  his  wife 
die'd  on  the  22d  of  April,  1888.  Three  children 
have  been  born  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wolter:  Lydia, 
Hulda  and  Florence. 

Beginning  as  a  farmer  with  a  tract  of  forty 
acres,  Mr.  Wolter  added  to  his  property  from  time 
to  time  until  he  is  now  the  owner  of  four  hun- 
dred and  fourteen  acres.  He  has  no  reason  to  re- 
gret having  come  to  America,  for  success  has 
rewarded  his  efforts  here  and  he  is  numbered 
among  the  large  land  owners  of  Randolph  County. 
Politicall3',  he  votes  with  the  Democratic  party, 
and  is  active  in  its  ranks.  For  sixteen  consecu- 
tive years  he  served  as  Constable.  He  and  his 
wife  are  members  of  the  Evangelical  Church  at 
Wine  Hill,  with  which  the  children  are  also  iden- 


810 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


tified.  They  are  numbered  among  the  best  people 
of  the  county,  where  the^'  are  prominent  in  re- 
ligious and  social  circles  and  are  held  in  high 
esteem. 


+= 


=+ 


ellARLES  G.  GRIZZELL,  M.  D.,  of  Ver- 
erennes,  was  l)orn  November  3,  1859,  in 
Kenton  Country,  Ky.,  and  in  the  usual  man- 
ner of  farmer  lads  was  reared  to  manhood.  His 
father,  Andrew  J.  Grizzell,  was  a  native  of  the 
same  county,  and  was  born  July  30,  1815.  The 
grandparents,  Solomon  and  Nancy  (Cogle)  Griz- 
zell, were  natives  of  Virginia  and  Kentucky  re- 
spectively. The  former  left  his  native  state  at  tlie 
age  of  twenty-one  j'ears,  purchasing  land  in  Ken- 
tuck}',  where  in  the  midst  of  the  forest  he  hewed 
out  a  farm.  In  the  family  were  eight  children:  Eliz- 
abeth, wife  of  Robert  Marshall;  William,  Andrew, 
Benjamin;  Harriet,  wife  of  John  Kleet;  Martha 
Ann,  wife  of  Willi:im  Ware;  Nancy  Ann,  the  sec- 
ond wife  of  William  AVare;  and  Elam.  The  father 
of  this  family  died  in  Kenton  County,  K3'.,  in 
1856.  His  wife  passed  away  when  their  son  An- 
drew was  only  five  years  of  age.  They  belonged 
to  the  Baptist  Church,  in  which  Mr.  Grizzell  served 
as  Deacon.  In  politics  he  was  a  Democrat  and  a 
follower  of  Andrew  Jackson. 

At  the  age  of  twenty-two  the  father  ofour  sub- 
ject left  home  and  married  Catherine  .Stephens, 
the  union  being  celebrated  in  Kenton  County, 
August  3,  1837.  He  then  engaged  in  fanning 
near  the  old  homestead,  and  when  his  father  became 
afflicted  with  palsy  he  took  charge  of  the  home 
farm,  which  he  continued  to  operate  until  the 
death  of  his  father.  Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Grizzell 
were  born  the  following  children :  Leonard  S., 
Thomas  J.;  Harriet  Ann,  wife  of  Leander  Dameron; 
George  W.,  Benton;  Eliza  Jane,  wife  of  Henr^'  Den- 
nis; William  H.;  Nancy,  wife  of  George  Butcher; 
Mary  F.,  wife  of  William  Pittsford;  James  B., 
Charles  C.  and  Edward  J.  The  mother  of  this 
family  died  January  14,  1890,  and  her  loss  was 
deeply  mourned  by  all  who  knew  her. 

Mr.  Grizzell  continued  to  carry  on  farming  in 
Kentucky  until  March,  1861,  when  he  came  with 
his  family  to  Ora  Township,  where  he  cleared  and 


developed  a  farm  of  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres, 
transforming  the  hitherto  heavy  timber  into  richly 
cultivated  fields.  He  there  made  his  home  until 
1883,  when  he  removed  with  his  family  to  Ava. 
On  the  death  of  his  wife,  the  old  home  was  broken 
up,  and  he  has  since  resided  vvith  his  children. 
He  has  long  been  a  faithful  member  of  the  Baptist 
Church,  to  which  Mrs.  Grizzell  also  belonged,  and 
for  twenty-five  years  has  served  as  Deacon.  In 
politics  he  has  been  an  ardent  advocate  of  the 
Democracy.  His  life  has  been  on  honorable  and 
upright  one,  well  worthy  of  emulation,  .and  it  is 
with  pleasure  that  we  present  to  our  readers  this 
record  of  his  career. 

Charles  C.  Grizzell,  whose  name  heads  this 
sketch,  attended  the  common  schools,  and  later 
was  a  student  in  the  normal  school  of  Murphys- 
boro  and  also  of  Ava.  His  education  was  com- 
pleted in  the  Normal  University  of  Carbondale, 
.and  he  then  engaged  in  teaching  for  eight  terms 
in  J.ackson  C'ounty  and  one  term  in  Randolph 
County,  after  which  he  took  up  the  study  of  med- 
icine with  Dr.  Davis,  in  Ava,  continuing  his  read- 
ing under  the  direction  of  that  gentleman  for 
about  three  _years.  He  was  a  student  in  the  Mis- 
souri Medical  College  for  two  terras,  and  was  grad- 
uated therefrom  March  5,  1889.  On  the  15th  of 
May  he  opened  an  office  in  Vergennes,  and  has 
here  acquired  a  large  and  lucrative  practice  in 
medicine  and  surgery.  He  gives  special  attention 
to  the  diseases  of  the  eye  .and  ear,  and  expects  to 
continue  his  studies  much  further  along  those 
lines.  He  belongs  to  the  Southern  Illinois  Medi- 
cal Society,  and  also  to  the  Jackson  County  Medical 
Society. 

On  the  23d  of  May,  1888,  Dr.  Grizzell  married 
Ida  M.  Walker,  of  De  Soto,  daughter  of  Franklin 
II.  Walker;  and  a  niece  of  Mrs.  Dr.  Davis,  of  Ava. 
Their  union  was  blessed  with  three  children.  Beu- 
lah,  who  was  born  Ma}'  8,  1890,  died  on  the  25th 
of  June  the  same  year;  Roy  A.  was  born  Novem- 
ber 2G,  1891;  and  Alves  W.  w.as  born  November 
10,  1893.  The  Doctor  and  his  wife  are  Presbyte- 
rians in  religious  belief,  and  take  an  active  interest 
in  chuich  and  benevolent  work.  He  is  a  member 
of  the  Masonic  and  Odd  Fellows'  societies  of  Ver- 
gennes, and  in  the  latter  has  served  as  Past  Grand 


-  .rr,^^RAJi±.^ 


'm-''% 


m 


RLSIDENCE    C^    J      G      RUPCH      SURVEY    2IG     KA5KA5K1A,     RANDOLPH  CO      ILL 


,  >^i-:,5.l,4^<^*S;>.^.; 


fcKfcfc^^ity  *tiCX'  J   t" 


,:J^.'*«-' 


sfei 


Ij9 


llMilltlitlfe  -  ""^  '^^ 


RESIDENCE    OF    DR.  C  .  C  .  GRl  ZZELL,       V  ERGEN  N  E5  ,,  J  ACK50N    CO, ,  1  LL  . 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


813 


and  Deputy  Grand  Master.  He  and  his  wife  are 
both  members  of  the  Rebecca  Lodge.  In  politics 
he  is  a  liberal  Democrat.  Among  bis  professional 
brethren,  Dr.  Grizzell  has  won  an  enviable  repu- 
tation, and  by  the  people  of  this  community  he  is 
regarded  as  a  skilled  and  able  physician,  in  whom 
they  have  great  confidence. 


+= 


=-f 


WIOSHUA  G.  BURCH.  This  venerable  gen- 
tleman is  distinguished  in  the  anuals  of 
Randolph  County  as  one  of  its  early  resi- 
dents, and  here  his  declining  years 'are  being 
quietl}'  p.asscd  in  a  comfortable  home  in  the  en- 
joyment of  the  companionship  of  his  faitliful 
wife.  He  is  a  native  of  Kentucky,  having  been 
born  near  Bardstown,  Nelson  County,  November 
1.5,  1815,  and  is  the  eldest  and  only  survivor  of 
the  ten  children  born  to  his  parents.  The  latter 
were  .Tohn  Hanson  and  Nancy  (Greenwell)  Burch, 
both  natives  of  Maryland.  Walter  Burch,  the 
grandfatlier  of  our  subject,  was  born  in  London, 
pjUgland,  coming  to  America  during  the  Colonial 
period.  Born  a  Protestant,  on  his  marriage  in 
London  with  an  Irish  maiden  named  Hagen,  he 
was  converted  by  her  to  the  Catholic  faith,  in 
whicli  the  family  has  continued  since. 

The  father  of  our  subject  was  born  in  1782, 
and  w.as  only  a  child  when  his  father  removed 
from  Maryland  to  Kentucky.  His  wife,  the  mother 
of  our  subject,  was  Jliss  Nancy  A.,  daughter  of 
Joshua  antl  Elizabeth  (Holton)  Greenwell,  both 
probably  of  Scottish  origin.  Our  subject  spent 
his  boyhood  daj's  in  his  native  county,  and  was 
given  only  five  months' schooling,  attending  what 
was  known  as  a  subscription  school.  His  parents, 
however,  supplemented  the  meagre  knowledge 
gained  therein  b^^  teaching  him  at  home.  He  is 
unusally  apt  in  mathematics.  A  few  ^-ears  ago, 
by  the  aid  of  a  level  which  lie  invented,  he  de- 
termined the  difference  of  the  height  of  water  be- 
tween the  Mississippi  and  Okaw  Rivers.  He  pre- 
dicted many  years  ago  that  the  former  river  would 
overflow  into  the  latter  at  Kaskaskia,  and  endeav- 
ored to  have  leading  Missourians  urge  their  mem- 


bers of  Congress  to  cut  across  the  "Oxbow,"  and 
in  this  way  protect  the  Illinois  farms.  His  en- 
deavors onl}'  provoked  their  derision,  but  his  pre- 
diction that  he  would  cross  over  to  the  Missouri 
side  diyshod  to  mill  had  a  strange  fulfillment 
during  the  holidays  of  1893.  St.  Mary's  is  now 
almost  an  inland  town,  and  a  part  of  Illinois  is 
on  the  west  side  of  tiie  river. 

AVlien  twenty-five  years  of  age,  our  subject  left 
his  native  state,  and  coming  to  Illinois,  located 
in  Horse  Prairie,  this  county,  which  is  now  the  site 
of  Red  Bud.  There  he  purchased  a  farm  of  one 
hundred  and  sixty  acres,  which  he  improved  and 
made  his  abiding  place  until  1847,  when  he  moved 
down  into  the  Kaskaskia  Bottoms  and  rented 
property  for  some  four  years.  At  the  end  of  that 
time,  having  sold  his  farm  on  the  prairie,  he  pur- 
chased the  old  Morrison  estate  from  Col.  Don 
Murray  and  Robert  Morrison,  sons  of  the  former 
owner.  To  tiiis  he  added  from  time  to  time  until 
he  possessed  about  nine  hundred  acres  of  the  rich- 
est land  to  be  found  in  the  state.  He  lost  about 
four  hundred  acres  of  this  later,  it  being  engulfed 
by  the  river. 

Farming  as  it  is  now  carried  on  seems  to  one  of 
Mr.  Burch's  age  as  though  he  were  in  another 
world.  His  earliest  recollections  of  harvest  are 
of  the  old  reaping  hook,  when  men  cut  an  armful 
at  a  time  and  bound  the  swath  while  walking 
back.  The  invention  of  a  cradle  was  supposed 
to  be  the  acme  of  perfection,  and  such  things  as 
reapers  or  self-binders  seemed  too  much  to  even 
be  dreamed  of.  Mr.  Burch  brought  the  first  reaper 
and  first  wheat  drill  to  this  neighborhood,  and 
was  the  first  to  own  a  thresher,  though  itinerant 
machines  had  been  here  before.  Since  making  his 
first  purchase  of  land  in  Randolph  County,  our 
subject  has  had  to  move  three  times,  owing  to  the 
encroachments  of  the  river.  His  present  home  is 
located  a  mile  and  a-half  from  the  Mississii)pi, 
which  he  hopes  is  a  sufficient  distance  to  prevent 
any  more  "wash-outs." 

Our  subject  has  been  a  life-long  Democrat  in 
politics,  as  were  his  ancestors.  During  the  Rebel- 
lion he  passed  through  many  exciting  adventures 
and  nothing  but  his  iron  nerve  and  unbounded 
courage  saved  him  to  tell  the  tale.  He  was  strongly 


814 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


in  sympathy  with  the  south  and  made  no  attempt 
to  conceal  his  sentiments.  Several  of  the  men 
who  had  plotted  against  his  life  had  been  saved 
from  Hildebrand  mainly  through  the  influence  of 
our  subject,  and  to  repaj'  him  for  his  kindness 
tliey  had  him  reported  at  St.  Louis  as  having 
raised  a  company  to  enter  the  Confederate  serv- 
ice. Consequently  orders  were  issued  to  take 
him  before  the  Provost-Marshal  at  Ste.  Genevieve, 
and  a  detective  named  Ruby  had  arranged  to 
capture  him  at  the  house  of  a  neighbor.  Divin- 
ing their  intention,  Mr.  Burch  feigned  a  desire 
to  have  a  private  conversation  with  Clark,  to 
whose  house  he  was  taken,  that  being  the  head- 
quarters of  Ruby  and  his  men,  and  when  in 
an  inner  room  seized  a  revolver  and  sent  word 
for  them  to  come  and  take  him.  As  a  mat- 
ter of  coui-se,  they  did  not  care  to  do  so  just 
then,  but  b\-  practicing  a  ruse  hoped  to  make  him 
their  prisoner.  Ruby,  the  leader,  promised  our 
subject  that  if  he  would  accompany  them  peace- 
ably he  should  not  be  harmed,  sealing  his  prom- 
ise with  uplifted  hand  and  solemn  oath.  Mr. 
Burch  decided  this  was  the  best  thing  to  be  done, 
and  when  the  party  reached  the  river  it  became 
evident  that  something  was  wrong,  and  the  detec- 
tive called  two  of  his  companions  aside  to  hold  a 
conference.  During  this  time  our  subject,  who 
was  laughing  and  joking  with  the  boatman  as 
though  nothing  was  amiss,  at  the  same  time 
made  arrangements  with  him  that  when  the  mid- 
dle of  the  river  was  reached  the  latter  was  to, 
knock  one  of  the  men  on  the  head  with  an  oar,  while 
our  subject  was  to  throw  the  larger  of  the  two  into 
the  river.  This  was  not  necessary,  however,  as 
the  conversation  disclosed  the  fact  that  his  cap- 
tors were  from  the  same  place  in  Kentucky  as 
Mr.  Burch  and  knew  many  of  his  old  friends. 
Before  the  river  was  crossed  they  became  friends, 
and  the  men  confessed  to  him  that  Ruby's  orders 
were  to  "leave  him  in  the  woods." 

When  brought  before  the  Provost-Marshal,  St. 
Gemme,  the  latter  asked  our  subject's  name, 
and  on  being  told,  exclaimed,  '-Ahl  this  is  Josh 
Burch?  There  are  many  charges  against  you." 
When  asked  wlio  his  accusers  were,  St.  Gemme 
refused  to  tell.     "Then  I'll  tell  you,"  the  prisoner 


replied,  and  he  immediately  recounted  dates  and 
names,  much  to  the  astonishment  of  the  Provost. 
His  way  of  learning  this  was  to  send  a  friend  to 
make  some  report  that  Mr.  Burch  had  himself 
written  out.  Then  they  would  be  told  that  the 
cause  had  been  reported,  and  referring  to  the 
books  would  give  name  and  dates,  which  were 
immediately  reported  to  the  intended  victim.  Mr. 
Buich  acknowledged  that  he  and  his  friends  were 
organized  in  arms,  but  not  for  war  against  the 
Government,  as  was  supposed,  but  to  protect  their 
lives  and  property  from  raiders  on  either  side. 
He  was  then  allowed  to  depart  and  returned  home. 
.Shortly  afterward  St.  Gemme  was  removed  through 
the  influence  of  a  letter  written  b^'  Mr.  Burch  to 
Daniel  Riley,  the  State  Senator  from  this  district, 
in  which  he  set  forth  the  grievances  of  the  people 
and  recounted  the  mysterious  murdei'S  of  a  dozen 
of  his  neighbors.  It  was  with  joy  on  all  sides 
that  his  removal  was  announced.  He  had  been 
exacting  tribute  from  the  people,  requiring  them 
to  purchase  a  permit  to  buy  even  salt.  When  his 
successor,  who  was  an  Irishman,  was  lirst  asked 
such  a  favor,  he  was  very  much  surprised,  and 
asked  in  his  rich  Irish  brogue,  "An' have  ye'es 
money  to  buy  it?"  Being  answered  in  the  affirm- 
ative, he  replied,  "Then  git  it,  and  the  divil  take 
the  mon  who  interferes." 

Mr.  Burch  had  Rub\'  arrested  for  kidnapping 
and  taking  him  without  a  warrant  from  the  state. 
On  being  tried,  he  received  a  sentence  of  six  years 
in  the  penitentiar\'  at  Joliet.  Though  a  south- 
erner in  sentiment,  our  subject  had  no  intention 
of  taking  up  arms,  onl3'  asking  to  be  feft  alone  to 
go  alxjut  his  business.  At  the  time  of  his  kidnap- 
ping he  had  friends  enough  to  have  surrounded 
and  killed  Captain  St.  Gemme  and  all  his  men, 
but  he  did  not  think  the  aflfair  would  prove  seri- 
ous and  did  not  desire  to  cause  more  trouble.  He 
always  gave  aid  to  the  sufifering  on  both  sides, 
and  no  Union  soldier's  destitute  wife  or  children 
were  allowed  to  go  hungiy  from  his  door.  At 
one  time  wheu  a  rabid  Unionist  in  open  meeting 
at  Sparta  was  advocating  hanging  "Old  Burch," 
a  fellow-member  of  the  league  arose  and  remarked 
that  his  own  books  would  show  that  his  friend 
Burcli  had  given  more  aid  to  the  Union  destitutes 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


815 


than  any  other  man,  and  he  would  not  sit  and 
hear  him  denounced. 

Though  many  times  solicited  to  occupy  public 
office,  our  subject  always  refused,  preferring  to 
devote  his  time  and  energy  to  conducting  his 
farm.  Vigorous  and  strong,  in  possession  of  all 
his  faculties  unimpaired,  he  has  nearly  attained 
four-score  years,  and  bids  fair  to  live  to  be  a  cen- 
tury old.  Mr.  Burch  was  married  April  10,  1837, 
to  Bridget,  daughter  of  Roderick  Tewel,  a  native 
of  County'  Galway,  Ireland,  who  came  to  America 
with  his  parents  about  1785,  when  six  years  of 
age, and  located  in  Maryland.  When  about  twenty- 
five  3'ears  of  age  he  went  to  Nelson  County,  Ky., 
where  Mrs.  Burch  was  born.  Of  this  marriage 
there  were  born  seven  children,  of  whom  those 
living  are,  William  R.,  who  is  farming  near  Kas- 
kaskia;  John  H.,  a  resident  of  Ste.  Genevieve, 
Mo.,  who  operates  a  farm  of  eight  hundred  acres 
on  the  Illinois  side;  Ignatius,  making  his  home 
on  a  farm  near  Old  Kaskaskia;  and  Joshua  F., 
who  is  also  conducting  a  farm  near  the  home  of 
his  father. 

Our  subject  was  a  second  time  married,  Septem- 
ber 30,  1877,  his  wife  being  Mrs.  Catherine  Allen, 
daughter  of  William  S.  and  Nancy  (Kelly)  Haines, 
natives  of  Virginia,  and  of  Scotch  and  Irish  de- 
scent respectively.  She  became  the  mother  of  two 
children,  Charles  and  Ross,  who  reside  at  home. 
By  her  first  husband  Mrs.  Burch  had  three  sons, 
William  E.,  George  N.  and  John  S.  (twins);  the 
two  latter  are  living  under  the  parental  roof  and 
assist  in  operating  the  home  farm.  Mrs.  Burch 
was  born  November  9,  184G,  and  first  married 
George  W.  Allen,  who  was  born  November  22. 
1844,  and  died  December  27,  1876.  With  one  of 
her  sons,  who  is  also  Postmaster,  Mrs.  Burch  con- 
ducts a  general  store  at  Dozaville. 


€^ 


^i^  APT.  JOHN  A.  MANN  was  born  near  Chcs- 
(((  „  ter,  111.,  November  8,  1839,  and  died  Jan- 
^^</  uary  4,  1893,  at  his  home  in  Randolph 
County.  During  his  life,  covering  a  period  of  lit- 
tle more  than  a  half-century,  he  was  instrumental 
in  promoting  the  interests  of  the  county  and  the 


welfare  of  the  people,  and  though  now  gone  from 
the  scenes  of  his  former  activities,  he  still  lives  in 
the  memory-  of  the  friends  of  days  gone  by.  His 
business  career  was  a  profitable  and  jarosperous 
one,  and  the  success  he  attained  was  the  result  of 
euerg3'  and  untiring  perseverance. 

The  son  of  Robert  and  Salina  (Balcli)  Mann,  the 
subject  of  this  sketch  was  the  sixth  of  their  family 
of  four  sons  and  three  daughters.  When  in  his 
sixth  year  he  accompanied  his  father  to  a  farm  on 
Mar3''s  River,  and  there  remained  until  about 
thirteen  j'ears  of  age,  at  which  time  the  family 
moved  to  Chester.  There  John  attended^  school 
and  made  his  home  until  the  outbreak  of  the  Civil 
War,  when  he  enlisted  as  a  private  in  Company  I, 
Tenth  Illinois  Infantry.*  During  the  course  of  the 
conflict  he  served  with  valor,  defending  the  Stars 
and  Stripes  with  courage  and  perseverance. 

Having  followed  the  river  a  few  years  before 
the  war,  our  subject  naturally  drifted  back  to  his 
old  occupation  when  discharged  from  the  .service. 
At  various  times  he  occupied  the  positions  of 
Captain,  pilot  and  engineer,  in  all  of  which  he 
was  proficient.  His  last  positions  before  retiring 
from  river  life  were  those  of  Captain  and  pilot  on 
the  feriy  boat  "Belle  of  Chester,"  running  from 
the  city  for  which  it  was  named  to  Claryville,  Mo. 
In  1871,  in  connection  with  his  brother-in-law,  Dr. 
Davis,  the  Captain  purchased  a  drug  store  in 
Steeleville,  111.,  which  they  conducted  for  the  five 
succeeding  years.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time. 
Captain  Mann  returned  to  the  river,  where  he  re- 
mained until  j\Iay  of  1892.  On  account  of  failing 
health,  he  retired  from  the  river  and  settled  upon 
a  farm,  consisting  of  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres, 
which  formed  half  of  the  old  Holloman  homestead, 
and  had  been  purchased  from  other  heirs  in  1881. 
There  his  death  occurred,  and  thence  his  bod3'  was 
borne  to  his  last  resting  place. 

Mrs.  Mary  E.  Mann,  the  widow  of  the  Captain, 
was  born  August  9,  1846,  being  the  only  daughter 
and  the  second  in  order  of  birth  in  a  family  of 
four  children.  Her  parents,  Ezekiel  and  Mary  G. 
(Brown)  Holloman,  were  natives  of  Middle  Ten- 
nessee, both  having  been  born  in  1812.  They 
came  to  Randolph  County  at  the  ages  of  three 
and   sixteen    respectively.     Mrs.  Mann   was   born 


816 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


upon  the  farm  where  she  now  resides  and,  except- 
ing five  years  in  Steeleville  and  three  in  Chester, 
this  has  alwaj'S  been  her  home.  To  the  Captain 
and  his  wife  were  born  eight  children,  of  whom 
five  survive,  name]\':  Ira,  Bess.  Eri,  Bernice  and 
Orfa.  Those  deceased  are  Ellen,  Minnie  and  Ros- 
coe. 

The  home  farm  in  township  7,  range  5,  Mrs. 
Mann  does  not  operate,  but  rents  to  tenants,  who 
have  the  care  of  the  place.  In  religious  belief  she 
is  a  Presbjterian  and  holds  membership  with  tlie 
church  in  Steeleville.  She  is  a  lad}'  of  noble 
character  and  amiable  disposition,  and  is  loved  by 
her  famil}',  esteemed  by  her  friends  and  honored 
by  all  who  know  her.  The  Captain  was  identified 
with  the  Independent  Order  of  Odd  Fellows,  and 
politically  voted  the  Republican  ticket. 

ON.  ,]OIIN  .J.  HIGGINS  resides  in  Du  Quoin 
and  is  numbered  among  its  prominent  citi- 
zens. Mr.  Higgins  was  born  near  Broom- 
field,  Count}'  Cork,  Ireland,  November  21, 
His  father,  John  Higgins,  died  in  1848, 
r  a  widow  and  five  sons,  of  whom  our  sub- 
ject is  the  youngest.  His  mother  bore  the  name 
of  Johanna  Moore;  she  was  a  woman  of  strong 
character,  and  when  left  a  widow  realized  that  her 
dut\-  to  her  sons  would  be  best  fulfilled  b}-  bring- 
ing them  to  free  America,  rather  than  b}'  remain- 
ing in  the  land  of  their  birth,  a  land  at  that  time 
scourged  b}'  famine  and  crushed  by  bad  govern- 
ment. In  Maj',  1849,  with  her  children,  she  sailed 
from  Queenstown  for  America,  and  landed  in  New 
York  July  4.  She  remained  a  few  months  at 
N^-ack,  on  the  Hudson  River,  and  then  removed 
to  Pittsfield,  Mass.  Here  the  elder  sous  found 
employment  and  made  for  their  mother  a  happy 
home,  which  she  enjoyed  until  her  death,  in  1869. 
John  J.  Higgins  attended  the  public  schools  of 
Pittsfield  until  the  fall  of  1858,  when  he  passed 
an  examination  and  was  admitted  to  the  Pittsfield 
High  School,  where  he  remained  for  one  ye&T. 
During  this  time  he  made  rapid  progress  in  his 
studies,  and  began  a  course  of  reading,  which 
makes  him  one  of  the  best  informed  men  in  our 


state.  This  result  has  been  accomplished  by  read- 
ing, study  and  experience.  He  possesses  an  ob- 
serving eye  and  a  retentive  memory,  and  thereby 
his  knowledge  has  been  constantly  increased.  One 
of  the  most  prominent  and  highly  educated  citi- 
zens of  the  county,  a  man  of  collegiate  education, 
who  is  an  orator  and  a  polished  and  educated 
gentleman,  said  to  the  historian:  "I  wish  I  was  as 
good  a  scholar  and  as  well  informed  on  general 
subjects  as  is  John  Higgins." 

In  1859  our  subject  entered  the  employ  of  W. 
M.  Root  as  an  apprentice  to  learn  the  art  of  watch- 
making, and  remained  with  his  employer  until 
1866,  when  he  came  to  Illinois  and  settled  in  Du 
Quoin.  Here  he  established  his  business  and  en- 
joys the  confidence  and  respect  of  the  public.  He  is 
devoted  to  his  calling,  is  a  thorough  master  of  his 
art,  and  possesses  one  of  the  finest  horological  li- 
braries in  the  west. 

In  public  affairs  Mr.  Higgins  has  always  taken 
an  active  and  intelligent  interest,  and  his  ability 
and  worth  were  recognized  b\'  the  Democrats  of 
the  Forty-eighth  Senatorial  District  in  1882,  when 
he  was  nominated  and  elected  a  member  of  the 
Lower  House  of  the  Illinois  Legislature.  He 
served  his  constituents  faithfully  and  well,  and  in 
1884  he  received  the  Democratic  nomination  for 
Senator  in  the  Fort\--eiglilh  District.  After  a 
thorough  canvass  he  defeated  Mr.  Ihorn,  his  prede- 
cessor in  office.  Through  the  efforts  of  friends  Mr. 
Higgins  received  in  this  contest  the  heaviest  vote 
and  the  largest  majoritj'  ever  given  in  the  district. 
His  efforts  while  in  office  were  directed  almost  en- 
tirel}-  to  restoring  the  business  of  the  state  to  safe 
and  economic  methods.  While  in  the  Senate,  with 
the  co-operation  of  a  few  friends.  Republicans  and 
Democrats,  he  was  largel}'  instrumental  in  break- 
ing up  and  exposing  the  public  printing  combine, 
which  had  been  organized  to  plunder  the  state 
treasury.  In  this  work  alone  about  $60,000  was 
saved  to  the  people. 

As  a  public  speaker  Mr.  Higgins  has  a  wide  repu- 
tation. In  1888  and  in  1892  the  Democratic  State 
Committee  called  upon  iiira  to  canvass  the  central 
and  northern  parts  of  Illinois;  his  familiarity  with 
the  great  questions  of  the  day,  intimate  knowledge 
of,  and  close  touch  with  the  people,  and  earnest  and 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


817 


eloquent  way  of  presenting  his  views,  give  bim 
more  than  ordinary  power  as  an  orator.  His  friends 
are  not  all  found  in  the  ranks  of  the  Democracy, 
many  Republicans  admire  and  support  him,  and 
all  who  know  him  have  the  utmost  confidence  in 
his  integrity  and  ability  and  speak  of  him  only  in 
terms  of  praise.  In  religious  belief  he  is  a  Cath- 
olic. 

October  15,  1872,  Mr.  Higgins  wedded  Miss 
Mary,  daughter  of  Alva  and  Priscilla  (Holmes) 
Ward,  who  emigrated  to  Illinois  from  Ohio,  where 
their  daughter  was  born.  Four  children  grace  the 
union  of  our  subject  and  his  wife,  Marj',  who  is  a 
pupil  in  St.  Mary's  Academy  of  Notre  Dame, 
Ind.;  Lawrence,  who  is  now  in  the  Du  Quoin  High 
School;  Kathleen  and  Florence,  who  are  in  the 
public  school. 

ENRY  HUCH,  proprietor  of  the  Columbia 
Star  Mills,  of  Columbi»,  Monroe  County, 
is  a  native  of  the  Buckeye  State.  He  was 
born  in  Lawrence  County  April  2,  1833, 
and  is  a  son  of  Gottlieb  Iluch,  a  native  of  Han- 
over, Germany,  who  came  to  America  in  1831 
and  settled  in  Lawrence  County.  Six  3^ears  later 
he  came  to  Monroe  County  and  entered  land  from 
the  Government,  three  miles  soutli  of  Columbia, 
where  he  made  his  home  until  his  death,  which  oc- 
curred in  1865.  He  was  a  stone  mason  by  trade, 
and  followed  that  business  iu  connection  with 
f.arming.  His  wife,  who  bore  the  maiden  name  of 
Caroline  Holzhausen,  died  three  da3'S  before  her 
husband's  death.  They  were  the  parents  of  nine 
children,  of  whom  three  are  yet  living:  William, 
who  resides  on  the  old  homestead;  Rebecca,  wife 
of  Michael  Stumphf,  a  farmer  of  Hanover  Precinct; 
and  Henry.  The  father  of  this  family-  was  a 
Democrat  until  Lincoln  ran  for  the  Presidency', 
when  he  became  a  Republican.  Both  he  and  his 
wife  were  members  of  the  Evangelical  Church. 
When  he  departed  this  life,  he  was  the  owner  of 
three  hundred  and  ninety-six  acres  of  laud,  and 
had  given  two  farms  to  his  children. 

From  the  age  of  five  years,  Mr.  Iluch  was  reared 
on  tlje  old  homestead  farm,  and  was  educated  in 


the  old  time  subscription  school,  which  was  held 
in  a  log  schoolhouse.  He  aided  his  father  in  clear- 
ing the  land  which  was  entered  from  the  Govern- 
ment, and  was  thus  earl}'  inured  to  arduous  labor. 
On  the  10th  of  April,  1856,  he  married  Miss  Mar- 
guerita,  daughter  of  Daniel  Klein,  and  a  native  of 
Bavaria,  Germany,  who  came  to  this  country  in 
1843,  the  family-  locating  near  Columbia,  where  her 
father  purchased  land.  She  was  born  October  5, 
1836.  Thej'  began  their  domestic  life  upon  a  par- 
tially improved  farm  of  one  hundred  and  twenty 
acres,  and  after  eight  years  came  to  Columbia, 
where  for  a  year  Mr.  Iluch  was  a  silent  partner  in 
a  drug  store.  In  1867,  he  embarked  in  the  mill- 
ing business,  iu  connection  with  Franz  Bauer,  un- 
der the  firm  name  of  Bauer  &  Huch,  which  con- 
nection continued  for  seven  3'ears,  when  he  bought 
out  his  partner's  interest. 

The  Columbia  Star  Mills  were  built  in  1856  by 
two  brothers,  William  and  James  Neirarick,  who 
operated  them  for  a  year,  and  then  sold  to  War- 
nock  &  Wilson,  who  carried  on  the  business  from 
1857  until  1867.  Mr.  Huch  is  now  the  proprietor 
of  what  is  one  of  the  leading  industries  of  the 
place.  The  mill  has  a  capacity  of  foiM-  hundred 
and  fifty  barrels  of  flour  per  day,  and  is  sui)plied 
with  a  patent  roller  process.  Its  products  arc 
shipped  extensively  to  the  south  and  west.  The 
Star  Mills  are  the  oldest  iu  Monroe  County.  In 
June,  1893,  Mr.  Huch  aided  in  organizing  the 
Eagle  Electric  Light  Compau}-,  of  which  he  is  now 
President. 

In  politics,  Mr.  Iluch  is  a  Democrat.  His  liome 
has  been  in  Monroe  County- since  1837,  and  he  is 
therefore  one  of  its  oldest  settlers.  He  is  also  one 
of  its  most  prominent  citizens,  being  both  widely 
and  favorably  known.  He  and  his  wife  hold 
membership  with  the  Evangelical  Church.  This 
worthy  couple  have  an  adopted  daughter,  Lena, 
who  is  now  the  wife  of  Adolph  Lambrecht. 

Mr.  Lambrecht,  General  Superintendent  of  the 
Columbia  Star  Mills,  was  born  in  Brunswick,  Prus- 
sia, German}',  on  the  16th  of  January,  1864,  and 
when  quite  young  was  left  an  orphan.  His  father 
was  Dr.  August  Lambrecht.  Crossing  the  Allan- 
tic,  the  son  came  to  Chicago  in  1878,  and  there 
learued  the  trade  of  a  druggist.     In  1879  he  came 


818 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


to  Columbia  and  entered  the  employ  of  Dr.  Rose, 
with  whom  he  continued  for  three  years,  having 
the  management  of  the  Doctor's  drug  store  in  this 
place.  In  1883,  he  took  up  the  milling  business, 
to  which  he  served  an  apprenticeship.  He  mas- 
tered the  business  in  all  its  details,  and  has  since 
worked  his  waj'  upward  Uy  the  important  position 
he  now  occupies. 

On  the  4th  of  September,  1884,  Mr.  Lambrecht 
was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Lena  Huch. 
They  both  belong  to  the  Evangelical  Church  and 
are  prominent  people,  who  occupj'  an  enviable  po- 
sition in  social  circles.  Their  home  is  one  of  the 
finest  in  the  coiint3',  being  complete  in  every  par- 
ticular, and  is  supplied  with  all  modern  improve- 
ments and  conveniences.  In  politics  Mr.  Lam- 
brecht is  a  Democrat.  He  belongs  to  the  Masonic 
fraternity,  and  is  now  Junior  Warden  of  Columbia 
Lodge  No.  474,  A.  F.  cfe  A.  M. 


'*       *•      *^  i 


m. 


11^^^^ 


"ifl  AMES  McLaughlin.  This  name  will  be 
recognized  b}'  many  of  our  readers  as  that 
of  ii  gentleman  who  has  borne  an  impor- 
tant part  in  the  development  of  the  agricult- 
ural resources  of  southern  Illinois.  For  more 
than  a  decade  he  resided  in  Randolph  County,  of 
which  he  was  a  prominent  and  popular  resident, 
but  in  the  spring  of  1894  he  came  to  Jackson  Coun- 
ty and  settled  upon  a  valuable  farm  in  Levan 
Township.  He  is  a  mau  of  active  habits,  not  afraid 
of  hard  work,  and  thus  has  found  plenty  to  occupy 
his  time,  and,  like  the  majority  of  Scotchmen,  does 
not  know  what  it  is  to  be  idle. 

The  father  of  our  subject,  Andrew  McLaughlin, 
was  born  in  Scotland  and  was  reared  to  manhood 
upon  a  farm  in  the  Land  of  his  birth.  Soon  after 
the  War  of  1812  he  came  to  America  and  settled  in 
Vermont,  where  he  married  Miss  Anna  McDermot, 
a  native  of  Scotland.  He  engaged  in  farming  pur- 
suits, in  which  he  was  successful,  gaining  a  compe- 
tence and  being  numbered  among  the  progressive 
agriculturists  of  the  Green  Mountain  State.  In 
politics  he  was  a  Republican,  and  in  religious  mat- 
ters was  identified  with  the  Methodist  Church. 
His  death  occurred  in   1858,  and  he  was  buried 


near  the  home  where  so  many  years  of  his  honored 
life  had  been  passed.  Two  years  after  his  demise 
his  wife  passed  awa}'.  Thev  were  the  parents  of 
three  children,  Angus.  Annie  and  James,  the  latter 
being  the  onlj'  one  now  living. 

Born  in  Vermont,  January  20,  1820,  the  subject 
of  this  sketch  was  reared  to  manhood  upon  the 
home  farm,  and  in  his  3'outli  learned  the  trade  of 
a  tannei-,  but  did  not,  however,  follow  that  occu- 
pation for  a  very  long  time.  In  1845  he  was 
united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Mary,  daughter  of 
John  Stephens,  and  a  native  of  Vermont.  Two 
children  have  been  born  of  this  union,  Anna,  the 
wife  of  Robert  Wilson  and  a  resident  of  St.  Louis, 
Mo.,  and  Andrew,  who  at  present  resides  with  his 
father  and  of  whom  further  mention  is  made  else- 
where in  this  volume. 

Dis[)Osing  of  his  homestead  in  the  Green  Moun- 
tain State,  Mr.  McLaughlin  came  west  in  1870  and 
settled  twenty  miles  from  St.  Louis,  in  Missouri, 
where  he  remained  engaged  in  agricultural  pur- 
suits until  1880,  tHe  date  of  his  removal  to  Ran- 
dolph County.  At  present  he  owns  a  farm  in 
this  count}',  but  as  above  stated,  removed  thence 
to  Levan  Township,  Jackson  County,  in  the  si)ring 
of  1894.  A  man  of  progressive  character,  he  is 
well  informed  concerning  all  topics  of  current  in- 
terest and  is  especially  fond  of  reading  articles 
and  books  bearing  upon  national  issues.  In  poli- 
tics he  is  a  stanch  Republican  and  never  fails  to 
deposit  his  ballot  for  the  principles  of  that  party. 
He  has  never  held  any  public  office,  i)referring  to 
devote  his  time  wholly  to  the  details  of  farm  work 

'^1 OHN  HENRY,  a  worthy  representative  of 
the  agricultural  interests  of  Jackson  Coun- 
,  t3',  residing  on  section  17,  Murphysboro 
(}^/'  Township,  is  a  native  of  Rheinpfalz,  Ger- 
many. He  was  born  June  21,  1828,  and  is  a  son 
of  Michael  and  Martha  Henry,  both  of  whom  died 
in  their  native  land.  The  father  was  a  farmer  by 
occupation,  and  served  as  a  soldier  in  the  French 
army.  He  was  for  nine  years  in, the  service  under 
Napoleon  Bonaparte. 

John  Henry  remained  in  his  native  land    until 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


819 


1848.  According  to  the  laws  of  his  country,  he 
was  forced  to  serve  in  the  German  army,  and  for 
six  months  was  a  private  in  the  Ninth  Regular  In- 
fantry. The  Revolution  of  1848  then  came  on, 
and  he  joined  the  rebels.  After  participating  in 
two  battles,  he  made  his  escape  to  France,  and 
thence  to  America.  Landing  in  New  Orleans,  he 
found  himself  a  stranger  in  a  strange  land  without 
a  dollar.  He  was  dependent  entirely-  upon  his  own 
resources,  and  whatever  success  he  lias  achieved  in 
life  is  the  result  of  his  own  efforts.  Going  to  St. 
Charles,  he  engaged  in  washing  glasses  at  the  bar 
for  three  years,  and  then  went  to  St.  Louis,  and 
was  employed  in  a  brick  j-ard  at  Camp  Spring.  He 
had  learned  tiie  trade  of  brick-making  in  the  Old 
Country,  and  it  now  stood  him  in  good  stead.  Af- 
ter one  season  spent  in  St.  Louis,  he  bought  pro- 
duce, which  lie  intended  to  ship  to  New  Orleans 
and  there  sell,  but  the  boat  on  which  he  placed  his 
goods  was  sunk  and  he  lost  all  that  he  had. 

In  1853,  Mr.  Henr}'  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Lizzie  Shue,  who  was  born  in  Prussia  in 
1832.  They  became  the  parents  of  five  children: 
Joiiu;  Lizzie,  now  the  wife  of  Charles  ]\Iiller; 
Nick,  Jacob,  and  Mary,  who  now  keeps  house  for 
her  father,  Tiie  mother  of  this  familj-  was  called 
to  her  final  rest  June  24,  1876. 

For  some  time  after  his  marriage,  Mr.  Henr^'  en- 
gaged in  marketing  in  New  Orleans,  in  fact  he 
carried  on  this  business  until  1868.  During  his 
residence  in  that  city  he  belonged  to  the  fire  de- 
partment for  twenty  3'ears,  and  was  assistant  fore- 
man. In  1868  he  came  to  Jackson  County,  111., 
and  purchased  sixty  acres  of  wild  land,  which  he 
at  once  began  to  clear  and  improve,  transforming 
the  hitherto  barren  tract  into  rich  and  fertile  fields, 
which  were  made  to  yield  him  a  good  income.  In 
1876  he  began  operating  a  thresher,  and  did  busi- 
ness along  that  line  for  seven  j'ears.  As  his  finan- 
cial resources  have  increased  he  has  extended  the 
boundaries  of  his  farm,  until  it  now  comprises  one 
hundred  and  fifty  acres  of  valuable  land,  of  which 
one  hundred  acres  are  under  cultivation.  He  raises 
wheat,  corn  and  hay,  and  also  engages  in  stock- 
raising.  In  1868  he  began  the  culture  of  grapes 
with  a  vineyard  of  twenty-five  vines.  He  now  has 
fourteen  hundred   bearing  vines,  including  four- 


teen fine  varieties,  and  engages  in  the  manufacture 
of  wine.  His  orchard  covers  about  eigiit  acres, 
and  is  planted  in  winesap,  Ben  Davis  and  otlier 
apples. 

Socially,  Mr.  Henry  is  connected  with  the  Odd 
Fellows'  soeiet}'.  In  politics,  he  and  his  sons  are 
Democrats,  and  he  has  served  as  Supervisor  of  his 
district.  He  may  truly  be  called  a  self-made  man, 
for  his  success  has  been  achieved  through  his  own 
efforts.  He  began  life  in  America  empty-handed, 
but  has  steadily  worked  his  wa}'  upward,  overcom- 
ing the  difficulties  and  obstacles  in  his  path  until 
he  now  occupies  a  position  of  prominence. 


W  AWRENCE  S.  MURPHY  is  a  member  of 
I  (^  ^^^  '''™  ^^  Bottom  &  Murphy,  liverymen 
/J'— %.  of  Sparta,  and  Is  recognized  as  one  of  the 
progressive  business  men  of  the  place,  who  well  de- 
serves representation  In  the  history  of  Randolph, 
his  native  county.  His  father,  Bryson  Murphy, 
was  born  in  Randolph  County,  and  being  left  an 
orphan  at  an  early  age  he  was  reared  by  the  Rev. 
David  McDUl,  with  whom  he  remained  until  he 
had  reached  man's  estate.  In  the  common  schools 
he  was  educated,  and  at  an  early  age  was  (jualified 
to  teach,  which  he  did  for  a  number  of  years  as  a 
means  of  livelihood.  In  the  United  Presbyterian 
Church  he  was  an  active  worker. 

In  1856,  Mr.  Murphy  was  united  In  marriage 
with  Miss  Margaret  Maxwell,  a  native  of  Randolph 
County,  and  a  daughter  of  John  and  Catherine 
(Clark)  Maxwell,  who  were  natives  of  New  York. 
The  former  was  born  in  1790,  and  died  in  1846. 
When  a  j'oung  man  he  came  to  Illinois,  where  lie 
followed  farming.  He  had  but  limited  educational 
privileges,  but  was  a  man  of  good  abllltv,  of  the 
strictest  integrity,  and  was  an  excellent  neighbor. 
His  wife  was  an  .accomplished  lady,  well  educated, 
and  possessed  noble  qualities  of  womanhood. 

To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Murphy  were  born  six  children. 
Clemmie  is  now  living  in  California;  George  died 
in  his  twenty-first  3'ear;  Lawrence  is  the  next 
younger;  Ilattie,  who  was  formerly  a  teacher  of 
recognized  abllitj',  is  now  the  wife  of  Rev.  J.  W. 
Ashwood,  pastor  of  a  United  Presbyterian  Church 


820 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL    RECORD. 


of  St.  Louis;  Charles,  the  youngest  member  of  the 
family,  died  at  liie  age  of  two  y^ears.  The  mother 
of  these  children  makes  her  home  with  her  daugh- 
ter, Mrs.  Ashwood,  of  St.  Louis. 

Lawrence  S.  Murphy  was  born  on  the  old  home- 
stead in  Randolph  County  on  Christmas  Day  of 
1860.  The  father  having  lost  his  health  when  our 
subject  was  quite  young,  the  responsibility  of 
helping  to  provide  for  the  necessities  of  the  fam- 
ily fell  upon  Lawrence  when  he  was  a  tender  youth. 
In  conse(iucnce,  in  the  school  of  experience  he  has 
acquired  the  greater  part  of  his  knowledge.  In 
1887,  he  became  associated  with  ]Mr.  Bottom  in  the 
livery  business.  The3'  arc  now  equal  owners  in 
the  business  which  they  are  successfully  conduct- 
ing, enjoying  a  fine  trade. 

Mr.  Murphy  is  also  interested  in  other  enter- 
prises. He  owns  some  city  proj^erty  in  Sparta 
and  is  a  member  of  the  building  and  loan  associ- 
ation. He  is  still  a  young  man,  but  is  recognized 
as  one  of  the  representative  citizens  of  the  com- 
munity and  occupies  a  prominent  place  in  busi- 
ness circles.  He  holds  membership  with  the 
Knights  of  Pythias  fraternity.  In  politics  he  attil- 
iates  with  the  Republican  party. 

,  EUBEN  JULIUS  C40DDARD.  Among  the 
members  of  the  Randolph  Count3Bar  none 
deserve  more  honorable  mention  than 
^) Reuben  Julius  Goddard.  He  is  a  native 
of  the  county  and  has  always  recognized  it  as  his 
home.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  commenced  a  course 
of  study  in  the  Union  Academy,  a  religious  insti- 
tution under  the  management  of  the  United  Pres- 
byteri.an  Chuich  (afterward  dissolved  in  favor  of 
Monmouth  College,  of  Illinois).  Later  he  entered 
the  Michigan  University,  of  Ann  Arbor,  where  he 
took  an  optional  literary  course  of  study  and  a 
regular  course  in  the  law  department,  from  which 
he  was  graduated  in  the  year  1864.  He  soon  after- 
ward began  the  practice  of  his  profession  in  Sparta, 
and  by  close  application  to  his  books  and  business 
he  has  established  a  large  and  lucrative  practice. 
In  1870  Mr.  Goddard  was  appointed  Prosecut- 
ing Attorney    of    the    Common    Pleas   Court  of 


Sparta,  a  court  abolished  by  the  new  Constitution 
of  Illinois.  In  November,  1872,  he  was  elected  to 
the  office  of  State's  Attorney  for  Randolph  County. 
In  1876  he  was  re-elected  to  the  same  office,  serv- 
ing until  1880,  when  he  declined  a  re-election.  In 
1892,  he  was  tendered  the  nomination  on  the 
Democratic  ticket  for  the  same  office  without  op- 
position, the  Republican  party  declining  to  nomi- 
nate a  candidate  against  him,  and  he  was  elected 
by  almost  the  entire  vote  of  the  county.  The 
duties  of  this  position  he  is  now  discharging  with 
signal  ability.  He  has  been  elected  eight  times  to 
the  office  of  City  Attorney  of  Sparta,  and  is  the 
present  incumbent. 

When  put  before  tlie  people  as  a  candidate  for 
any  position,  Mr.  Goddard  has  never  been  de- 
feated. In  his  political  views  he  is  conservative, 
yet  in  the  heat  of  a  campaign  active  and  out- 
spoken and  an  efficient  worker  and  organizer. 
He  identified  himself  with  the  Democratic  party 
upon  attaining  his  majority  and  has  ever  since 
aided  her  cause  b3'  voice  and  vote.  Ambitious  to 
excel  in  professional  life,  he  devotes  his  energies 
ti)  ils  prosecution. 

November  30,  187.^,  Mr.  Goddard  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Emma  Kerr,  a  native  of  Chau- 
tauqua County,  N.  Y.,  a  lady  of  superior  etluca- 
tional  and  musical  attainments,  she  being  a  gradu- 
ate of  the  convent  at  Batavia,  N.  Y.  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  (ioddard  have  one  child,  Willie  Brown  God- 
dard, a  bright  boy  of  sixteen  years.  Socially, 
our  subject  is  a  prominent  member  of  the  Ma- 
sonic fraternity,  being  connected  with  Tancred 
Commandery  No.  50,  of  Belleville,  111.,  and  sub- 
ordinate orders.  Under  the  guidance  of  his  ac- 
complished wife  their  home  is  noted  for  its  hospi- 
tality and  culture  among  the  Spartans. 

Mr.  Goddard's  fatlier,  William  B.,  was  a  native 
of  Kentucky,  born  near  Maysville,  in  that  state, 
January  21,  1817,  and  moved  with  his  parents, 
Reuben  and  Sarah  (Brown)  Goddard  and  located 
on  a  farm  in  St.  Clair  County,  111.,  near  the  old 
Indian  town  of  Cahokia.  William  B.  died  in  1875, 
in  the  little  town  of  Evans,  Colo.,  where  he  had 
gone  on  account  of  his  declining  health,  lie  was 
married  at  Kaskaskia,  this  county,  to  Miss  Eliza 
Hawthorne,  daughter  of  James  Hawthorne,  one  of 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


821 


the  pioneers  of  Randolph  and  a  prominent  and 
leading  citizen,  who  held  the  office  of  Recorder  of 
said  county  nian3-  3cars  and  filled  other  public 
offices.  The  Hawtiiorne  family  is  of  Scotch  ori- 
gin and  came  to  America  at  an  early  day  in  the 
settlement  of  the  countr}',  locating  in  South  Caro- 
lina, afterward  removing  to  Ohio.  Thence  David, 
the  great-grandfather,  and  father  of  James,  the 
grandfather  of  the  subject  of  this  sketch,  moved 
to  this  county  while  Illinois  was  a  territory. 

AVilliam  B.,  tlie  father  of  our  subject,  soon  after 
his  marriage  moved  to  the  vicinity  of  Sparta, 
where  he  lived  until  1871,  when  he  moved  to 
Colorado.  He  was  a  farmer,  merchant,  builder 
and  architect,  and  acted  as  Justice  of  the  Peace 
and  Cit}'  Recorder  for  twenty  j'ears  at  Sparta.  For 
many  years  he  was  a  member  of  the  United  Pres- 
byterian Church,  and  was  noted  for  his  honesty 
and  integritjf  of  character.  He  was  not  success- 
ful in  accumulating  wealth,  his  mind  running 
more  in  the  direction  of  education  and  religion. 
He  took  great  pride  in  his  family,  whom  he  de- 
votedl}'  loved,  and  nothing  gave  him  greater 
pleasure  than  the  prosecution  of  plans  promoting 
their  advancement  in  intellectual,  social  and  moral 
culture.  He  gave  his  children  that  which  is  of  in- 
finitely more  value  than  i)ropertj',  viz.:  a  good 
education  and  proper  ideas  of  the  true  ends  and 
duties  of  life.  Of  his  children,  besides  the  subject 
of  this  sketch,  James  H.  is  a  prominent  physician 
of  Sedgwick,  Kan.,  and  served  as  First  Assistant 
Surgeon  of  the  Foit3--secoud  Illinois  Regiment 
until  the  close  of  the  late  war.  Albert,  the  younger 
brother,  is  a  fancy  job  printer  at  San  Diego,  Cal. 
One  sister,  Eveline  L.,  the  wife  of  Myron  Camp, 
resides  with  her  husband  at  Garden  Plain,  Kan. 
The  other  sister,  Sarah  E.,  the  wife  of  R.  Porter 
Morrison,  resides  with  her  husband  at  Sedgwick, 
Kan. 

The  paternal  grandparents  of  our  subject,  Reu- 
ben and  Sarah  (Brown)  Goddard,  were  natives  of 
Kentucky.  Reuben  Goddard  was  the  son  of  Will- 
iam Goddard,  a  native  of  Englanc),  and  a  minister 
of  the  Gospel  of  the  Church  of  England.  He  was 
one  of  three  brothers  who  came  to  America  in 
Colonial  times.  He  located  near  Maysville,  Ky., 
continued  his  ministry  of  the  Gospel  and  also  be- 
32 


came  a  wealthy  planter.  His  brother  Benjamin 
located  in  Massachusetts,  and  the  third  brother  in 
Indiana  They  were  all  ministers  of  the  Gospel, 
and  it  is  from  these  three  that  the  Goddards  in 
America  are  descended. 


l|r^"\EV.  HENRY  GOOSENS,  rector  of  the 
v^/  church  at  Kaskaskia,  was  born  in  the  vil- 
lage of  Oeding,  in  Westphalia,  a  province 
^!of  Prussia,  February  5,  1856.  He  is  a  son 
of  Charles  and  Gesina  (Krosenbrink)  Goosens, 
natives  of  Prussia  and  Holland  respectively.  The 
parents  are  still  residing  in  the  Old  Country,  where, 
in  his  native  village,  our  subject's  elementary  edu- 
cation was  secured  during  the  time  between  his 
sixth  and  fourteenth  3'ears.  After  working  on  the 
farm  for  the  succeeding  six  years,  he  arrived  at  the 
age  wlien  it  was  necessar3'  to  serve  the  customar3' 
two  3'ears  in  the  Prussian  arm3'.  Most  of  his  term 
of  service  was  spent  at  Aix-la-Chapelle,  in  the 
Rhenish  Provinces,  in  sight  of  the  spires  of  the  old 
cathedral  that  had  been  standing  for  a  thousand 
3'ears. 

Immediately  on  his  return  from  the  army,  our 
subject  began  his  studies  for  the  priesthood.  It 
was  about  this  time  that  the  Jesuits  were  expelled 
from  German3',  and  as  all  the  schools  for  the  prop- 
agation of  the  faith  had  been  closed,  bis  studies 
were  pursued  under  the  tutelage  of  Father  Tlioene, 
an  expelled  priest,  who  had  taken  up  his  residence 
in  Holland,  just  across  the  line,  not  ver3'  far  from 
the  home  of  our  subject,  who  walked  over  every 
day  for  his  instruction  and  returned  liome  at  night. 
By  having  a  private  tutor  he  made  much  more 
rapid  progress  than  he  would  have  done  in  a  school, 
and  in  two  years  was  master  of  the  Latin  language, 
and  also  became  inoficient  in  mathematics  and 
general  classics. 

At  the  expiration  of  the  two  3ears'  tutelage,  our 
subject  bade  farewell  to  the  Fatherland,  and  in  the 
spring  of  1882  embarked  at  Amsterdam  on  a  vessel 
of  the  same  name,  landing  at  New  York  in  the 
month  of  Ma3'.  Immediatel3'  on  arriving  in  the 
States,  he  proceeded  to  Teutopolis,  in  Effingham 
County,  111.,  where  he  entered  in  the  fourth  class 


822 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


of  St.  Joseph's  College,  conducted  bj-  the  Francis- 
can Fathers.  The  fall  following  he  was  admitted 
to  the  fifth  class,  graduating  in  1884  in  the  sixth 
class,  and  was  received  by  Bishop  Baltes,  of  Alton, 
as  a  candidate  for  clerical  studies.  Under  the 
Bishop's  patronage  he  was  sent  to  the  Benedictine 
Abbe^',  at  St.  Meinrad,  Spencer  County,  Ind.,  to  be 
instructed  in  philosophy  and  theology.  After  a 
four  years'  course  (one  in  philosophy-  and  three  in 
tlieology),  our  candidate  for  priestly  offices  was  or- 
dained at  Belleville,  111.,  under  Bishop  Janssen, 
May  28,  1888. 

AVithin  a  week  of  his  ordination,  Father  Goosens 
was  assigned  to  the  charge  of  the  congregation  of 
St.  Wendel  (Wakefield  P.  O.),  in  Clay  County,  111. 
Here  he  remained  over  five  j-ears,  or  until  the  fall 
of  1893,  when  he  was  transferred  to  Kaskaskia  with 
a  view  to  locating  the  church.  The  building  had 
to  be  moved,  owing  to  the  encroachment  of  the 
river,  which  is  washing  away  the  old  town.  There 
was  a  dissension  between  the  members  of  the  Town 
Board  and  the  church  authorities.  The  two  fac- 
tions could  not  agree  as  to  the  location  of  the 
church  and  the  town.  Fatiier  Goosens  having 
been  successful  in  bringing  together  a  divided  con- 
gregation at  St.  Wendel,  was  considered  bj'  the 
Bishop  the  proper  one  to  bring  unitj^  out  of  dis- 
cord in  this  the  oldest  congregation  in  the  west. 
After  many  hindrances  and  much  earnest  labor,  the 
matter  was  finally  adjusted  by  compromising,  the 
town  site  selected  being  at  the  crossing  of  the 
Grand  Line  and  the  Big  Lane,  almost  equidistant 
between  the  old  town  and  the  rival  village.  The 
adjustment  of  these  difficulties  is  a  credit  to  the 
abilit}'  and  earnestness  of  the  Father  in  charge. 

The  congregation  over  which  Father  Goosens 
now  presides  is  the  oldest  in  the  Mississippi  Val- 
ley. The  Church  of  the  Immaculate  Conception  was 
founded  by  Pierre  Marquette  in  1665,  on  the  banks 
of  the  Illinois,  at  the  Indian  village  of  Kaskaskia, 
near  tlie  present  town  of  Utica,  in  La  Salle  County. 
The  Kaskaskia  Indians,  then  inhabitants  of  that 
county,  on  being  driven  out  by  their  fierce  foes, 
the  Iroquois,  descended  the  Illinois  and  the  Mis- 
sissippi to  the  mouth  of  the  little  river  that  bears 
their  name,  near  which  they  established  tiieir  vil- 
lage on  the  banks  of  the  stream.  Whether  this  was 


at  the  site  of  the    present    town   or  elsewhere  is  a 
matter  of  dispute. 

From  the  journals  written  during  the  years  of 
1693-94  by  Father  .lames  Gravier,  the  third  in  suc- 
cession from  Marquette,  we  learn  that  the  mission 
was  then  on  the  banks  of  the  Illinois.  Letters 
written  in  1699  and  1700  show  that  no  removal 
had  yet  taken  place.  It  is  probable  that  the  au- 
tumn of  the  latter  year  witnessed  the  exodus  of  the 
tribes  of  the  Illinois  and  the  estiblishment  of  the 
mission  in  the  south.  Here  a  building  of  logs  was 
erected,  which  must  have  been  at  least  the  second 
in  the  history  of  the  church,  and  the  first  in  its 
new  location.  In  1720  this  primitive  chapel  was 
replaced  by  one  of  stone,  erected  at  the  expense  of 
the  King  of  France,  and  the  church  passed  from 
the  rank  of  a  mission,  with  Pierre  Nicholas  Igna- 
tius dc  Branhois  the  first  regular  pastor.  Twenty- 
one  years  later  the  King  sent  to  this  cliurch  in  the 
wilderness  the  famous  bell,  the  first  to  peal  its  mu- 
sic in  the  great  valley  of  the  west.  After  receiv- 
ing due  homage  at  the  late  World's  Fair,  this  pio- 
neer of  Christianity,  with  its  royal  lilies  and  quaint 
inscription,  was  returned  to  its  earlj'  habitation. 
What  stories  it  could  tell! 

Whether  this  stone  building  was  outgrown  b}' its, 
congregation,  or  fell  into  deca^'',  is  not  known,  but 
in  1801  it  was  replaced  by  a  wooden  structure 
built  of  logs  on  end,  as  were  manj^  of  the  old 
French  houses.  Most  of  the  timber  of  this  third 
church  was  cedar,  while  some  walnut  and  sassa- 
fras was  used.  There  were  no  nails  used  in  its  con- 
struction, the  shingles  being  fastened  on  with  large 
wooden  pegs.  This  building  becoming  dilapi- 
dated, it  was  decided  to  erect  a  new  one  of  brick, 
the  corner  stone  of  which  was  laid  by  Bishop  Ro- 
sati,  of  St.  Louis,  and  four  years  later,  under  Father 
St.  Cyr,  the  erection  of  the  church  was  begun,  and 
was  finished  after  Father  Metzger  took  charge. 

Much  of  the  old  town  having  been  swept  into 
the  river  where  the  Mississippi  cut  through  the 
narrow  peninsula  between  the  banks  of  tiie  Kas- 
kaskia and  its  own,  it  became  evident  that  in  a  few 
3'ears  at  farthest  all  would  be  swept  awaj',  and  the 
state  appropriated  money  for  the  removal  of  the 
remains  in  the  old  cemetery  to  a  tract  of  ground 
on  the  hills  near  Ft.  Gage,  which  was  accomplishet^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPinCAL  RECORD, 


823 


in  1892.  As  the  old  church  was  in  the  line  of  en- 
croachraent,  it  too  must  be  removed.  With  this  end 
in  view,  its  walls  were  wrecked  in  the  fall  of  1893  by 
Father  Goosens,  the  priest  now  in  charge,  the  ma- 
terial removed  to  the  new  site,  which  through  the 
mediation  of  the  pastor  was  selected  some  three 
miles  from  the  present  town.  Here  is  being  erected 
a  church  of  Gothic  st^ie,  and  nearer  the  center  of 
the  population  of  the  "Island,"  as  'Kaskia  Point 
is  now  called. 

A  very  neat  model  of  the  new  edifice  has  been 
constructed  by  Father  Goosens,  who  in  many  ways 
makes  use  of  his  ingenuity  to  emploj'  his  leisure 
time,  idleness  being  a  thing  he  cannot  endure. 
In  the  new  church  when  completed  will  repose, 
let  us  hope  for  all  time  ttf  come,  the  ancient  rec- 
ords of  the  early  church,  the  bell  and  chalice 
still  in  use,  the  royal  gifts  from  P' ranee,  a  hand- 
some altar  of  beautifully  carved  wood,  and  many 
relics  venerated  by  the  ciiurch,  some  of  which, 
whose  records  have  been  lost,  can  never  more  he 
exposed  to  public  view.  There  are  old  paintings* 
too,  whose  origin  and  age  are  unknown,  which 
are  not  the  least  interesting  of  the  many  histor- 
ical relics  of  this  ancient  church. 


ylLLIAM  C.  WERKK,  a  merchant  of  Wine 
Hill,  and  the  owner  of  valuable  farming 
land  near  this  village,  is  one  of  the  most 
substantial  men  of  Randolph  County,  lie  is  a  na- 
tive of  Germany,  having  l)een  born  in  Rethem, 
Hanover,  May  24,  1839,  and  is  a  son  of  Frederick 
and  Marie  (Clasen)  Werre,  natives  respectively 
of  Rethem  and  Oldendorf.  When  our  subject  was 
ten  years  of  age  his  fatlier,  who  was  a  farmer  in 
tiie  Old  Country,  disposed  of  his  house  in  the  vil- 
lage and  his  outlying  lands  and  started  with  his 
family  for  America. 

Embarking  at  Bremerhaveu  on  the  four-mast 
vessel  "Burgundy,"  the  family'  commenced  the 
voyage  to  the  New  World.  Early  in  the  third 
night  out,  the  vessel  ran  into  a  sand  bar  in  the 
English  Channel  and  was  wrecked.  Clad  only  in 
their  night  clothes,  the  passengers  escaped  in  the 
small  boats,  losing  all    they  possessed.     The   old 


men,  the  women  and  children  were  taken  to 
France.  Some  of  the  men  were  put  aboard  a  coal 
vessel,  while  the  others  were  taken  to  England. 
The  famil}'  was  separated  for  four  weeks  and  none 
knew  whether  the  absent  ones  were  living  or  dead. 
Finally  all  were  assembled  in  London  and  the 
voyage  was  renewed.  The  English  were  very  kind 
in  supplying  the  unfortunates  with  clothing, 
money  and  food.  Mr.  Werre  lost  in  property 
about  1600,  but  saved  about  ^800  in  gold  that  he 
and  his  wife  had  secured  on  their  persons,  a  goodl}' 
fortune  for  emigrants  in  those  da3's. 

After  about  a  month's  delay  the  family  again 
took  ship,  this  time  on  a  London  vessel,  the  "Rio 
Grande,"  and  after  a  voyage  of  about  thirteen 
weeks  lauded  in  New  Orleans,  February  20,  1849. 
After  remaining  there  a  week  they  took  a  river 
steamer  for  Chester,  which  was  reached  in  a  week's 
time.  Fritz,  a  son  by  Mr.  Werre's  first  wife,  who 
had  come  to  America  in  1842  and  owned  fortj' 
acres  near  Bremen,  Randolph  County,  died  leaving 
the  land  to  his  father.  As  forty  acres  of  land 
was  considered  a  fortune  in  the  Old  Country,  ]\Ir. 
Werre  expected  to  live  at  his  ease  on  that  amount 
of  land  here.  Finding  it  insufficient,  an  additional 
eighty-acre  tract  was  purchased  and  life  in  the 
new  country  began. 

The  father  of  our  subject  was  twice  married  and 
had  six  children,  of  whom  William  was  next  to 
the  youngest.  Only  two  members  of  the  family 
now  survive.  Our  sul)ject  had  attended  school  in 
the  Old  Country  but  found  none  on  his  arrival 
here.  However,  by  self-culture  he  acquired  a  fairly 
good  Euglish  education.  On  account  of  his  fa- 
ther's illness  the  care  of  the  family  fell  upon  him 
when  he  was  but  sixteen.  Together  with  his 
younger  brother  he  conducted  the  farm  and  cared 
for  his  father,  who  for  the  last  seven  of  his  twenty 
years'  suffering  was  not  out  of  the  house  but 
twice. 

November  13,  186 1,  at  the  age  of  twenty-three, 
our  subject  married  Miss  Christina,  daughter  of 
Conrad  and  Wilhelmina  (Handelman)  Wolter,  na- 
tives of  Klein  Elbe,  Hanover,  where  Mrs.  Werre 
was  born  August  27,  1842,  and  where  she  lived 
until  attaining  her  tenth  year.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Werre   were  the  parents  of  nine  children,  eight  of 


824 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


whom  survive,  as  follows:  William,  Edmond,  Her- 
man, Ernest,  Amelia,  Carolina,  Adolpli  and  Sig- 
mond.  Anna  is  deceased.  Mr.  Werre,  bis  wife, 
and  all  the  children  are  members  of  St.  Paul's 
Evangelical  Lutheran  Church  at  Wine  Hill,  in 
which  they  take  a  deep  interest,  promoting  all 
that  pertains  to  the  cause  of  religion.  They  are 
also  deeply  interested  in  the  advancement  of  the 
parochial  school,  which  is  conducted  at  present  by 
August  Wilde. 

Besides  conducting  a  well  stocked  country  store 
at  Wine  Hill,  Mr.  Werre  operates  some  two  liun- 
dred  acres  of  fine  farming  land  near  the  village 
and  also  owns  nearly  one  hundred  .acres  in  addi- 
tion. In  politics  he  is  a  stanch  Democrat  and 
supports  the  party  principles  by  his  influence  and 
ballot.  Socially,  he  and  his  entire  family  are  held 
in  high  esteem  by  all  who  are  so  fortunate  as  to 
call  them  friends. 


RS.  NANCY  E.  CRANDLE,  widow  of  the 
late  .James  M.  Crandlc,  resides  on  section 
22,  township  7,  range  5,  where  for  the 
past  fifty-five.  3'ears  she  has  made  her 
home.  Her  parents  came  to  this  farm  in  1839  and 
her  father  purchased  a  tract  of  forty  acres,  also 
entered  three  tracts  of  the  same  size  from  tlie  Gov- 
ernment. Two  of  these  he  bought  at  11.25  per  acre, 
while  the  third  was  only  twelve  and  one-half  cents 
per  acre.  Coming  to  this  county  a  poor  man,  with 
little  of  this  world's  goods  to  call  his  own,  by  ex- 
cellent management  and  tireless  industry  he  ac- 
cumulated a  valuable  property.  Better  than  that, 
he  gained  the  esteem  of  all  with  whom  he  came  in 
contact  and  who  were  won  to  him  by  his  unvary- 
ing kindness  of  heart  and  nobility  of  life.  At  the 
age  of  sixty-eight  }'ears,  on  the  9th  of  September, 
1869,  he  was  called  hence.  His  wife  survived  him 
for  some  years,  her  death  occurring  February  6, 
1890,  at  the  age  of  eighty-four.  Tliej'  were  con- 
sistent members  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  and 
by  their  lives  exemplified  the  sincerity  of  their 
religious  belief. 

The  subject  of   this  sketch  was  born  in  Rowan 
County,  N.  C,  January  31,  1833,  and  accompanied 


her  parents  to  Illinois  in  1839,  setj;ling  in  Ran- 
dolph County,  where  she  grew  to  mature  years, 
ller  marriage  occurred  March  16,  1863,  and  united 
her  with  James  Crandle.  This  gentleman  was  a 
native  of  Canada  and  came  to  Illinois  at  the  age  of 
five  years,  settling  in  Boone  Count}'.  In  1859  he 
came  to  Randolph  County,  where  he  followed  his 
chosen  occut)ation,  that  of  agriculture.  To  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Crandle  were  born  five  children,  of 
whom  the  following  are  now  living:  James  S., 
Sarah  liiunice  E.,  Eugene  and  Merritt.  The  daugh- 
ter married  Martin  Conder  and  lives  in  Mt.  Ver- 
non, 111.  The  others  reside  with  their  mother. 
They  have  received  excellent  educations,  and  Eu- 
gene is  a  successful  teacher. 

In  1870  Mrs.  Crandle  was  bereaved  by  the  death 
of  her  husband,  about  seven  years  after  their 
marriage.  Though  left  with  a  family  of  small 
children  dependent  upon  her,  she  did  not  become 
discouraged,  but  worked  patiently  and  persever- 
ingly  until  success  was  hers.  Her  sons  are  manly 
and  energetic,  and  her  daughter  amiable  and  ac- 
complished, and  the  honorable  position  they  oc- 
cupy is  due  in  no  small  degree  to  the  self-sacrific- 
ing efforts  of  the  devoted  mother.  The  home 
farm  consists  of  sixty  acres  of  land,  from  which 
Mrs.  Crandle  receives  a  good  income.  In  religious 
belief  she  is  a  member  of  the  Presb^'terian  Church, 
which  she  joined  at  the  age  of  sixteen  years.  Her 
husband  was  identified  with  the  Methodist  Epis- 
copal Church.  In  this  part  of  the  county  she  is 
well  and  favorably  knovvn  and  is  numbered  among 
the  most  popular  ladies  of  the  neighborhood 
where  she  has  so  long  resided. 


lETRICH  RICKENBERG,  one  of  the  suc- 
cessful agriculturists  of  Randolph  County, 
(^^  resides  on  section  5,  township  7,  range  5, 
and  is  the  owner  of  one  hundred  and 
sixty  acres  included  in  the  home  farm,  in  addition 
to  one  hundred  and  seventy-six  acres  elsewhere  ini 
this  county.  He  was  born  in  Hanover,  Germany, 
March  7.  1829,  and  is  the  son  of  Frederick  and 
Mary  (Gergens)  Rickenberg,  natives  of  Hanover. 
In  the  parental   family  there  were  eight  children^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


825 


three  of  whom  are  living,  Mary,  Lewis  and  Diet- 
rich, all  of  whom  live  in  Randolph  County. 

In  1842  our  subject  and  Henr}-  Rickenberg  emi- 
grated to  the  United  States,  landing  in  New  Or- 
leans in  December.  In  1846  Mary  came  to  this 
country,  and  later  Lewis  and  another  sister  crossed 
the  ocean  to  join  tlie  members  of  tiie  family  here. 
In  1866  the  eldest  brother  and  the  father  followed 
them  hither,  and  the  latter  died  in  this  county, 
near  Ellis  Grove,  in  1868.  The  mother  had  passed 
away  in  the  Old  Country  in  1846.  The  parents 
were  sincere,  honorable  Christian  people,  and  were 
devoted  members  of  the  Lutheran  Church. 

After  working  for  an  uncle  for  about  two  j'ears, 
our  subject  went  to  New  Orleans,  in  1844,  and 
from  there  proceeded  to  Florida,  where  he  was 
employed  on  the  Jordan  River  for  about  fourteen 
months.  Returning  to  New  Orleans  he  remained 
in  that  city  until  1849,  and  then  returned  to  Ran- 
dolpli  County,  where  he  has  since  made  his  home. 
In  1850  he  married  Miss  Margaret  Ileitmann,  who 
was  born  in  Hanover  in  1833,  and  accompanied 
her  parents  to  this  country  when  ten  years  old, 
settling  in  Randolph  County,  where  she  grew  to 
womanhood.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Herman 
and  Margaret  Heitmann,  and  by  her  marriage  be- 
came tlie  mother  of  seven  children,  three  yet  liv- 
ing, William,  Fritz  and  Helena,  tlie  latter  being 
the  wife  of  William  Ebers,  of  Randolph  County. 
Mrs.  Margaret  Rickenberg  died  Jul}'  18,  1870. 

The  second  marriage  of  Mr.  Rickenberg  uuiteil 
him  with  Miss  Doris  Hormann,  who  was  born  in 
Hanover  January  25,  1850,  and  accompanied  her 
parents  to  the  United  States  in  1873.  Her  eldest 
brother  resides  in  Germany,  but  the  rest  of  the 
family  reside  in  the  United  States.  Nine  chil- 
dren were  born  of  the  union  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Rickenberg,  of  whom  eight  are  living,  namely: 
Henry,  Emma,  Harmon,  Bertha,  Frieda,  Clara,  Her- 
bert and  Alfred.  Adolf  is  deceased.  The  chil- 
dren are  being  given  excellent  educational  ad- 
vantages and  are  being  trained  fui-  positions  of 
usefulness  and  honor. 

Beginning  with  limited  capital  in  the  United 
Slates,  Mr.  Rickenberg  has  prospered  beyond  his 
greatest  expectations  and  is  now  one  of  the  well- 
to-do  farmers  of  Randolph  County.     He  and  his 


family  are  identified  with  the  Evangelical  Luth- 
eran Church  at  Wine  Hill  and  are  highly  regarded 
in  the  social  circles  of  the  communit}'.  The  home 
farm  is  without  doubt  one  of  the  finest  for  miles 
around  and  invariably  attracts  the  attention  of  the 
passer-by,  proving  by  its  appearance  of  thrift  the 
progressive  spirit  and  prosperity  of  the  owner.  In 
political  matters  Mr.  Rickenberg  affiliates  with  the 
Democratic  party. 

ZUBER,  Superintendent  of  the  Murphys- 
y  boro   Brewing  Company,  was  born   in  St. 

i^  Gallen,  the  canton  of  St.  Gallen,  Switzer- 
(^)  land,  December  15,  1864.  His  father,  a 
mechanic  in  iron,  and  his  grandfather,  a  merchant 
by  occupation,  both  resided  in  that  canton.  The 
former,  in  1879,  came  to  America,  and  for  two 
years  followed  his  trade  in  New  Orleans,  after 
which  he  went  to  St.  Louis,  and  there,  in  partner- 
ship with  our  subject,  is  engaged  in  the  manufac- 
ture of  cornice  work. 

Our  subject  is  one  of  two  sons,  the  other  being 
Emil,  a  resident  of  St.  Louis.  He  was  reared  in 
Switzerland  and  attended  school  in  that  country, 
where  also  he  learned  the  trade  of  a  saddler  and 
harness-maker.  In  1881,  with  his  mother  and 
brother,  he  emigrated  to  the  United  States,  and  in 
St.  Louis  followed  the  trade  of  an  upholsterer, 
which  he  had  learned  in  Switzerland.  Later,  un- 
der the  firm  name  of  Zuber  &  Son,  he  embarked  in 
the  manufacture  of  cornice  work,  the  factory  be- 
ing located  for  two  years  at  No.  506  Lock  Ave- 
nue, removed  thence  to  No.  2606  South  Seventh 
Street,  and  later  to  No.  2527  South  Broadway. 
The  firm  is  still  in  business  at  that  place,  and  has 
established  a  solid  reputation  as  tinsmiths  and 
manufacturers  of  cornice. 

In  the  spring  of  1892  our  subject  accepted  the 
position  of  Superintendent  of  the  Murph3'sboro 
Brewing  Company,  and  coming  to  this  city,  has 
since  made  it  his  home.  The  brewery  has  a  capacity 
of  two  hundred  and  one-fourth  barrels  per  day, 
and  is  furnished  with  all  the  modern  improve- 
ments, including  an  engine  room,  store  rooms,  and 
an  ice  plant  for  the  manufacture  of  ice.     They 


826 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


Lave  two  machines  with  a  capacity  of  sixty  tons 
per  daj',  and  do  an  extensive  wholesale  and  retail 
business,  shipping  both  ice  and  beer  to  adjoining 
cities.  Mr.  Zuber  not  on!}'  superintends  the  work 
in  the  brewery,  but  also  has  charge  of  the  work  on 
the  road,  and  through  his  enterprise  the  business 
has  been  largely  increased.  The  concern  was  es- 
tablished in  1868,  but  its  success  has  been  largely 
secured  since  1886.  The  company  owns  eight 
acres  in  Murphysboro,  and  in  connection  with  the 
brewer}'  has  a  bottling  works,  which  was  started  in 
1890. 

The  marriage  of  Jlr.  Zuber  occurred  in  St.  Louis 
in  1891,  and  united  him  with  Miss  Kate,  daughter 
of  Rudolph  Stecher,  proprietor  and  President  of 
the  Stecher  Cooperage  Works,  one  of  the  largest 
in  America.  They  are  the  parents  of  one  child, 
Rudolph.  Socially  Mr.  Zuber  is  identified  with 
Amity  Lodge  No.  261,  L  O.  O.  F.,  and  the  Order 
of  Reliable  Protection  at  St.  Louis.  Political!}'  he 
is  a  Republican,  firm  in  his  allegiance  to  party 
principles.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Murphysboro 
Fire  Department.  The  various  enterprises  calcu- 
lated to  promote  the  best  interests  of  the  cit}'  re- 
ceive his  cordial  support,  and  he  is  recognized  as 
one  of  the  most  energetic  and  successful  citizens 
of  tiie  place. 


@_ ^am^         M 


/p55\EORGE  TEGT.MEYEK,  a  merchant  of  Shi- 
fl|  ,— -,  loh  Hill,  was  born  at  Bevensen,  in  the 
^^^J  province  of  Hanover,  March  31,  1853.  He 
is  a  son  of  Louis  and  Mary  (Lubbers)  Tegtmeyer, 
natives  of  the  same  province.  Until  the  age  of 
fourteen  he  attended  the  schools  at  Bevensen,  and 
on  completing  his  studies  he  entered  as  an  appren- 
tice a  store  at  Zeven,an  apprenticeship  being  nec- 
essary to  a  mercantile  career  in  the  Old  Country. 
There  he  remained  u..til  the  fall  of  1871.  when  he 
emigrated  to  America,  the  only  one  of  his  entire 
family  to  leave  the  Fatlierland. 

Embarking  at  Hamburg  on  the  steamer  "Holsa- 
tia,"  after  a  passage  of  thirteen  days  Mr.  Tegt- 
meyer landed  in  New  York,  where  he  spent  one 


week.  Having  an  uncle  in  Randolph,  111.,  he  set 
out  for  this  place  and  reached  his  destination  in 
October.  During  the  winter  he  attended  school, 
and  in  March  went  to  St.  Louis.  Having  no  ac- 
quaintances, it  was  necessary  to  take  what  ever 
work  came  to  hand.  The  first  position  that  offered 
was  a  place  as  a  waiter  in  a  restaurant.  After  a 
time  he  secured  a  position  in  a  store  on  O 'Fallon 
Street,  and  later  filled  a  clerical  position  in  several 
mercantile  establishments. 

In  the  spring  of  1878  longing  for  the  home 
became  too  strong  to  be  resisted,  so  passage  was 
taken  for  the  Old  Country,  where  our  subject  re- 
mained until  September.  Returning  to  America, 
he  stopped  for  a  month  in  St.  Louis,  and  learning 
that  William  C.  Dean,  of  Shiloh  Hill,  was  desiring 
to  dispose  of  his  store,  a  deal  was  consummated  in 
the  fall  of  that  year  and  possession  was  taken 
March  1,  1879.  Here  Mr.  Tegtmejer  has  remained 
ever  since.  In  his  store  will  be  found  a  nicelv  se- 
lected slock  of  such  goods  as  are  usualh'  found  in 
a  general  store.  He  buys  and  ships  a  goodly 
amount  of  produce  raised  in  the  surrounding 
countr}". 

September  12,  1879,  Mr.  Tegtmeyer  was  united 
in  marriage  with  Miss  Augustina,  daughter  of 
Fred  and  Henrietta  (Kremer)  Niederme\-er,  resi- 
dents of  St.  Louis,  where  Mrs.  Tegtme}'er  was  born 
September  12.  1861.  To  them  were  bom  five 
children,  three  of  whom  survive.  They  are  Louis 
G.,  Ida  H.  and  Willie.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  G.  Tegt- 
meyer are  members  of  the  Lutheran  Church  at 
Shiloh  Hill.  In  politics  he  is  a  Republican  and 
sees  no  reason  for  a  change  in  his  political  views 
at  the  present  time.  For  ten  j'ears  he  has  been 
Treasurer  of  the  township  schools,  which  position 
of  trust  he  still  holds.  In  1883  he  was  appointed 
Postmaster  at  Shiloh  Hill  and  has  since  held  that 
position  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  patrons  of  the 
office. 

In  1889  a  stock  company  was  formed  to  operate 
a  creamery  at  Shiloh  Hill  and  Mr.  Tegtmeyer  owns 
a  majority  of  the  stock.  Most  of  the  product  is 
shipped  to  St.  Louis.  Socially  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Tegt- 
meyer are  highly  esteemed  bj^  a  wide  circle  of 
friends.  Through  the  successful  management  of 
his  business  he  has  accumulated  a  competence  and 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


827 


is  numbered  among  the  substantial  men  of  the 
town.  A  well  spent  life  has  gained  for  him  the 
confidence  of  all  with  whom  business  or  social  re- 
lations have  brought  him  in  contact. 


,>> .o*o.-@>^.,^hJ^..o*o. <<— 

^(  OSHLTA  AND  JOSEPH  SPRINGER  are  promi- 
nent and  well  known  farmers  of  Jackson 
County,  residing   on  section   15,  Makanda 

'tfJ  Township.  Their  grandfather,  John  Spring- 
er, prior  to  his  marriage  accompanied  the  famous 
explorer,  Daniel  Boone,  to  the  then  wilderness  of 
Kentucky,  whence  after  remaining  one  winter,  he 
returned  to  the  vicinit}'  of  Frederick  City,  Md., 
where  his  father's  family  lived.  There  he  married 
and  there  two  children  were  born  to  the  union. 
About  1781  he  moved  to  Kentuck3'  and  settled 
near  Harrodsburg,  Mercer  County.  When  the 
Indian  War  broke  out,  he  with  other  neighbors 
sought  refuge  in  Harrod's  Fort.  After  peace  was 
declared  with  the  Indians,  he  removed  to  the  vicin- 
ity of  Danville,  K}-.,  and  later  went  to  Washington 
County  and  settled  on  Pleasant  Run,  five  miles 
from  Springfield,  the  county  seat.  There  he  died 
about  1812. 

The  father  of  our  subjects,  John  Springer,  was 
born  in  Harrod's  Fort,  Kj\,  January  8,  1784,  and 
moved  to  Madison  (now  Bond)  Count\',  111.,  set- 
tling near  Greenville  in  the  fall  of  1810.  In  Ken- 
tucky he  married  Susan  Sage,  and  after  her  death 
he  was  united  with  Miss  Elizabeth  Bird,  a  native 
of  Tennessee,  who  became  the  mother  of  our  sub- 
jects. When  the  War  of  1812  commenced,  the 
father  with  other  neighbors  went  into  Jones'  Fort, 
where  they  organized  a  companj",  William  Jones 
being  chosen  Cai)tain,  and  Mr.  Springer  First  Lieu- 
tenant. The}-  stayed  there  until  the  fall  of  1814, 
when,  the  war  being  ended,  they  removed  five 
miles  northwest  of  Edwardsville,  Madison  County, 
111.,  and  settled  on  section  30,  township  5,  range  8. 
In  that  home  the  children  of  his  second  marriage 
were  born  and  reared.  He  was  appointed  Justice 
of  the  Peace  by  Gov.  Ninian  Edwards.  In  1815  he 
was  made  a  Class-leader  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church  at  Salem  and  served  continuously  as  such 
until   his  death,  Juue  25,   1849.     His   wife,  whose 


membership  was  also  in  the  Methodist  Church, 
died  during  the  same  year  as  that  in  which  he 
passed  awa^'.     In  politics  he  was  a  Whig. 

In  the  parental  family  there  were  ten  children,  of 
whom  six  are  yet  living,  Thomas  O.,  Levi  C,  Emily 
Gillhone,  Lucinda  Irwin,  Joshua  S.  and  Joseph  E. 
Joshua  S.  Si)ringer  was  born  in  Madison  County, 
111.,  December  15.  1841,  was  reared  on  the  old 
homestead,  and  acquired  his  education  in  the  dis- 
trict schools.  He  enlisted  August  10,  1862,  in 
Company  F,  One  Hundred  and  Seventeenth  Illi- 
nois Infantry,  and  served  until  March  18,  186,3, 
when  he  was  discharged  on  account  of  disability. 
He  then  returned  home,  where  he  continued  until 
February,  1867,  when,  in  company  with  his  brother, 
he  bought  their  present  farm. 

On  the  15th  of  .January,  1877,  Joshua  S.  Springer 
wedded  Mary  Hopkins,  daughter  of  L.  V.  Hopkins, 
who  was  in  the  gunboat  service  during  the  Civil 
War,  and  who  came  to  Jackson  County  in  1865. 
She  was  born  in  Ft.  Madison,  Iowa,  December 
7,  1851,  and  died  April  18,  1892,  leaving  two  chil 
dren,  Edward  S.  and  Charles  F,,  who  are  now  at- 
tending school.  One  other  child  died  in  early  life. 
Joseph  Springer  was  born  on  the  old  homestead 
October  13,  1843,  and  he  too  wore  the  blue,  enlist- 
ing as  a  private  of  Company  H,  One  Hundred  and 
Fiftieth  Illinois  Infantry,  .January  14,  1865.  He 
was  appointed  Sergeant  of  Camp  Butler,  was  after- 
wards made  Second  Lieutenant,  and  later  merito- 
rious conduct  won  him  promotion  to  the  rank  of 
First  Lieutenant.  He  went  to  Nashville  and  w.as 
then  engaged  in  guarding  railroads  at  Bridgeport, 
after  which  he  was  stationed  at  Cleveland  and  Dal- 
ton.  On  the  8tli  of  July,  1865,  he  was  ordered  to 
Atlanta,  where  he  did  Provost  duty  for  a  mouth, 
and  was  thence  transferred  to  Franklin,  and  after- 
wards to  Grilliu,  Ga.  He  was  mustered  out  Jan- 
uary 19,  1866,  and  was  discharged  in  Springfield. 
The  Old  Flag  and  the  cause  it  represented  found 
in  him  an  able  defender. 

On  the  29th  of  December,  1880,  was  celebrated 
the  marriage  of  Joseph  Springer  and  Adeline  E., 
daughter  of  Philander  Utter,  a  native  of  New  Jer- 
sey, who  removed  west  to  Oakland  Countj-,  Mich. 
She  was  Ijorn  September  5,  1844,  in  Ontario  Coun- 
ty-, N,  Y.     They  have  one  child,  William  E.,  who 


828 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


has  in  his  possession  the  gun  carried  by  his  grand- 
father in  the  Black  Hawk  War,  while  his  cousin 
Charles  has  the  sword  which  belonged  to  Lieuten- 
ant Springer. 

The  Springer  brothers  are  the  owners  of  one 
hundred  and  twentj-  acres  of  valuable  land,  which 
is  highly  improved  and  cultivated,  and  devote 
their  energies  to  the  raising  of  grain  and  fruit  and 
good  grades  of  stock.  They  are  numbered  among 
the  leading  agriculturists  of  the  community.  Both 
hold  membership  with  the  Methodist  E^piscopal 
Church  and  with  the  Masonic  fraternit\'.  and  Jo- 
seph is  Past  Master  of  Makanda  Lodge  No.  434, 
A.  F.  &  A.  M.  The\^  also  belong  to  Makanda 
Post  No.  280,  G.  A.  R.,  of  which  Joshua  is  Junior 
Vice-Commander.  He  has  also  belonged  to  the 
Odd  Fellows'  society,  and  for  seventeen  yeare  he 
has  served  as  School  Director.  He  is  also  Highway 
Commissioner,  and  Joseph  has  been  botli  Super- 
visor and  Highway  Commissioner  of  Makanda 
Township.  In  politics  they  are  stalwart  Republi- 
cans, and  Joshua  is  a  member  of  the  Count}-  Cen- 
tral Committee.  The  Springer  brothers  are  men 
of  intelligence  and  sterling  worth,  ever  faithful  to 
duty,  whether  public  or  priv.ite,  and  in  the  commu- 
nity where  they  live  are  highly  respected. 


-^ 


'jJ^jEV.  ROBERT  ALLYN,  LL.  D..  formerly  of 
irbondale,  was  one  of  the  prominent 
ministers  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
^0  Church,  known  not  only  in  Illinois,  but 
througliout  the  country.  He  was  born  January  25, 
1817,  in  Led_yard,New  London  County,  Conn., and 
was  a  member  of  one  of  the  oldest  families  of  this 
countr}'.  The  first  American  ancestor,  John  Allyn, 
emigrated  from  England  to  America,  and  in  1646 
removed  from  Gloucester,  Mass.,  to  New  London 
County,  Conn.  He  laid  out  the  town  of  Allyn 's 
Point,  six  miles  north  of  New  London,  and  there 
served  as  Town  Clerk  and  Selectman.  Those  in 
the  line  of  direct  descent  were  Robert,  Robert  and 
James.  The  last-named  is  the  grandfather  of  our 
subject.     He  was  born  in  Ledyard,  Conn.,  married 


Anna  Stanton,  and  was  a  soldier  of  the  Revolu- 
tionary War. 

Charles  Allyn.  the  father  of  our  subject,  was 
born  in  New  London  County,  Conn.,  September 
28,  1781,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  War  of 
1812,  although  he  was  never  enrolled  as  a  soldier. 
His  occupation  was  that  of  farming.  He  wedded 
Lois  Gallup,  who  was  born  April  17,  1791,  and 
was  a  daughter  of  Jacob  and  Rebecca  (Morgan) 
Gallup,  natives  of  Connecticut.  The  family  was 
one  of  prominence  in  the  earl}-  histor}-  of  that 
state  and  numbered  among  its  members  Capt. 
John  Gallup,  who  served  in  the  French  and  Indian 
War.  Ethan  Allen,  of  Revolutionary  fame,  is  of 
the  same  familj'  as  our  subject.  One  of  the  Allj-n 
family  became  the  wife  of  Mr.  Cox,  and  the 
mother  of  Jacob  D.  Cox,  ex-Governor  of  Ohio. 
The  parents  of  Rev.  Mr.  All3^n  alwaj-s  resided  in 
the  Nutmeg  State.  They  had  a  family  of  six 
children,  three  of  whom  are  now  living,  Robert; 
Calvin,  of  Nevada;  and  Mrs.  Louisa  Williams,  of 
Salem,  Conn. 

Upon  his  father's  farm  our  subject  was  reared  to 
manhood.  He  began  his  education  in  the  district 
schools,  later  attended  Wilbraham  Academy  of 
Massachusetts,  and  was  graduated  from  the  Wes- 
Icyan  Univereity  of  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1841. 
He  then  became  Principal  of  the  academy  in  which 
he  had  studied,  and  held  that  position  until  1848, 
after  which  he  was  Principal  of  Kent  Academy 
(now  know  as  Providence  Conference  Seminary) 
in  East  Greenwich,  R.  I.,  until  1854.  For  three 
years  he  served  as  Commissioner  of  the  public 
schools  of  Rhode  Island,  and  in  1852  and  1854 
was  elected  to  the  Legislature  of  that  state.  In 
that  year  he  was  appointed  to  visit  West  Point  b}' 
the  President,  and  his  commission  was  signed  by 
Jefferson  Davis,  then  Secretaiy  of  War.  He  was 
also  connected  with  the  Normal  School  of  Rhode 
Island. 

November  18,  1841,  Rev.  Mr.  Allyn  married 
Miss  Emeline  H.  Denison,  who  was  born  in  Frank- 
lin County,  Mass.,  September  18,  1811.  and  was  a 
daughter  of  David  Denison,  who  belonged  to  an 
old  New  England  family.  She  died  in  Colchester, 
Conn.,  April  24,  1844.  Of  her  two  children, 
Charles  is  now  deceased;  and  Emeline  L.,  widow  of 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


829 


William  H.  Hypes,  resides  in  Lebanon,  111.  June 
24,  1845,  Mr.  Allyii  wedded  Mary  B.,  daugh- 
ter of  Jonathan  Budingtou.  She  was  born  June 
28,  1823,  in  Franklin  County,  Mass.,  and  died  Oc- 
tober 17,  1879,  in  Carbondale,  111.,  leaving  three 
children,  .Toseph,  Ellen  and  Harriet.  The  last- 
named  died  January  10,  1883. 

In  1857  Rev.  Mr.  Allyn  left  the  east,  and  for  two 
years  was  Professor  of  Greek  and  Latin  in  the 
Ohio  University  at  Athens.  In  1859  he  went  to 
Cincinnati,  and  was  President  of  the  Wesleyan 
Female  College  for  four  years.  He  then  went  to 
McKendree  College  of  Illinois,  of  which  he  was 
President  for  eleven  years.  In  1874  he  caine  to 
Carbondale,  organized  the  Southern  Illinois  Normal 
University,  and  for  eighteen  3'ears  continued  as 
its  President.  His  work  as  an  educator  was  most 
successful  and  won  him  prominence  throughout 
the  country.  He  was  a  member  of  the  National 
Educational  Association,  the  National  Council  of 
Education,  and  of  the  state  associations  of  Massa- 
chusetts, Rhode  Island,  Ohio  and  Illinois.  He 
served  as  President  of  the  associations  in  Rhode 
Island  and  this  state. 

In  March,  1835,  Rev.  Mr.  Allyn  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  and  from 
1841  until  his  death  was  active  in  pulpit  work.  He 
delivered  over  thirteen  hundred  sermons,  twenty 
of  which  have  been  printed.  He  was  ordained  a 
Deacon  of  the  church  in  1844,  in  May,  1846,  was 
made  an  Elder,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Southern 
Illinois  Conference.  He  was  one  of  the  organizers 
of  the  Freedmau's  Aid  Society  of  the  Methodist 
Episco))al  Church,  which  has  so  materially  pro- 
moted the  welfare  of  the  colored  race. 

In  1864  Rev.  Mr.  All^ni  received  the  degree  of 
D.  D.  from  the  Wesle3'an  University  of  Connecti- 
cut, and  in  1875  McKendree  College  of  Illinois 
conferred  upon  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  lie  was 
a  prolific  writer  and  furnished  many  able  articles 
for  the  papers.  He  took  an  active  part  in  politics 
during  the  slaver3'  agitation,  helped  to  raise  sev- 
eral companies  for  the  Union  army  and  served  as 
one  of  the  Home  Guards  in  Cincinnati  during  the 
war.  He  was  also  a  prominent  worker  in  the 
cause  of  temperance.  During  the  latter  years  he 
lived  retired  at  his  pleasant  home  in   Carbondale, 


resting  after  long  and  faithful  service  in  lines 
which  tend  to  elevate  and  uplift  humanity.  He 
was  taken  ill  with  la  grippe  and  passed  away 
January  7,  1894.  In  his  demise  Carbondale  lost 
one  of  its  most  honored  citizens  and  the  Methodist 
Church  one  of  its  most  able  ministers.  In  the 
school  room  and  in  the  pulpit  his  example  and 
teachings  benefited  those  around  him,  and  his  in- 
fluence will  continue  an  active  power  for  good  in 
this  community  for  many  years  to  come. 


■gig^g^&^$^^^g«»-^$^iS^!g-S-;$-^*^S- 


\Ti  M.  KUNZ,  a  hardware  inerchant  of  Pinck- 
neyville,  was  l)orn  in  the  province  of  Nona, 
Prussia,  December  21,  1832.  His  father, 
Frederick  Kunz,  was  a  small  farmer  in  the 
Old  Countrj',  where  his  entire  life  was  passed.  Our 
subject  was  the  youngest  of  a  family  of  six,  there 
being  four  brothers  and  two  sisters.  Of  this  num- 
ber, himself,  one  brother  and  one  sister  are  now 
living.  Prior  to  the  age  of  fourteen  years  he  at- 
tended the  schools  of  his  native  land,  after  which 
he  learned  the  trade  of  a  blacksmith. 

Coming  to  America  in  1853,  Mr.  Kunz  worked 
at  his  trade  in  St.  Louis  for  two  years,  and  then 
spent  one  year  in  Chester.  In  1856  he  came  to 
Pinckneyville,  where  he  followed  his  trade  until 
1883.  By  hard  work  and  good  management  he 
accumul.ated  some  money,  which  he  invested  in. 
real  estate,  and  the  property  having  increased  in 
value,  he  has  become  well-to-do.  He  still  owns 
considerable  valuable  real  estate  in  Pinckneyville, 
including  the  two  lots  on  the  east  side  of  the 
square,  where  his  store  is  located.  He  expects  in 
the  near  future  to  build  a  fine  opera  house. 

In  1883,  when  he  left  the  anvil,  Mr.  Kunz  en- 
gaged in  the  hardware  and  machinery  business,  in 
which  he  has  since  built  up  a  large  trade.  He  is 
one  of  the  substantial  and  wealthy  men  of  the 
city,  and  is  respected  b}'  all  who  know  him.  Prom- 
inent in  public  affairs,  he  has  served  for  six  terms 
as  Alderman,  and  is  at  present  a  member  of  the 
Board  of  Education.  Politically  he  is  a  Democrat. 
In  1856  he  married  Miss  Lottie  Halkomeyer,  and 
they  became  the  p.irents  of  four  children,  namely: 
Theodore,  who  died  at  the  age  of  eighteen  years; 


830 


i^ORTRAlT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Mary,  who  is  at  home;  Henry,  who  is  a  traveling 
salesman  for  a  St.  Louis  firm,  and  Jacob,  who  is 
employed  in  a  hardware  store  in  St.  Louis.  The 
mother  of  tliese  children   died  in  1871. 

The  second  marriage  of  Mr.  Kunz  united  him 
with  Catherine  Wildemote,  a  native  of  Germauj'. 
They  have  eight  children,  as  follows:  Fritz,  who 
assists  his  father  in  the  store;  Charles,  wlio  is  also 
with  his  father  in  the  liardware  business;  Emma, 
Tillie,  George,  Eddie,  Artliur  and  Harmon,  who 
are  attending  the  public  schools.  Mr.  Kunz  and 
his  family  are  members  of  the  Lutlieran  P^vangeli- 
cal  Church,  and  he  was  for  many  years  a  Trustee, 
but  resigned  from  that  position  in  1894. 


JOSEPH  F.  DEROUSSE,  one  of  the  descend- 
ants of  the  old  French  settlers  of  Randolph 
County,  and  a  gentleman  who  enjoys  to  an 
_^  unusually  high  degree  the  esteem  and  re- 
gard of  his  fellow-citizens,  was  born  in  Old  Kas- 
kaskia  February  8,  1832,  during  the  palmiest  days 
of  the  ancient  town.  He  is  a  son  of  P"rancois,  who 
in  turn  was  the  son  of  Joseph  Derousse,  and  who 
was  also  born  in  the  old  French  town.  Here  he 
grew  to  manhood  and  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Julia  Danis,  who,  like  himself,  was  a  representa- 
tive of  a  prominent  pioneer  family. 

When  our  subject  was  about  seven  years  old, 
Francois  Derousse  removed  with  the  family  to 
Pujol,  a  village  some  six  miles  from  Kaskaskia, 
and  there  Joseph  passed  his  j'outhful  years.  Edu- 
cational advantages  were  not  good  at  the  time  he 
was  a  boy,  and  in  consequence  his  early  education 
was  somewhat  neglected.  April  19,  1856,  he  was 
united  in  marriage  with  the  daughter  of  Antoine 
Casson.  Of  this  marriage  four  children  were 
born,  three  of  whom  survive:  Celia,  who  is  the 
widow  of  Fr.ank  Menaid;  Octavia,  wife  of  Alfred 
Buatte  and  a  resident  of  Wamego,  Kau.;  and  Jo- 
seph, who  married  Letitia  Udson,  and  is  living 
near  the  crossing  of  the  Grand  Line  and  the  Big 
Lane. 

After  the  death  of  his  first  wife,  who  passed 
away  on  the  30th  of  September,  1872,  flur  sub- 
ject was  again  united  in  marriage,  in  1879,  choos- 


ing as  his  wife  Mrs.  Sarah  Pavau,  the  widow 
of  Edward  Pavau.  This  union  has  been  blessed 
by  the  birth  of  two  children,  only  one  of  whom 
is  now  living,  Denis  Leon,  a  bright  lad  of  four- 
teen years.  Mr.  Derousse  had  twelve  grandchil- 
dren, eight  of  whom  are  now  living.  The  family 
is  one  of  prominence  in  the  community,  and  the 
children,  who  have  been  given  excellent  advan- 
tages, are  highly  respected  in  the  localities  where 
they  reside. 

In  the  spring  of  1893  Mr.  Derousse  moved  to 
his  present  holding,  lot  No.  45,  Third  Survey,  Kas- 
kaskia Commons,  and  here  he  and  his  family  have 
a  comfortable  home,  abounding  with  all  the  com- 
forts and  many  of  the  luxuries  of  life.  Mr.  De- 
rousse is  a  member  of  the  Church  of  the  Immac- 
ulate Conception,  the  oldest  congregation  in  the 
west,  having  been  founded  by  Pere  Marquette  on 
his  tour  of  the  Valley  in  1672.  Like  all  the  old 
French,  Mr.  Derousse  has  been  a  life-long  Demo- 
crat and  votes  the  straight  ticket.  While  pre- 
ferring to  devote  his  attention  to  personal  affairs, 
he  has  consented  to  serve  in  a  number  of  official 
positions,  in  all  of  which  he  has  discharged  the 
duties  with  characteristic  energy  and  efficienc}'. 
For  three  yeais  he  has  held  the  office  of  School 
Trustee,  and  for  nine  years  served  as  School  Di- 
rector. 

' S#P '    . 


EZEKIEL  J.  HOLLOMAN,  an  agriculturist 
residing  on  section  13,  township  7,  range 
6,  Randolph  County,  cultivates  a  tract  of 
one  hundred  and  fifty  acres,  of  which  a  part  is 
hill  and  the  remainder  bottom  land.  Upon  the 
farm  where  he  now  resides  he  was  born  April  20, 
1850,  being  a  son  of  Ezekiel  and  Mary  G.  (Brown) 
Holloman,  natives  of  Middle  Tennessee,  both  of 
whom  were  born  in  1812,  the  former  coming  to 
Illinois  in  1815,  and  the  latter  in  1828. 

Until  the  age  of  eighteen  years  Ezekiel  J.  Hol- 
loman attended  the  district  schools  of  his  native 
township,  when,  owing  to  his  father's  ill  health,  it 
was  necessary  for  him  to  take  charge  of  the  farm 
and  assume  the  responsibility  of  caring  for  the 
family.  Two  years  later  the  father  died,  and  thus 
was  thrust  upon  the  young  man  a  still  greater  re- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


831 


sponsibillty.  In  the  settlement  of  the  estate  about 
one  hundred  and  sixtj'  acres  fell  to  Ezekiel,  and 
on  this  place  he  is  now  making  his  home.  He  de- 
voles  his  entire  time  to  general  farming  and  stock- 
raising,  to  which  his  land  is  well  adapted.  His 
principal  crop  is  wheal,  bul  he  diversifies  in  his 
agriculture. 

January  15,  1874,  Mr.  Holloraan  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Flora  E.,  daughter  of  Samuel 
and  Elizabeth  (McNeil)  Gordon.  This  lady  be- 
came the  mother  of  one  daughter,  Ida  B.,  and 
passed  away  May  4,  1881.  The  second  marriage 
of  Mr.  Hoi  Ionian  occurred  April  22,  1885,  and 
united  him  with  Miss  K)mil3'  L.,  daughter  of  John 
P.  and  Nancy  (Clendenin)  Mann,  of  Rockwood. 
Mrs.  Holloman  was  born  January  8,  1854,  and  is 
the  mother  of  five  children :  Ezekiel  B.,  Kate,  John 
Preston,  Nannie  and  George  T. 

In  politics  Mr.  Holloman  is  a  stanch  Republican 
and  invariably  supports  the  candidates  of  his 
chosen  party.  Having  been  elected  Road  Com- 
missioner, he  held  the  office  for  a  time,  but  find- 
ing that  it  interfered  with  his  farming  interests 
he  resigned.  For  about  fifteen  3-ears  he  served  as 
School  Director,  but  also  resigned  that  position. 
He  has  no  desire  for  official  honors,  preferring  to 
devote  his  attention  unreservedly  to  his  agricult- 
ural interests.  In  religious  belief  he  is  a  member 
of  the  Presh3^terian  Church. 


^IF^OBERT  McCONKEY.  In  the  death  of  this 
l!i^  gentleman  Randolpli  County'  lost  one  of  its 
iss  fl|i  most  enterprising  agriculturists,  and  one 
who  had  been  a  prominent  factor  in  its  up- 
building, being  himself  an  exponent  of  the  power 
of  a  strong  will  and  strict  integrity- — qualities 
calculated  to  bring  success.  No  higher  tribute 
can  be  paid  to  anj'  man  than  tliat  "lie  helped  him- 
self and  others  as  he  journeyed  through  the  pass- 
ing years,"  and  of  Mr.  McConkes'  tiiis  remark  may 
be  truthfully  made. 

Born  in  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  in  1818,  Mr. 
McConkey  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1851, 
and  for  three  j-ears  made  his  home  in  New  York 
City.     Thence   in    1854  he  came  to  Illinois,  and 


purchasing  land  in  township  7,  range  5,  Randolph 
Count}-,  settled  thereon,  and  commenced  the  task 
of  clearing  and  improving  the  place.  While  still  a 
resident  of  the  Emerald  Isle,  he  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Sarah  Hunter,  and  two  children, 
James  and  Margaret,  were  born  to  their  union  prior 
to  their  emigration.  After  coming  to  America  five 
children  were  added  to  the  household,  of  whom  W. 
R..  now  residing  on  the  old  homestead,  is  the  only 
survivor.  The  parents  were  members  of  the  Pres- 
byterian Church,  in  which  faith  they  died,  the  mo- 
ther in  1885,  and  the  father  on  the  15th  of  Jan- 
uary, 1891. 

The  elder  of  the  two  surviving  sons,  James,  was 
born  in  C'oiint}'  Antrim,  Ireland,  November  15, 
1845,  and  came  with  his  parents  to  America  in 
1851,  remaining  at  home  until  he  was  nineteen 
\ears  old.  He  then  joined  the  boj's  in  blue,  en- 
listing February  15,  1865,  as  a  member  of  Com- 
pany F,  One  Hundred  and  Fifty-fourth  Illinois 
Infantry,  and  doing  service  with  the  regiment  in 
Tennessee.  I'pon  being  discharged,  June  23, 1865, 
he  returned  home,  and  .assisted  his  father  on  the 
farm  until  twent3'-two  3'ears  old. 

On  the  11th  of  November,  1868,  James  McCon- 
key was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Sarah, 
daughter  of  W.  W.  and  Naiic}-  (Farrar)  Mitchell. 
Of  the  children  born  to  this  union  three  are  liv- 
ing, Robert,  Alexander  and  Israel.  The  second 
marriage  of  Mr.  McConkc}-  united  him  with  Miss 
Ellen  Crain,  their  wedding  taking  place  October 
9,  1888.  Three  children  were  born  to  them,  of 
whom  two  arc  living,  Josephine  and  Lola.  Mrs. 
McConke}'  was  born  in  township  7,  range  5,  this 
county.  May  22,  1860,  and  is  a  daughter  of  James 
H.  and  Ph(ebe  (Morris)  Crain.  She  is  a  lad}-  of 
amiable  disposition,  and  is  influential  in  the  social 
circles  of  the  communit}-.  Their  farm  is  located 
on  section  32,  where  Mr.  McConkey  owns  and  cul- 
tivates one  hundred  and  twenty  acres,  raising  the 
various  cereals  to  which  the  soil  is  adapted,  and 
also  making  a  specialty  of  stock.  Politically  lie 
votes  with  the  Republican  party. 

The  younger  son  of  our  subject,  W.  R.,  married 
Miss  Susie  M.  Andrews  on  the  4th  of  July,  1888, 
and  the}-  have  two  living  children,  Maude  and 
Mabel.     The   first-born,  Robert  E.,  died  when  ten 


832 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


months  old.  The  patents  of  Mrs.  McConkey,  Fred- 
crick  and  Caroline  (Zang)  Andrews,  are  residents 
of  township  7,  range  .5,  and  unto  them  were 
born  ten  children,  eight  yet  living.  William  R. 
took  charge  of  the  liome  farm  until  his  father's 
demise,  when,  tlie  place  liaving  been  willed  to 
him,  it  became  his  permanent  home.  Here  he  is 
prosperously  engaged  in  farming  and  stock-rais- 
ing. He  and  his  wife  are  well  and  favorably 
known  throughout  the  county;  she  is  a  member  of 
the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  to  which  he  is  a 
generous  contributor,  though  not  a  member.  In 
political  matters  he  votes  the  Republican  ticket, 
and  invariably  gives  to  the  principles  of  that  party 
his  warm  support. 

'jl?  A.  PORTER  carries  on  general  farming  on 
I  (@  sections  3,  9  and  10  Sand  Ridge  Township, 
jILj^  Jackson  Count}',  and  is  one  of  the  promi- 
inent  citizens  of  this  community.  His  father, 
Marshall  Porter,  was  born  in  Connecticut  October 
31, 1810,  and  was  asou  of  John  and  Sarah  (Fuller) 
Porter.  The  former  was  a  farmer  and  mechanic. 
In  the  earl_v  part  of  this  century  he  removed  to 
Ohio,  locating  in  Marietta.  He  removed  thence 
to  Athens,  Ohio,  and  liis  last  d.ays  were  spent  in 
Gallia  Count}'.  In  church  work  he  took  a  very 
prominent  part,  and  served  as  Deacon  in  the  Pres- 
b3'terian  Church,  with  which  he  held  membership. 
In  Athens  he  built  a  large  seminary,  which  is  still 
standing.  The  Porter  family  dates  its  origin  back 
to  the  da3'S  when  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  landed  in 
America  from  the  "Mayflower." 

Jlrs.  Porter,  mother  of  our  subject,  bore  the 
maiden  name  of  Celestia  C.  Bort.  She  was  born 
near  Erie,  Pa.,  in  1816,  and  was  a  daughter  of  the 
Rev.  Barnard  and  Polly  (Dewey)  Bort.  Her  father 
was  a  soldier  in  the  War  of  1812,  and  came  of  an 
old  Pennsylvania-Dutch  famil}-.  He  was  a  min- 
ister of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  and  both 
he  and  his  wife  died  in  the  Keystone  State.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Marshall  S.  Porter  were  married  in  Erie, 
Pa.,  and  removed  thence  to  Marietta,  Ohio,  where 
he  worked  as  a  mechanic.  He  afterwards  studied 
medicine    in  Marietta   College,   but  his   eyesight 


failed  him  and  be  never  engaged  in  practice. 
Later  he  removed  to  Porter,  Ohio,  which  town 
was  named  in  honor  of  his  father,  and  in  18.50  he 
came  to  Jackson  Count}-,  111.,  settling  in  Vergen- 
nes  Township,  upon  a  wild  farm.  Their  home 
was  a  log  cabin  in  the  midst  of  the  forest,  and  they 
lived  in  true  pioneer  style. 

The  father  died  April  1,  1880,  and  the  mother 
died  in  August,  1886.  They  were  members  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church,  and  Mr.  Porter  served  as 
Deacon  and  was  a  prominent  worker  in  the  church 
and  Sunday-school.  In  polities  he  was  a  Whig. 
Of  their  family  of  eleven  children  four  are  now 
living:  Luther  D.,  of  Sand  Ridge  Township;  L. 
A.;  George  II.,  of  the  same  township;  and  Ellen  L. 
Luther  D.  and  Solomon  M.  served  in  the  Seventh 
Illinois  Infantry  during  the  late  war.  The  former 
continued  at  the  front  until  after  the  close  of  the 
war,  but  the  latter  was  discharged  on  account  of 
disability,  and  died  from  its  effects. 

L.  A.  Porter,  whose  name  heads  this  record,  was 
born  in  Athens,  Ohio,  September  17,  1843,  and 
when  a  child  was  brought  to  this  state.  His  edu- 
cation was  acquired  in  the  common  schools,  and 
he  early  became  familiar  with  the  arduous  task 
of  clearing  and  developing  new  land.  He  was 
married  April  5,  1869,  to  Mrs.  Mary  (Worthen) 
Allen,  daughter  of  William  and  Mary  (Will) 
Worthen,  who  are  mentioned  in  the  sketch  of  Ed 
Worthen,  on  another  page  of  this  work.  The  lady 
was  born  on  this  farm,  in  a  log  house,  April  29, 
1837.  She  began  her  education  in  the  district 
schools  and  completed  it  in  Du  Quoin  Seminary, 
after  which  she  successfully  engaged  in  teaching 
school  for  eight  years,  and  was  then  married. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Porter  began  their  domestic  life 
upon  an  unimproved  farm  in  Vergennes  Township, 
which  he  transformed  into  a  productive  and  highly 
cultivated  tract,  building  a  fine  residence,  sur- 
rounded by  a  well  kept  lawn,  and  planting  fruit 
trees.  Upon  that  place  they  resided  until  1873, 
when  they  returned  to  the  old  home  to  live  with 
Mrs.  Porter's  mother,  and  afterward  bought  the 
homestead  from  the  heirs.  In  the  house,  which 
was  erected  at  a  cost  of  $6,000,  they  lived  until 
1879,  when  it  was  burned  with  all  its  contents. 
They  then  removed  to  the  old   home,  which  was 


PORTRAIT   AND    BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


833 


erected  by  Mrs.  Porter's  father  in  1853.  The  farm 
now  comprises  five  hundred  acres  of  valuable  land, 
most  of  which  is  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation. 
He  makes  a  specialty  of  raising  Jersey  cattle  for 
dairy  purposes  and  Hereford  cattle  for  the  market. 
He  also  owns  and  operates  a  steam  sawmill  at 
Grand  Tower,  and  manufactures  and  saws  railroad 
timber  for  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad  Company. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Porter  have  never  liad  any  chil- 
dren of  their  own,  but  the  following  named  or- 
phan children  iiave  found  a  home  with  them:  Lee 
Hull,  Loring,  Ida,  May,  Elmer  C.  and  Luther  Love- 
juy,  Mary  E.,  Sanford  B.,  Fred  O.  and  Lucinda 
Porter,  and  several  others,  fifteen  in  all.  Oursub- 
ject  and  his  wife  are  faithful  members  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church  of  Murphysboro,  in  which  he 
serves  as  Elder,  and  arc  active  workers  in  the  Sun- 
day-school. In  1881  thc3-  organized  a  Sunday- 
school  in  their  own  home.  It  afterwards  convened 
at  the  schoolhouse,  and  its  sessions  are  now  held 
in  the  Mound  Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Porter  have  been  very  active  in  its 
growth  and  iiave  been  absent  onl3'  a  few  Sundays 
in  ten  years.  Mr.  Porter  now  has  charge  of  the 
Bible  class,  while  his  wife  is  teacher  of  the  primary 
class.  Sociall3',  he  is  a  member  of  the  Odd  Fellows' 
society  of  Murphysboro,  in  which  he  has  filled 
various  offices  and  is  now  Past  Grand  of  his  lodge. 
In  politics  he  takes  an  active  interest,  and  has 
frequently  been  a  delegate  to  the  conventions  of 
the  Republican  part3'.  He  is  now  serving  his 
fourth  year  as  Supervisor. 


^+^[ 


"^]  AMES  P.  ADAMS,  one  of  the  most  prosper- 
ous farmers  of  Randolph  County,  and  a 
resident  of  township  6,  range  6,  has  spent 
his  entire  life  in  the  county  of  which  he  is 
still  a  resident.  He  was  here  born  December  12, 
1848,  and  is  a  son  of  David  and  Margaret  (Doug- 
las) Adams,  to  whom  further  reference  is  made  in 
the  biography  of  L.  L.  Adams,  presented  on  an- 
other page  of  this  volume.  James  attended  the 
Logan  school  in  township  6,  range  6,  during  the 
winter  seasons,  while  the  summers  were  devoted  to 
farm  work.     His   father  having  died  when  he  was 


a  child  of  six  3'ears  he  was  early  obliged  to  be- 
come self-supporting,  and  thus  were  developed  in 
his  character  the  traits  of  self-reliance  and  energy. 
In  January,  1873,  Mr.  Adams  married  Miss 
Mary  J.,  daughter  of  Andrew  and  Eliza  Douglas, 
but  their  union  was  of  brief  duration,  the  3'oung 
wife  dying  the  year  after  {he  marriage.  In  1882 
Mr.  Adams  was  united  with  Miss  Lydia  Rupperl, 
the  daughter  of  Charles  and  Joan  Ruppert,  na- 
tives respectively  of  Bohemia  and  Scotland.  Five 
children  have  been  bora  of  this  union,  namel3': 
Katie  B.,  Lillie  A.,  Eugene  R.,  Josephine  M.  and 
James  W.,  all  of  whom  are  at  home  with  their  par- 
ents. In  religious  connections  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Adamsare  identified  with  the  Presb3'terian  Church, 
in  which  he  is  Trustee.  Socially  he  is  a  member 
of  the  American  Legion  of  Honor.  In  politics  he 
adheres  to  Republican  principles,  and  while  never 
an  aspirant  for  office,  has  served  as  School  Director 
and  in  other  positions  of  trust. 


OH.  RHODES.  M.  D.,  the  only  physician  of 
]  Baldwin,  and  a  resident  of  this  place  since 
1873,  was  born  in  Madison  County',  but  was 
reared  and  educated  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.  His  father, 
Dr.  Arnold  H.  Rhodes,  emigrated  to  Wisconsin 
and  from  there  came  to  Jackson  County-,  III.,  and 
located  in  De  Soto,  where  his  death  occurred.  In 
the  famil3'  wiire  five  sons  and  three  daughters, 
and  it  is  worth3'  of  note  that  two  of  the  sons  be- 
came practicing  physicians,  while  the  other  three 
were  druggists. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  conducted  his  medi- 
cal studies  under  his  father's  supervision.  He  en- 
listed in  the  Sixt3' -second  Illinois  Infantry  and 
served  for  three  3'earsas  Assistant  Surgeon  of  that 
regimen t,which,  joining  the  Kentucky  Brigade, and 
being  assigned  to  the  "Western  arm3',  took  part  in 
all  the  campaigns  of  that  corps.  At  the  close  of 
the  war,  in  the  spring  of  1865,  the  Doctor  located 
at  Preston,  where  he  remained  until  1873,  the  date 
of  his  arrival  in  Baldwin.  In  I860,  in  Jackson 
County,  III.,  he  was  united  in  marri.age  with  Miss 
Rachel  Cochran,  and  they  became  the  parents  of 
one  daughter,  Amanda,  now  the  wife  of  Dr.  Will- 


834 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


iam  K.  Wright,  of  Mt.  Auburn,  111.  Mrs.  Rachel 
Rhodes  died  in  1868.  Tlie  Doctor  afterward  mar- 
ried Miss  Sarah  A.,  daughter  of  Joseph  Beattie. 

Upon  coming  to  Baldwin  Dr.  Rhodes  erected 
his  present  drug  store,  which  he  stocked  with  a 
general  line  of  drugs,  and  has  since  conducted  a 
profitable  trade,  in  acldition  to  attending  to  his 
professional  practice.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  he 
is  a  busj'  man.  His  practice  is  extensive,  as  large 
perhaps  as  that  of  any  ph3'sician  in  the  count}'. 
Socially'  he  is  a  member  of  the  Grand  Army  of  the 
Republic  and  belongs  to  the  post  at  Baldwin.  Po- 
liticall}-  he  is  a  Republican. 

HARLES  D.  BODEKER,  a  prominent  and 
influential  citizen  of  Randolph  County, 
who  is  now  successfully-  engaged  in  the  op- 
eration of  his  fine  farm  on  section  33,  township 
6,  range  6,  was  born  in  Prussia  on  the  1st  of 
April,  1842.  His  father,  Frederick  Bodeker,  was 
there  born  in  1803,  and  his  death  occurred  in  his 
native  land  in  1886.  Our  subject  was  the  sixth 
in  order  of  birth  in  a  family  of  seven  children. 
He  acquired  his  education  in  the  schools  of  his  na- 
tive country,  and  when  a  youth  of  fourteen  years 
came  to  America.  From  that  age  he  has  been  de- 
pendent upon  his  own  resources,  and  whatever 
success  he  has  achieved  in  life  is  due  to  his  own 
efforts.  On  reaching  the  Is'ew  World  he  took  up 
his  residence  in  Chester,  III.,  and  at  once  engaged 
with  Charles  Schroeder  to  learn  the  carpenter's 
trade.  This  was  in  1856,  and  he  continued  in  the 
employ  of  Mr.  Schroeder  until  the  death  of  that 
gentleman,  in  1861.  As  there  was  considerable 
unfinished  work  in  the  shop  at  that  time,  Mr. 
Bodeker  continued  as  the  manager  of  the  business 
until  the  following  August. 

Our  subject  then  entered  the  service  of  his 
country,  enlisting  as  a  member  of  Company  I, 
Tenth  Illinois  Infantry.  He  was  mustered  in  at 
Cairo,  and  was  with  his  regiment  in  many  severe 
engagements,  including  the  battles  of  Farmiugton, 
New  Madrid,  Corinth,  Island  No.  10,  and  man}' 
others.  He  was  mustered  out  on  the  4th  of  July, 
1865,  in   Louisville,  Ky.,  after  which  he  returned 


to  Randolph  County  and  resumed  work  at  the 
carpenter's  trade,  which  he  followed  for  about 
twelve  years.  In  the  meantime  he  had  purchased 
land  and  was  canning  on  a  farm.  About  1889  he 
altogether  abandoned  his  trade  and  now  devotes 
his  entire  time  and  attention  to  the  further  culti- 
vation and  improvement  of  his  beautiful  farm, 
which  is  justly  considered  one  of  tlie  finest  in  the 
county.  One  department  of  his  business  is  dairy 
farming,  and  it  proves  a  profitable  one. 

In  June,  1867,  Mr.  Bodeker  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Henrietta  Hackmeister,  daugh- 
ter of  Henry  and  Mena  Hackmeister,  who  were 
natives  of  Germany.  By  their  marriage  were 
born  five  children,  one  of  whom  died  in  infanc}'. 
Louie,  Mar}',  William  and  Anna  are  still  with  their 
parents.  Mr.  Bodeker  and  his  family  are  members 
of  the  Lutheran  Church  and  are  people  of  promi- 
nence in  this  community,  where  they  are  widely 
and  favorabi}'  known.  He  has  been  identified  with 
the  Republican  part}'  for  many  years,  and  at  this 
writing  is  the  nominee  of  the  party  for  the  office 
of  County  Commissioner.  He  has  the  confidence 
of  his  fellow-townsmen,  and  the  trust  reposed  in 
him  is  never  betrayed.  For  ten  years  he  has  been 
Appraiser  for  the  Randolph  Mutual  Insurance 
Com))any,  and  is  a  member  of  Swanwick  Post  No. 
212,  G.  A.  R.,  of  Chester.  He  was  a  faithful  sol- 
dier when  the  Union  was  in  peril,  and  is  alike  true 
to  his  country  in  days  of  peace.  In  the  com- 
munity where  he  lives  he  manifests  a  commenda- 
ble interest  in  everything  pertaining  to  the  gen- 
eral welfare  and  to  the  advancement  of  public 
enterprises  which  are  calculated  to  i^rove  benefi- 
cial. 

• 0^P • 


^  lilLLIAM  BARNARD.  It  is  impossible  in  a 
\/\///  '^''^^  biographical  sketch  to  render  full 
V*(^  justice  to  prominent  men,  and  yet  there 
are  some  who  are  so  intimately  and  clearly  identi- 
fied with  the  county's  welfare,  and  whose  names 
are  so  familiar  to  all,  that  it  is  only  right  to  dwell 
upon  what  they  have  done  and  the  influence  of 
their  career  upon  others.  To  this  class  belongs 
William  Barnard,  one  of  the  capable  business  men 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD 


835 


of  Chester,  who  is  carrying  on  an  extensive  business 
as  a  coal  merchant. 

Our  subject's  birth  occurred  August  22,  1847,  in 
Muskingum  County,  Ohio.  lie  is  of  English  de- 
scent, his  paternal  grandfather  having  been  born 
in  England,  whence  he  eniigi'ated  to  the  United 
States  and  settled  in  West  Virginia.  In  Wheeling, 
that  state,  John  Barnard,  our  subject's  fatlier,  was 
born  and  thence  he  removed  westward.  He  mar- 
ried Miss  Rebecca  Rupp,  a  native  of  Muskingum 
County.  Ohio,  and  a  daughter  of  Emanuel  Rupp. 
This  worthy  couple  are  still  living  and  at  present 
make  their  home  in  Muscatine,  Iowa.  The  father 
is  a  farmer  and  fruit-grower  by  occupation,  and  is  a 
man  of  energetic  disposition  and  upright  character. 

William  Barnard  was  the  eldest  in  the  parental 
family  of  six  children.  He  was  a  lad  of  seven 
years  at  the  time  of  the  removal  of  the  familv  to 
Iowa.  He  received  an  excellent  education,  lirstat- 
tending  the  district  school,  and  later  the  high 
school  at  Muscatine.  AVhen  reaching  his  twentieth 
^•ear  he  left  home,  and  going  to  Bellaire,  Ohio,  com- 
menced to  work  for  bis  uncle,  William  G.  Barnard, 
who  was  an  extensive  coal  merchant  in  that  city. 
He  remained  thus  engaged  for  eleven  3'ears,  and  in 
1879  made  his  advent  into  Chester,  having  been 
sent  here  to  take  charge  of  the  business  of  his 
uncle,  with  whose  interests  he  was  identified  until 
1892.  In  the  fall  of  that  year  he  purchased  the 
business  in  this  place  formerly  conducted  by  his 
uncle,  and  formed  a  partnership  with  William 
Goald3',  the  firm  being  known  as  Barnard  ife  Goald3'. 
Here  Mr.  Barnard  is  doing  a  good  business  and 
conducting  himself  in  such  a  mannei  as  to  win  the 
respect  of  his  fellow-men. 

August  27,  1868,  Mr.  Barnard  married  Miss  Am- 
erett  McCloud,  and  to  them  have  been  born  four 
children,  who  bear  the  respective  names  of  Delia. 
Clarence,  Phebe  and  Clj'de.  Mrs.  Amerett  Bar- 
nard departed  this  life  in  June.  1885,  and  in  1886 
our  subject  married  Mrs.  Eliza  J.  Pattereon.  She 
was  born  in  Perry  County,  this  state,  and  at  the 
time  of  her  marriage  to  our  subject  was  the  widow 
of  John  Patterson.  B}'  this  union  Mr.  Barnard  has 
become  the  father  of  one  child,  Lillie  May.  He  is 
a  devoted  and  consistent  member  of  the  Presbyter- 
ian Church,  in  which  denomination  he  has  held 


the  office  of  Elder.  He  is  a  Republican  in  politics, 
being  in  full  accord  with  the  principles  of  his 
part}-  and  exerting  all  his  influence  for  its  suc- 
cess. In  1892,  he  was  elected  Alderman  of  the 
.Second  Ward,  and  during  his  incumbency  of  the 
office  gave  entire  satisfaction  to  his  constituents. 


T;_  ENRY  WELGE.  The  subject  of  this  sketch 
[  J  is  a  representative  of  a  prominent  pioneer 
^y^  family  of  Randolph  County,  and  no  doubt 
\K§)j  inherits  his  industry  and  perseverance  from 
his  German  ancestors,  his  parents,  Henr}'  and  Henri- 
etta ( Jacobi)  Welge,  being  natives  of  that  country-. 
The  father  came  to  America  when  a  young  man, 
and  after  locating  in  Chester,  worked  out  by  the 
da\-  for  awhile  and  then  rented  land,  which  he 
farmed  for  man}'  years.  Later  he  purchased  prop- 
ertj',  and  was  engaged  in  its  cultivatiou  until 
his  decease,  in  1882.  His  good  wife  preceded  him 
to  the  better  land  by  several  years,  dying  when 
our  subject  was  a  lad  of  six  years. 

Our  subject  attended  a  Lutheran  school  until 
reaching  his  thirteenth  year,  and  after  that  passed 
the  remainder  of  his  school  days  as  a  student 
in  the  public  schools  of  his  neighborhood.  After 
reaching  his  majoritj-  he  began  farming  on  his 
own  account,  which  has  been  his  life  work.  In 
connection  with  the  cultivation  of  his  land,  Mr. 
Welge  has  been  engaged  extensively  in  breeding 
fine  stock  on  his  farm,  located  on  section  9,  town- 
ship 7,  range  6.  His  business  success  is  that  which 
comes  from  earnest  application,  close  attention  to 
details  and  perseverance.  As  the  result  of  his 
well  directed  efforts  he  has  acquired  a  good  prop- 
erty. 

October  20,  1883,  Miss  IMartha  Knop  became  the 
wife  of  our  subject.  Mrs.  Welge  was  the  daughter 
of  George  and  Sophia  Knop,  and  became  the 
mother  of  two  children,  of  whom  Ettie  is  the  only 
survivor.  The  wife  and  mother  departed  this  life 
December  4,  1888,  and  November  15  of  the  fol- 
lowing year  Mr.  Welge  married  Miss  Louisa, 
daughter  of  John  C.  and  Dora  Meyer,  natives  of 
Germany,  who  are  at  the  present  time  residing  in 


836 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


Randolph  County.     By  their  union  two  children, 
Ida  and  Alma,  have  been  born. 

The  Lutheran  Church  finds  in  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Welge  two  of  its  most  active  and  consistent  mem- 
bers. Our  subject  is  a  man  of  liberal  views  and 
takes  a  deep  interest  iu  all  matters  pertaining  to 
local  improvements  or  enterprises.  He  has  been  a 
life-long  Democrat  and  an  ardent  advocate  of  re- 
form and  progress. 


^  OHN  A.  GRAFF,  lu  Levan  Township,  -Jack- 
son County,  lies  a  valuable  farm  compris- 
ing two  hundred  and  forty  acres,  the  prop- 
*J^^  erty  of  the  gentleman  with  whose  name  we 
introduce  this  sketch.  Tlie  soil,  through  excellent 
methods  of  fertilization  and  proper  rotation  of 
crops,  has  been  brought  under  a  high  state  of  cul- 
tivation, and  yields  large  harvests  of  the  various 
cereals.  The  improvements  noticeable  liere  are 
tiie  result  of  Mr.  Graff's  efforts.  He  has  erected 
suitable  and  substantial  buildings,  conspicuous 
among  which  is  the  cozy  and  commodious  resi- 
dence erected  in  1888. 

The  paternal  grandfather  of  our  subject,  John 
Graff,  was  the  proprietor  of  a  tavern  in  Somerset 
County,  Pa.,  and  was  a  man  of  some  means.  His 
third  son  was  AVilliam,  father  of  our  subject,  and  a 
native  of  Somerset  County,  born  in  1808.  He  grew 
to  mauhood  in  the  home  district,  and  thence  iu  184 1 
removed  to  Illinois,  settling  in  Levan  Township, 
Jackson  County.  The  land  which  he  purchased 
was  unimproved,  and  the  surrounding  country 
was  a  wilderness.  On  coming  here  he  was  in 
moderate  circumstances,  but  possessing  an  abun- 
dance of  energj-  and  perseverance,  he  gradually' 
gained  large  landed  estates.  In  politics  he  was 
first  a  Whig,  and  later  affiliated  with  tlie  Repub- 
licans, always  taking  an  active  interest  in  politi- 
cal affairs.  In  religious  belief  he  was  a  Lutheran, 
in  which  faith  he  passed  away  in  1877. 

Four  sons  and  two  daughters  were  born  to  "Will- 
iam and  Rosa  Ann  (Imhoff)  Graff:  Jacob,  a  resi- 
dent of  Bradley  Township;  Henry,  wliose  home  is 
in  Levan  Township;  Elvina,  who  died  at  the  age 
of  twelve  years;  John  A.,  of  this  sketch;  Marj-, 


Mrs.  Smith;  and  Andrew,  of  Levan  Township. 
Our  subject  was  born  in  Somerset  County,  Pa., 
January  4,  1839,  and  was  only  two  years  old  when 
his  parents  came  to  Jackson  County.  His  oppor- 
tunities for  schooling  were  very  limited,  and  his 
education  has  been  mainly  acquired  through  his 
unaided  efforts. 

At  the  age  of  twentv-four  years,  Mr.  Graff  mar- 
ried Adaline,  daughter  of  John  Bowers,  of  Jackson 
Count}',  111.  The  following  children  were  born  of 
this  union:  Andrew  and  John,  who  live  iu  Levan 
Township;  Luellen,  who  is  married:  Laura,,  the 
wife  of  Thomas  Moore;  Josepli  and  Julia,  who  re- 
side at  home;  Daniel,  Robert  and  Franklin,  who 
are  conducting  their  studies  in  the  district  schools. 
The  wife  and  mother,  who  was  a  devoted  member 
of  the  Methodist  Church,  .and  a  sincere  Christian, 
died  June  1,  1884,  mourned  not  alone  b^'  the  im- 
mediate relatives,  but  also  by  all  her  acquaint- 
ances. 

Politically,  Mi-.  Graff  is  a  Re[)ublican,  but  does 
not  take  an  active  part  in  public  affairs.  He  is  in- 
terested in  educational  matters,  and  is  now  serving 
his  second  term  as  School  Director.  In  religious 
belief  he  is  identifled  with  the  Lutheran  Church. 
Both  as  a  farmer  and  as  a  citizen,  he  has  proved 
himself  capable,  progressive  and  honorable,  and 
he  justly  occupies  a  high  place  in  the  regard  of  his 
fellow-citizens. 


ACOB  ZANG,  an  extensive  farmer  of  Ran- 
dolph County,  and  the  owner  of  valu.able 
propert}'  in  township  6,  range  7,  was  born 
sj;^^'  in  Germany  in  1820  and  is  the  youngest 
son  of  Michael  Zang.  A  student  in  the  schools  of 
German}'  until  fifteen  years  of  age.  he  gained  a 
fair  education,  and  when  discontinuing  his  studies 
engaged  in  farming.  At  the  age  of  twenty-eight 
he  sailed  for  America,  and  arriving  iu  this  country 
settled  near  the  present  city  of  Scranton,  Pa.,  where 
for  one  year  he  was  employed  in  the  iron  works. 
Coming  to  Illinois  in  1849,  Mr.  Zang  settled  in 
Chester,  and  for  some  time  thereafter  worked  as  a 
laborer.  He  then  for  several  years  engaged  in 
burning  lime.     In  1861  he  purchased  the  property 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


837 


where  he  still  lives  and  here  he  has  since  engaged 
in  farming.  At  the  time  of  its  purchase,  the  land 
was  a  wilderness,  but  is  now  a  finely  ini[)roved 
farm,  which  proves  the  energetic  disposition  and 
persevering  spirit  of  the  owner.  Wliile  still  a  resi- 
dent of  German^',  Mr.  Zang  was  united  iu  marriage, 
in  1846,  with  Miss  Susanna  (iahen,  and  one  child, 
Caroline,  was  born  to  them  before  emigrating  to 
the  United  States.  She  is  now  the  wife  of  Fred 
Andrews,  who  resides  near  Rockwood,  this  state. 
Since  coming  to  America  nine  children  were 
added  to  the  family,  of  whom  the  eldest,  Peter, 
died  when  ten  3'ears  old.  Those  who  are  liv- 
ing are:  Jacob,  wiio  married  Mary  Caudle  and 
resides  near  New  Palestine,  111.;  Ricky,  the  wife  of 
Thomas  R.  Stewart,  living  near  Chester;  Fred,  who 
married  Dora  Risner,  and  makes  his  home  near 
Palestine,  this  state;  Emma,-  the  wife  of  William 
Williamson;  William,  who  is  unmarried  and  lives 
with  his  parents;  Rudolph,  who  mairied  Addie 
Bilderbach  and  lives  near  Palestine;  Susa  and  Mag- 
gie, who  are  at  home.  Mr.  Zang  is  a  Democrat  in 
national  Issues,  but  is  liberal  in  local  affairs.  He  and 
his  family  are  members  of  the  German  Methodist 
Church. 


^*y  HARLES  M(  ELHINEY,  who  is  well  known 
l(  throughout    Randolph  County   as   one    of 

^^^  the  progressive  and  successful  agiiculturists 
of  township  4,  range  5,  resides  upon  a  farm  con- 
sisting of  three  hundred  and  sixty  acres  located 
on  section  26.  There,  until  tlie  deatii  of  his 
brother  William,  the  two  conducted  general  farm- 
ing iu  partnership,  and  through  their  untiring  in- 
dustry and  good  management  gained  prosperity. 
Referring  to  our  subject's  ancestr}  ,  we  find  that 
his  paternal  grandfather,  .John  McEiliiney,  emi- 
grated from  Ireland  to  tliis  country  and  settled  in 
Pennsylvania,  somewhat  later  becoming  a  soldier 
in  the  War  of  the  Revolution.  The  father,  James, 
was  born  in  1773,  near  the  Susquehannah  River 
in  Pennsylvania,  and  was  a  soldier  in  the  War  of 
1812.  The  mother,  wiiose  maiden  name  was  Grace 
Campton,  was  born  in  Ireland,  whence  at  the  age 
of  nine  months  she  was  brought  to  America  by  her 
father,  John  Campton,  who  settled  in  the  Keystone 
33 


State.  Grandfather  Campton  served  in  the  War 
of   1812. 

The  parents  of  our  subject  were  married  iu 
Pennsylvania,  and  continued  to  reside  in  Beaver 
County  until  called  fiom  earth,  the  father's  death 
occurring  in  1848,  and  the  mother's  in  1867.  Of 
their  family  of  eleven  children,  Charles  is  the  only 
survivor.  He  was  born  May  6,  1823,  and  was  the 
next  to  the  youngest  child  in  the  family,  his 
brother  William,  who  was  born  Ma}'  7,  1825,  being 
the  youngest.  These  two  lads  grew  to  manhood 
upon  the  home  farm,  sharing  the  labors  of  cultiva- 
ting the  land,  as  well  as  the  pleasures  of  boyhood. 
They  had  few  educational  advantages,  but  both 
became  well  informed  through  observation  and 
reading.  Our  subject  has  never  married,  but  after 
his  brother's  marriage  made  his  home  with  his 
family. 

On  the  .5tli  of  February,  1852,  William  McEl- 
hiuey  married  Miss  INIinerva  Johnston.  The  par- 
ents of  Mrs.  McElhiney,  James  and  Phoebe  (Hay- 
maker) Johnston,  were  natives  respectively  of 
Ireland  and  Pennsylvania,  and  the  father,  who 
emigrated  to  America  in  1786,  settled  in  Alle- 
gheny County,  Pa.,  and  there  made  his  permanent 
home.  The  maternal  grandfather  of  Mrs.  McEl- 
hiney was  Jacob  Il.aymaker,  who  was  captured  by 
the  Indians  in  the  early  days  of  Colonial  history. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Johnston  were  residents  of  Allegheny 
County  until  their  decease;  he  died  in  1847,  while 
slie  survived  many  years,  passing  away  in  1861. 
They  had  ten  children,  of  whom  six  are  now  liv- 
ing. Born  March  2,  1829,  Mrs.  McElhiney  grew 
to  womanhood  in  tlie  Ke3'stone  Stale,  wlierc  her 
birth  occurred. 

After  his  marriage,  William  McElhiney  settled 
upon  a  farm  in  Beaver  County,  Pa.,  whence  in 
1865  he  removed  to  Illinois  and  settled  upon  the 
■place  now  the  home  of  his  widow.  They  were  the 
parents  of  six  children,  of  whom  five  are  now  liv- 
ing: John  Lafayette;  Phoebe,  the  wife  of  J.  R. 
Hughes,  of  California;  Lallie,  a  resident  of  Ran- 
dolph County,  and  the  wife  of  Andrew  Wilson; 
Annie  M.  and  Lutie.  The  father  of  this  family 
died  January  20,  1878.  While  a  resident  of  Penn- 
sylvania he  served  as  an  Elder  in  the  Presbyterian 
Church.     Both    in    that   state   and  in  Illinois  he 


838 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


served  as  School  Director.  In  politics  he  and 
Charles  were  actively  identified  with  the  Demo- 
ciatic  party,  and  the  latter  is  still  influential  in 
local  affairs. 

• ^#P '    . 

^^  O.  RP:UBP:LT,  a.  M.,  superintendent  of 
i@^i  the  city  schools  of  Murph3'sboro,  was  born 
in  Pottsville,  Pa.,  July  15,  1849.  He  is 
the  son  of  .J.  A.  Reubelt,  A.  M.,  D.  D.,  LL. 
D.,  a  cultured  gentleman  of  broad  knowledge  and 
extended  reputation,  who  was  of  German  birth  and 
parentage,  and  in  his  youth  conducted  his  literary 
studies  in  the  far-famed  University  of  Leipsic, 
graduating  from  that  institution  with  honors. 
Prior  to  his  marriage  he  emigrated  to  America,  and 
filled  chairs  in  colleges  at  Philadelphia,  New  York, 
Greensburg  (Ohio),  Treiiton  (Tenn.)  aud  Fa3'ette 
(Mo.),  in  the  iatter  city  being  connected  with  An- 
drews University. 

From  Missouri,  Professor  Reubelt  removed  to 
Greencastle,  Ind.,  where  he  accepted  the  position  of 
Professor  of  Latin  in  De  Pauw  Uuivel•sit3^  Later 
he  filled  a  similar  position  in  the  University  of 
Indiana,  at  Bloomiugton,  and  was  actively  en- 
gaged in  giving  instruction  in  the  ancient  classics 
for  a  period  of  twenty-five  j'ears.  At  the  pres- 
ent time  (1894)  he  resides  in  Carthage,  Tenn., 
and  devotes  his  attention  principally  to  literar}- 
work.  He  has  just  completed  writing  a  book  en- 
titled "English  Prepositions,"  and  is  also  the  au- 
thor of  a  work  on  natural  history,  comprising  two 
volumes,  and  a  "Life  of  Christ."  As  an  author, 
he  is  entertaining  and  instructive,  sound  in  his 
logical  deductions  and  accurate  in  his  conclusions, 
and  his  contributions  to  the  literature  of  our  coun- 
try will  perpetuate  his  name  through  the  ages  to 
come.  During  the  War  of  the  Rebellion  his  sym- 
pathies were  enlisted  ou  the  side  of  the  Union,  and 
for  some  time  he  served  as  Chaplain  of  a  regiment 
from  Philadelphia.  At  the  second  battle  of  Bull 
Run  he  was  wounded,  though  not  seriousl\'. 

The  mother  of  our  subject,  whose  maiden  name 
was  Lavinia  Orwig,  was  born  in  Pottsville,  Pa., and 
died  in  Greencastle,  Ind.,  in  1865.  Her  father, 
Isaac,  was  born  in  Pennsj'lvania,  and  was  a  de- 
scendant of  German  ancestors  who  settled  in  the 


Keystone  State  during  an  early  period  of  its  his- 
tory, and  who  purchased  large  tracts  of  land  from 
William  Penn.  Our  subject  is  the  sec(md  in  a  fam- 
ily of  ten  children,  of  whom  there  are  now  living 
five  sons  and  one  daughter.  The  eldest  is  a  con- 
tractor, and  the  others  are  teachers  b}^  profession. 

A  student  in  the  public  schools  of  Penns3'lvania 
prior  to  the  age  of  fourteen,  our  subject  then  re- 
moved to  Indiana,  where  soon  afterward  he  en- 
tered the  preparatory  department  of  De  Pauw 
University.  On  the  5th  of  October,  1864,  when  a 
lad  of  fifteen  years,  he  enlisted  as  a  member  of 
Company  I,  Forty-third  Indiana  Infantry,  and 
from  Indianapolis  accompanied  his  regiment  to 
Kentuckj^  and  Tennessee.  At  the  close  of  the  war, 
in  1865,  he  was  mustered  out  of  the  service  at  In- 
dianapolis, and  at  once  returned  to  De  Pauw  Uui- 
versity,  where  he  continued  his  studies  until  the 
close  of  the  junior  year.  In  1869  he  entered  the 
University  of  Indiana,  at  Blooniington,  from  which 
institution  he  was  graduated  June  25,  1870,  with 
the  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Arts.  Three  years  later 
the  degree  of  Master  of  Arts  was  conferred  upon 
him. 

After  completing  his  literary  studies.  Professor 
Reubelt  filled  the  position  of  Superintendent  of 
schools  at  Veva3%  Ind.,  for  one  year,  and  has  fol- 
lowed this  profession  continuously,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  one  year,  when  he  engaged  in  the  mer- 
cantile business  at  Brazil,  Ind.  For  three  years  he 
was  Principal  of  the  Tuscola  (111.)  schools,  and 
for  one  3'ear  was  similarly  engaged  at  Freeport, 
this  state.  In  the  fall  of  1892  he  came  to  IMurphys- 
boro,  where  he  has  since  been  Superintendent  of 
schools.  As  an  instructor,  he  is  thorough,  judi- 
cious and  efficient,  and  he  occupies  a  position  of 
prominence  among  the  educators  of  the  state.  He 
is  a  man  of  close  observation,  careful  i-eflection, 
soundness  of  judgment,  practical  views  and  a  wide 
range  of  interests.  His  faculties  are  well  balanced, 
and  he  is  perhaps  inclined  to  conservative,  rather 
than  radical  views  and  actions. 

In  Brazil,  Ind.,  December  29,  1875,  Professor 
Reubelt  was  united  in  marriage  with  IMiss  Jennie 
Warner,  who  was  born  in  Greencastle,  Ind.,  being 
the  daughter  of  Derrick  Warner,  a  retired  farmer 
and  old  settler  of  the  Hoosier  State.     The3'  ai,-e  th.^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  J5I0GRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


839 


parents  of  two  childien,  Ida  and  Wai-ner.  Socially, 
Professor  Reubelt  afliliates  with  the  Masonic  fra- 
ternity, the  Independent  Order  of  Odd  Fellows, 
the  Knights  of  Pythias,  the  Knights  of  Honor  and 
the  Orand  Army  of  the  Republic.  In  his  religious 
belief  he  is  identified  with  the  Christian  Church, 
and  is  now  serving  as  an  Elder  in  that  denomina- 
tion. Politically  he  is  strong  in  his  advocacy  of 
Democratic  principles,  which  he  supports  with  his 
ballot  and  inftuence.  For  twelve  years  he  has 
been  prominently  connected  with  institute  work  in 
Indiana  and  Illinois,  and  his  efforts  have  largely 
contributed  to  the  advancement  of  educational 
interests. 


URPIIYSBORO  PUBLIC  SCHOOLS.  The 
people  of  Murphysboro  are  justly  proud 
of  their  city  schools,  which  rank  among 
the  best  equipped  educational  institutions 
of  southern  Illinois.  A  thorough  oversight  of  the 
work  is  maintained  b3-  the  Board  of  Education, 
composed  of  seven  members,  all  enterprising  and 
enthusiastic  public-school  men.  They  are.  Dr.  W. 
W.  Essick,  President;  Philip  Eager,  Secretary; 
Philip  Decker,  W.  S.  Hanners,  J.  G.  Hard}-,  R.  T. 
Lightfoot  and  B.  R.  Neal. 

There  are  two  buildings  utilized  for  school  pur- 
poses, one  in  the  western  and  the  other  in  the  east- 
ern part  of  the  city.  The  former  is  the  high  school 
building,  having  eleven  rooms,  heated  by  steam 
and  supplied  by  water  from  the  city  water  works. 
The  east  side  building  is  also  supplied  with  water 
from  the  water  works,  but  is  heated  by  stoves  in- 
stead of  steam.  All  the  aids  that  are  essential  to 
successful  teaching,  such  as  maps,  charts,  globes, 
dictionaries, encyclopedias,  philosophical  and  chem- 
ical apparatus  and  librar}',  are  ready  for  use  on 
all  proper  occasions. 

The  schools  have,  during  the  eigiit  months'  term, 
an  enrollment  of  twelve  hundred  pupils,  with  an 
average  attendance  of  ninety-six  per  cent,  and 
practically  no  tardiness  whatever.  In  addition  to 
the  children  of  MurphN'sboro,  the  schools  receive 
considerable  outside  patronage,  and  have  enrolled 
many  non-resident  pupils.  Each  year  many  stu- 
dents 'are  graduated  from  both  the  grammar  and 


high  schools,  and  those  completing  the  latter  course 
are  entitled  to  admission  in  the  freshman  class  of 
any  institution  in  Illinois.  Besides  the  east  .and 
west  side  school  buildings  there  is  a  building  on 
Walnut  Street  used  for  educational  purposes,  and 
a  colored  school  of  two  rooms.  These  are  also 
well  equipped  and  provided  with  a  splendid  corps 
of  teachers. 

The  following  is  a  list  of  teachers  employed  dur- 
ing 1893-94:  Superintendent,  A.  O.  Reubelt;  West 
Side  Princi[)al  High  School,  J.  S.  Ragsdale;  Assis- 
tant Principal,  Mrs.  Lou  Lightfoot;  Grammar 
Grade,  Delia  C'h.ase;  Sixth  Year,  Etta  Hamilton; 
Fifth  Year,  Anna  Clendenin;  Fourth  Y'ear,  Ida 
Jennison;  Third  Y'ear,  Adda  Bain;  Second  Y'ear, 
Nora  Smith;  First  and  Second  Year,  Minnie  Barber; 
First  Primary,  Mattie  Stocks.  East  Side:  Principal, 
W.  J.  Thompson;  Sixth  Year,  Minnie  Eakin;  Fifth 
Year,  Joseiihine  Huthraacher;  Fourth  Year,  Ida 
Gilbert;  Third  Year,  May  Worlhen;  Second  Y'ear, 
Bertha  Dowd;  First  Primary,  Lizzie  Murph}';  Sup- 
ply Teacher,  Mrs.  J.  M.  Biyan.  Principal  Colored 
School,  J.  E.  Patterson;  Second  Primary,  Ella 
Cruse;  Second  Primary,  .lennie  Roberts,  First  Pri- 
mary, Maude  Webb;  Assistant  in  Colored  School, 
.Jennie  Bates. 


ELART  HECK,  proprietor  of  the  Heck 
Hotel  and  the  Ruma  Creamery,  is  a  native 
of  Germany,  having  been  born  in  Prussia 
in  1843.  He  is  a  son  of  Anton  and  Cath- 
erine Heck,  both  of  whom  died  in  their  native 
land,  Germany.  In  the  family  there  were  five 
sons  and  one  daughter.  Three  sons  emigrated  to 
the  United  States,  while  two  sons  and  a  daughter 
still  reside  in  the  Old  Country.  The  subject  of  this 
sketch  crossed  the  ocean  in  his  twenty-third  3'ear, 
after  having  received  a  fair  education  in  the 
schools  of  German}',  and  also  served  an  appren- 
ticeship to  the  blacksmith's  trade  there. 

Coming  to  Randolph  County,  111.,  in  1867,  Mr. 
Heck  worked  upon  his  brother's  farm  for  three 
months,  after  which  lie  secured  employment  in  a 
blacksmith  shop  at  Red  Bud,  remaining  thereabout 
one  j'ear.  Later  he  opened  a  shop  in  Evansville, 
and  continued  iu  that  business  until   1874,  when 


840 


PORTRAIT  AKD  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD 


he  moved  to  Ruma  and  embarked  in  the  same 
business  at  this  place.  A  few  years  afterward  he 
closed  his  blacksmith  shop  and  engaged  in  the 
hotel  business  and  in  farming.  He  was  an  exten- 
sive and  successful  agriculturist,  and  raised  from 
two  thousand  to  twenty-live  hundred  bushels  of 
wheat  per  annum. 

In  1893,  Mr.  Heck  rented  his  farm,  and  has  since 
devoted  his  attention  to  the  hotel  business.  In 
1890,  he  started  a  new  enterprise,  the  Ruma  Cream- 
er\-,  which  is  now  actively  superintended  bj-  his 
two  sons.  His  first  Presidential  vote  was  east  for 
General  Grant,  but  he  has  since  affiliated  with  the 
Democratic  party;  however,  he  votes  for  principle 
rather  than  part}',  and  supports  the  candidate 
whom  he  deems  best  qualified  for  office.  For  six 
years  he  has  filled  the  position  of  .School  Director, 
and  has  held  other  local  offices  of  trust. 

In  the  spring  of  1868,  Mr.  Heck  married  Miss 
Mary  Heagly,  who  was  born  near  Centre ville,  111. 
They  are  the  parents  of  six  living  children,  namely: 
Carrie,  Lulu,  John,  Max,  Katie  and  Mary.  The 
religious  home  of  the  famil}'  is  in  the  Catholic 
Church. 


W.  ADAMS,  onner  of  the  roller  mills  of 
Tamaroa,  stands  among  the  foremost  of  the 
^  business  men  who  have  contributed  to  the 
financial  prosperity  of  this  part  of  the 
county.  With  true  public  spirit  and  characteristic 
liberality  he  has  aided  every  enterprise  that  would 
in  any  way  advance  the  welfare  of  the  communitj'. 
He  is  a  native  of  New  York,  having  been  born  in 
Cortland  County,  in  1830.  There  he  grew  to  man- 
hood, and  after  completing  his  schooling  he  em- 
barked in  agricultural  pursuits,  in  which  occupa- 
tion he  was  engaged  prior  to  his  removal  west,  in 
1855.  In  that  3-ear  he  located  in  Franklin  Coun- 
t3',  this  state,  and  launched  out  in  the  general 
mercantile  business. 

Being  a  true  patriot,  however,  Mr.  Adams,  in 
August,  1862,  sacrificed  personal  gain  in  order  to 
defend  the  Union,  and  enlisting  in  Company  B, 
Eight^'-ninth  Illinois  Infantry,  was  sent  to  join 
the  Army  of  the  Cumberland.     With  his  regiment 


he  participated  in  many  of  the  hard-fought  battles 
of  the  Rebellion.  While  befoi'e  Chickamauga  he 
was  captured  b^'  the  enemy,  and  for  eighteen 
months  was  confined  in  southern  prisons,  spending 
six  months  of  that  time  in  the  famous  Libby 
Prison.  Upon  entering  the  service  he  had  been 
made  Lieutenant  of  his  company,  and  when  mus- 
tered out  at  the  close  of  the  war  he  held  the  rank 
of  Captain. 

When  returning  to  the  peaceful -^lursuits  of  life, 
our  subject  came  to  Tamaroa,  in  1866,  ami  em- 
barking in  the  hardware  business,  continued  thus 
engaged  until  1874,  when  he  disposed  of  his  in- 
terests in  that  line,  and  has  since  devoted  his  at- 
tention to  the  manufacture  of  flour.  His  mill  is 
supplied  with  the  most  approved  machinery,  and 
turns  out  a  fine  quality  of  flour. 

Mr.  Adams  and  his  wife,  whose  maiden  name 
was  Sarah  Dawsen,  are  the  parents  of  one  son, 
W.  H.,  who  is  interested  with  his  father  in  the 
milling  business.  Our  subject  is  an  active  [loliti- 
cian,  and  during  elections  always  votes  with  the 
Republican  party.  lie  is  prompt  and  methodical 
in  his  business  habits,  is  naturall}'  very  popular, 
and  has  many  friends  in  the  community  where  he 
has  resided  for  so  many  years. 

The  paternal  grandfather  of  our  subject.  Pre- 
served Adams,  was  a  native  of  Massachusetts, 
which  was  also  the  birthplace  of  his  son,  the  father 
of  our  subject,  who  also  bore  the  name  of  Pre- 
served. The  latter,  upon  attaining  mature  years, 
removed  to  Cortland  Countj-,  N.  Y.,  when  that 
now  wealth}-  locality  contained  but  two  or  three 
houses. 


B.  HALL,  land  agent  for  the  Illinois  Cen- 
*  _  //'  tral  Railway  Company,  has  been  a  promi- 
'Y/m  neut  factor  in  the  upbuilding  of  southern 
Illinois,  and  is  numbered  among  the  leading  citi- 
zens of  Du  Quoin.  He  was  born  in  Posey  County, 
Ind.,  on  the  20th  of  October,  1848.  His  father, 
John  Hall,  was  a  native  of  Kentuck}-,  and  emi- 
grating northward,  became  one  of  the  pioneers  of 
Posey  County.  Bj'  occupation  he  was  a  farmer. 
He  twice  represented  his  district  in  the  Indiana 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


841 


Legislature,  having  become  a  prominent  and  influ- 
ential citizen  of  the  community  in  which  he  made 
his  home. 

The  famil_v  is  of  Welsh  origin,  and  the  grand- 
father of  our  subject,  wiio  was  a  native  of  Wales, 
came  to  this  country  in  early  life.  The  family  re- 
moved to  Illinois  in  1854,  settling  in  Blairsville, 
Williamson  County,  where  the  father  of  our  sub- 
ject built  the  first  steam  flouring  mill  in  southern 
Illinois.  This  he  operated  in  connection  with 
merchandising  until  1860,  when  he  settled  upon 
his  farm  and  there  remained  until  1872.  Remov- 
ing to  Franklin  County  in  the  latter  year,  he  there 
married  Mrs.  Clarissa  Blake,  who  still  survives. 
He  passed  away  in  1876.  His  first  wife,  who  bore 
the  maiden  name  of  Margaret  Harris,  died  ten 
years  previous  to  his  demise. 

Mr.  Hall  of  this  sketch  was  one  of  a  family  of 
ten  children,  four  sons  and  six  daughters,  but  he 
is  now  the  onlj'  survivor.  He  was  a  lad  of  six 
summers  at  the  time  of  the  removal  of  the  family 
from  Indiana  to  Illinois.  His  early  life  was  spent 
at  Blairsville,  and  his  education  was  acquired  in 
the  Southern  Illinois  College,  of  Carbondale,  and 
in  Ewing  (111.)  College,  which  he  attended  in 
1870-71.  When  his  school  life  was  ended  he  em- 
barked in  farming  on  his  own  account,  and  fol- 
lowed tli.at  pursuit  until  1875.  In  1879  he  came 
to  Du  Quoin,  where  he  engaged  in  the  real-estate 
business  and  also  dealt  in  machinery,  but  the  lat- 
ter pursuit  he  abandoned  in  1890,  .as  his  other  en- 
terprises had  grown  to  such  proportions  that  he 
was  compelled  to  devote  his  entire  attention  to  his 
real-estate  interests. 

Mr.  Hall  was  first  married  in  1876,  but  his  wife 
died  a  few  months  later.  On  the  8th  of  March, 
1882,  he  wedded  Miss  Lizzie  Emery,  and  their 
union  has  been  blessed  with  two  children:  Gussie, 
aged  nine,  and  Bessie,  a  maiden  of  seven  summers. 

In  1891  Mr.  Hall  was  appointed  agent  for  the 
Illinois  Central  Railroad  Land  Department,  and 
has  done  more  to  help  build  up  this  portion  of 
southern  Illinois  than  any  other  one  man.  He 
had  but  small  means  when  he  came  to  Dii  Quoin, 
but  by  strict  attention  to  business  and  well  di- 
rected efforts  he  has  acquired  a  liandsome  compe- 
tence.    He  is  now  a  stockholder  and  director  in 


the  First  National  Bank,  which  he  helped  to  or- 
ganize, and  also  owns  some  five  hundred  acres  of 
valuable  land,  together  with  considerable  prop- 
erty in  Du  Quoin.  In  politics  he  is  a  Prohibitionist, 
and  has  served  for  several  terms  in  the  City  Coun- 
cil. He  is  also  a  prominent  Odd  Fellow,  and  no 
man  in  Dn  Quoin  has  more  friends  or  stands  higher 
in  the  regard  of  his  fellow-townsmen  than  does 
W.  B.  Hall. 


NDREW  Mclaughlin.  The  agricult- 
.^/L-i|  ural  districts  of  southern  Illinois  are  the 
ti  homes  of  scores  of  worth3'  men  whose 
lives  have  been  spent  in  such  a  manner  as 
to  win  the  respect  of  those  with  whom  they  asso- 
ciate, while  their  well  directed  efforts  have  re- 
sulted in  securing  comfortable  homes  and  valuable 
possessions.  While  but  a  young  man,  the  subject 
of  this  sketch  h.as  already  proved  that  he  possesses 
an  abundance  of  energy,  perseverance  and  indus- 
try-, and  has  materially  aided  his  father  in  the 
management  of  the  home  farm. 

Elsewhere  in  this  volume  will  be  found  the  bio- 
graphical sketch  of  James  McLaughlin,  father  of 
our  subject,  and  one  of  the  prominent  residents  of 
Jackson  County,  residing  in  Levan  Township.  As 
the  name  indicates,  the  family  is  of  Scotch  origin, 
and  its  members  for  generations  have  been  dis- 
tinguished for  thrift  and  enterprise.  The  subject 
of  this  sketch  was  born  in  Vermont  in  1868,  and 
was  only  two  j'ears  of  age  when  he  was  brought  by 
his  parents  to  Missouri.  He  grew  to  manhood  on 
his  father's  farm  near  St.  Louis,  and  after  complet- 
ing his  literary  studies  in  the  State  College  of 
Vermont  and  the  Business  College,  engaged  for 
a  time  in  teacliing  school.  His  natural  vocation, 
however,  that  for  which  he  w.as  best  adapted  and  in 
which  he  took  the  deepest  interest,  was  tliat  of  ag- 
riculture, and  discontinuing  the  profession  of  a 
teacher,  he  has  since  engaged  in  farming. 

In  1890  occurred  the  marriage  of  Andrew  Mc- 
Laughlin and  Miss  Julia  Epeck.  The  latter  is  the 
daughter  of  John  Epeck,  a  well  known  pioneer  of 
Randolph  Count}';  she  is  a  lady  of  kind  disposi- 
tion and  noble  character   .and  is    devoted  to  the 


842 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


welfare  of  her  husband  and  their  only  child,  Anna 
Julia,  who  was  born  in  1892.  With  his  father 
and  family  our  subject  removed  from  Randolph 
to  Jackson  County  in  the  spring  of  1894  and  has 
since  made  his  home  in  Levan  Township.  In 
political  matters  he  favors  the  Republican  party, 
but  is  not  a  politician,  llis  intelligence,  enterpris- 
ing nature  and  honorable  dealings  have  given  him 
an  excellent  standing  in  business  circles. 


R.  VALENTINE  S.  BENSON,  a  promi- 
nent citizen  at  present  of  Randolph  Coun- 
ty, and  Superintendent  of  the  Illinois  Asy- 
lum for  Insane  Criminals  at  Chester,  was 
born  in  Gallatin  County,  111.,  May  22,  1834.  His 
father,  Charles  R.,  and  mother,  Mary  (Riggin)  Ben- 
son, were  natives  respectively  of  A'irginia  and 
Tennessee.  His  grandparents,  Babel  and  Nellie 
(Soward)  Benson,  resided  in  Greenbrier  County 
Va.,  where  Chailes  R.,  the  Doctor's  fatlier,  was 
born  September  28,  1793.  His  mother,  Mary  (Rig- 
gin)  Benson,  was  born  in  Knox  County,  Tenn., 
June  23,  1796,  and  was  the  daughter  of  James 
Riggin,  a  Methodist  minister.  They  were  married 
in  Knox  County,  Tenn.,  April  5,  1821,  and  immi- 
grated the  following  fall  to  Logan  County',  K3'., 
where  they  resided  until  1828.  They  then  came  to 
Sangamon  County  (then  St.  Clair),  111.,  and  in 
1830  removed  to  Gallatin  County,  this  state,  where 
he  entered  a  fine  body  of  land  from  tiie  Govern- 
ment. He  im[)roved  a  valuable  farm  and  resided 
there  until  Ids  death,  October  16,  1847,  while  on  a 
visit  in  Missouri.  The  mother  died  December  26, 
1838.  The  father  served  in  the  War  of  1812,  and 
was  in  several  hard-fought  battles,  that  of  the  Horse 
Shoe  Bend  being  one  of  them.  The  Doctor  is 
the  youngest  of  five  brothers  3'et  living,  and  with 
the  exception  of  one,  who  makes  his  home  in  Ore- 
gon, all  are  residents  of  Illinois.  Eleven  j'ears  ago 
they  met  together  in  a  family  reunion. 

We  now  take  up  the  personal  history  of  Dr. 
Benson,  who  attended  the  common  schools  of  Gal- 
latin County  in  his  childhood  and  early  youth, 
and  worked  upon  the  home  farm  until  fourteen 
years  of  age.     Wlien   sixteen  years  of  age  he  en- 


tered a  school  in  Jacksonville,  111.,  there  pursuing 
his  studies  for  four  months.  On  the  expiration  of 
that  period  he  farmed  one  year  in  Gallatin  Coun- 
ty on  his  own  account,  and  then  began  merchan- 
dising in  Raleigh,  Saline  County,  where  he  contin- 
ued two  years. 

Wishing  to  make  the  practice  of  medicine  his 
life  work,  our  subject  then  entered  upon  its  study 
under  Dr.  V.  Rathbone,  of  Raleigh,  who  is  now 
living  in  Harrisburg,  111.  With  that  gentleman 
he  read  for  two  years  and  attended  a  course  of 
lectures  in  the  St.  Louis  Medical  College.  In  the 
following  year,  1856,  he  located  in  Hamilton 
County,  111.,  but  after  a  year  removed  to  Benton, 
Franklin  County,  where  he  engaged  in  the  prac- 
tice of  his  chosen  profession  for  six  years.  In 
1869-70  he  attended  the  Kentucky  School  of 
Medicine  at  Louisville,  Ky.,  and  -was  graduated 
from  that  institution.  At  that  time  he  was  a  res- 
ident of  jMcLeansboro,  Hamilton  County,  111., 
where  he  had  re-located  in  1863,  and  where  he 
\  continued  the  practice  of  medicine  until  1880.  He 
then  retired  from  an  active  practice  of  his  profes- 
sion, but  still  continued  a  select  practice  and  his 
residence  in  JMcLeansboro,  where  he  followed  the 
drug  business,  farming  and  stock-raising  until 
1885. 

In  1855  Dr.  Benson  married  Mary  E.,  daughter 
of  Dr.  L.  Ratlibone,  of  McLeansboro.  Of  this  mar- 
riage were  born  a  son  and  daughter.  The  former. 
Dr.  John  G.  Benson,  is  a  prominent  physician  and 
druggist  of  McLeansboro.  The  daughter  is  the 
accomplished  wife  of  Hon.  James  R.  Campbell, 
who  is  a  member  of  the  Illinois  Senate.  In  Feb- 
ruary, 1864,  Mrs.  Benson  died.  The  Doctor  was 
married  in  January,  1867,  to  his  present  wife, 
Judith  A.  Parrish,  nee  Wilbauks.  The  lady  is  a 
member  of  the  Metliodist  Episcopal  Church. 

In  1885  Dr.  Benson  received  an  appointment  as 
agency  physician  to  the  Sioux  Indians  at  Ft.  Peck, 
Camp  Poplar  River,  Mont.  He  served  in  this  po- 
sition one  year  and  then  returned  to  his  home  in 
McLeansboro,  where  he  engaged  in  the  drug  busi- 
ness in  connection  with  farming  and  special  prac- 
tice in  his  profession  until  February  1,  1893.  In 
his  political  views  the  Doctor  is  a  Democrat  and 
represented  Hamilton  and  Wayne  Counties  in  the 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


843 


State  Legislature  in  1865-66.  In  1876  he  was 
elected  in  the  Nineteenth  Congressional  District  a 
member  of  the  State  Board  of  Equalization,  which 
oflice  he  held  for  four  j*eai-s,  and  was  Chairman  of 
the  Committee  on  Personal  Property.  In  1881  he 
was  appointed  on  the  United  States  Board  of  Pen- 
sion Examiners.  This  was  under  President  Ar- 
thur's administration,  and  he  held  the  office  until 
1885,  when  he  resigned  to  accept  the  Indian 
Agency.  In  January,  1893,  be  was  appointed 
Superintendent  of  the  Criminal  Insane  Asylum  of 
Chester,  which  position  he  still  holds.  His  able 
management  of  the  institution  has  won  him  high 
commendation.  His  entire  official  career  has  been 
an  honorable  one  and  has  brought  him  into  just 
prominence  throughout  the  state,  while  his  fidelity 
to  duty  has  won  him  high  regard. 


John,    who  married   Lizzie  Breel;  David,  who  is 

engaged  in  business  in  Chester;  Henry,  Mary, 
Frank,  William,  Rudolph  and  Lizzie,  all  of  whom 
remain  with  their  parents.  The  religious  home  of 
the  family  is  in  the  Catholic  Church.  In  politics, 
Mr.  Hamm  always  votes  the  Democratic  ticket, 
but  has  never  been  solicitous  for  public  offices,  pre- 
ferring to  give  his  undivided  attention  to  the 
work  of  conducting  his  farm. 


ILLIAM   SCHWARTZ,  one  of  the  earliest 
pioneers  of  Illinois,  was  born  in  Jackson 


<X:'ri"M"i"i"}-»»-»»-»jp-i"i-M"»»-i"»-H-f»:?0 

7  RANK  HAMM,  one  of  Randolph  Countj-'s 
well  known  citizens,  and  a  farmer  of  town- 
ship 7,  range  7,  was  born  in  Hanover,  Ger- 
many, in  February,  1826.  He  is  a  son  of  Kasper 
and  Mary  (Topp)  Hamm.  who  resided  in  the  Old 
Countr3'  until  the  death  of  Kasper,  after  which  the 
widowed  mother  with  our  subject  came  to  Amer- 
ica in  1854.  The  latter  attended  the  schools  of 
German}"  until  fourteen  and  one-half  j-ears  of  age, 
when  his  studies  were  discontinued.  He  embarked 
in  farming,  and  followed  that  occupation  in  the 
land  of  his  birth  prior  to  his  emigration  to  the 
United  States. 

Upon  coming  to  this  country,  'Sir.  Hamm  at 
once  settled  near  Chester,  111.,  where  he  still  makes 
his  home.  During  the  period  of  thirt\'-nine  years 
that  have  passed  since  settling  here,  he  has  im- 
proved the  property  until  it  is  now  one  of  the 
finest  farms  in  the  township.  Being  a  man  of  en- 
ergetic disposition,  shrewdness  and  keen  discrim- 
ination, he  has  made  a  success  of  his  chosen  call- 
ing, and  is  deservedl}'  numbered  among  the  repre- 
sentative agriculturists  of  this  section. 

In  1863  occurred  the  marriage  of  Mr.  Hamm  to 
Miss  Elizabeth  Gausman,  whose  parents  were  Prus- 
sians by  birth.  Eleven  children  were  born  of  this 
marriage,  of  whom  the  following  are  still   living: 


w 

\y  ^  County  in  1826.  Long  before  this  period 
his  parents  and  grandparents,  who  came  from 
Pennsylvania  and  Kentucky,  settled  on  the  un- 
broken prairies  with  no  other  capital  than  perse- 
verance, rugged  honesty  and  untiring  industry. 
To  them  the  subject  of  this  sketch  owes  much  of 
his  prosperity.  Quite  early  in  life  he  impressed 
his  individuality  upon  the  people  as  a  shrewd 
public  man  of  aflfairs,  as  well  .as  a  farmer  of  un- 
usual force  and  intelligence.  As  a  member  of  the 
Lower  Legislature  he  was  respected  for  his  opin- 
ions and  advanced  views  upon  questions  affecting 
the  people  of  his  district.  So  great  was  the  confi- 
dence reposed  in  him  by  those  who  knew  him  as  a 
neighbor  and  friend,  that  many  local  offices  were 
filled  by  him,  and  in  these  he  served  with  the 
I  same  fidelity  that  marked  his  course  in  every  pur- 
suit of  life.  In  politics  he  was  a  Republican.  In 
the  faith  of  the  Christian  Church,  of  which  he  was 
long  a  member,  he  passed  away  September  22, 
1871. 

The  ladv  who  in  1851  became  the  wife  of  Mr. 
Schwartz  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Sarah  Kimmel, 
and  was  a  daughter  of  Henry  Kimmel,  who  was 
numbered  among  the  earliest  settlers  of  Jackson 
County,  having  come  here  from  Pennsylvania. 
Eight  children  were  born  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Schwartz, 
of  whom  three  are  living,  George  S.,  W.  A.  and 
Ellen.  W.  A.  is  a  well  known  attorney  residing 
in  Carbondale;  Ellen  married  J.  D.  Hays,  a  promi- 
nent citizen  of  Elkville;  and  George  S.,  wlio  was 
born  in  1864,  resides  on  the  old  homestead  situated 
on  section  20,  Elk  Township.     His  education    was 


844 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


received  in  tlie  State  Normal  University,  and  he 
is  an  intelligent,  well  informed  man.  In  1884  he 
marrie(i  Jliss  Laura,  daughter  of  Capt.  Simeon 
W.alker,  of  Carbondale,  and  they  are  the  parents 
of  two  children:  George  S.,  Jr.,  who  was  born  in 
1886;  and  Irene,  whose  birth  occurred  in  1893. 


VI^EV.  CHARLES  KLOCKE,  rector  of  the 
|i*fr'  Sacred  Heart  of  Jesus  Catholic  Church  at 
/Ai\V  DuQuoin,  was  born  in  the  parish  of  Ma- 
^^rienmunster,  diocese  of  Paderborn,  West- 
phalia, Germany,  April  15,  1841.  His  fatiier, 
John  Klocke,  was  one  of  the  very  wealthy  farmers 
of  that  locality,  and  his  house  was  one  of  the  fin- 
est in  all  Westphalia.  Sturdy  oaks  spread  their 
branches  over  the  beautiful  residence,  and  the 
scenery  was  of  that  grandeur  that  must  be  seen  to 
be  appreciated.  The  owner  of  this  fine  estate  was 
no  ordinary  man,  but  a  high-minded,  cultured, 
liberal-hearted  gentleman.  His  generosity  to  the 
poor  and  oppressed  gave  him  the  name  of  "the 
father  of  the  poor,"  by  which  he  was  known  far 
and  near.  In  fact,  his  large  foitune  and  the 
profits  of  his  estate  were  devoted  to  the  needs  of 
the  destitute.  No  worthy  hand  was  ever  stretclied 
out  to  him  that  was  taken  away  empty. 

The  demise  of  this  pliilanliiropist,  which  oc- 
curred at  tiie  age  of  fifty-six  years,  was  the  first 
death  in  a  large  family  for  fort3-two  years,  and 
when  he  passed  away  he  was  mourned  by  none 
more  than  by  the  poor  whom  he  had  befriended. 
The  mother  of  our  subject,  whose  maiden  name 
was  Catherine  Bupe,  was  a  kind,  good  woman; 
she  died  some  ten  years  after  the  death  of  her 
husband.  Father  Klocke  was  the  seventh  son 
and  the  youngest  child  of  ten  children,  and  is  the 
onl}'  one  of  the  number  who  left  German^'.  Tlie 
others,  remaining  in  their  native  land,  were  prin- 
cipally farmers,  and  were  very  successful. 

Father  Klocke  spent  his  boyhood  days  on  his 
father's  estate,  surrounded  by  all  the  comforts 
wealth  can  bring.  While  attending  the  parochial 
schools,  and  while  meditating  under   the  shadows 


of  the  wide-spreading  oaks,  endeavoring  to  de- 
cide in  his  own  mind  what  he  would  choose  for 
his  life  work,  he  doubtless  thought  of  the  many 
advantages  he  would  have  if  he  adopted  business 
pursuits  or  one  of  the  professions.  Therefore  it 
may  seem  strange  that  of  all  the  occupations  pre- 
senting themselves  to  his  attention  he  should  se- 
lect the  priesthood,  with  its  attending  hardships 
and  cares.  But  even  in  boyhood  the  predomi- 
nant question  with  him  was,  "What  can  I  do  for 
the  greatest  good  of  my  fellow-men?"  His  de- 
cision was  that  his  life  work  should  be  in  the 
church. 

Attending  the  parochial  schools  until  the  age 
of  fourteen  years.  Father  Klocke  then  studied 
with  the  parish  priest,  and  when  sevetiteen  3'ears 
of  age  he  entered  the  gymnasium  of  Paderborn, 
one  of  liie  most  noted  institutions  of  learning  in 
that  section  of  the  country,  and  situated  about 
thirty  miles  from  his  home.  He  passed  a  most 
thorough  examination  for  the  fifth  class,  which 
was  far  in  advance  of  his  age,  but  the  authorities, 
deciding  that  it  would  be  a  bad  precedent  to  ad- 
vance him  even  though  he  was  qualified,  put  him 
back  in  the  fourth  class.  After  four  months  he 
found  that  he  could  not  advance  rapidly  enough 
to  suit  himself,  and  acting  upon  the  advice  of 
some  of  the  old  professors,  he  decided  to  present 
himself  at  the  gymnasium  at  Beelan  for  examina- 
tion in  the  sixth  class,  which  was  still  further  in 
advance  of  his  age.  First,  however,  he  spent  one 
month  in  the  fifth  class  and  passed  to  the  sixth. 

Some  jealousy  existed  among  the  other  stu- 
dents, as  well  as  among  a  number  of  the  professors 
in  the  gymnasium  at  Paderborn,  on  account  of  our 
subject  having  left  the  latter  place.  It  was  also 
against  the  rules  of  the  different  schools  that  a 
student  should  be  admitted  to  one  from  another. 
But  a  more  serious  trouble  was  to  confront  him, 
for  charges  were  preferred  against  him  for  leaving 
the  other  institution  without  paying  his  tuition. 
If  this  were  proved  true  he  would  be  expelled  and 
could  never  become  a  priest.  He  was  summoned 
before  the  faculty  and  confronted  with  the  charges. 
Though  lie  protested  his  innocence,  his  word  would 
not  be  taken  as  against  the  professors  of  the  leading 
educational  institution  in  the  land.     He  was  told 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


845 


that  he  must  prove  beyond  a  question  of  doubt 
that  he  had  paid  it.  He  remembered  having  taken 
a  receipt  for  the  amount  when  paid,  but  had  he 
kept  it?  This  was  his  only  hope,  and  lie  stated  it 
to  the  faculty.  They  told  him  to  produce  the  re- 
ceipt and  that  quickly,  or  he  would  be  discharged 
in  disgrace.  Hastening  to  his  room,  to  his  great 
joy  be  found  the  receipt  and  in  triumph  returned 
and  presented  it.  This  was  conclusive  and  re- 
vealed the  fact  of  a  plot  against  him. 

In  that  institution  Father  Klocke  continued  his 
studies  until  1864.  At  that  time  the  present 
Bishop  of  Belleville,  John  Janssen,  then  secretary 
to  the  Rt.-Rev.  Bishop  Junken,  of  Alton,  was  in 
Europe  for  the  purpose  of  getting  missionaries  to 
come  over  to  the  American  frontiers.  Deciding 
that  he  could  do  more  good  in  this  country.  Fa- 
ther Klocke,  with  eight  others,  crossed  the  Atlan- 
tic, after  which  he  spent  one  year  in  the  study  of 
theology  and  philology  at  St.  Joseph's,  of  Teu- 
topolis.  111.,  and  in  September  of  1865  entered  a 
seminary  in  Montreal,  Canada,  where  after  three 
full  years  of  study  his  education  was  completed. 
In  1868  Father  Klocke  was  ordained  as  a  priest 
and  shortly  afterward  celebrated  his  first  mass  in 
the  Church  of  the  Holy  Redeemer  on  Third  Street 
in  New  York  City,  after  which  he  was  with  the 
Rt.-Rev.  Bishop  Junken,  at  Alton,  until  September 
26  of  the  same  year.  He  was  then  sent  to  Du 
Quoin  to  take  charge  of  the  little  church  at  this 
place  and  the  missions  in  this  section,  including  all 
of  the  territory  on  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad 
from  Cairo  to  Eflingham.  Though  the  field  was 
large,  there  were  within  its  limits  at  that  time  but 
seventy-eight  families.  The  church  at  Du  Quoin 
was  a  poor  affair  and  did  not  even  have  a  roof 
over  it.  Southern  Illinois  was  not  well  settled  or 
developed  in  those  early  days  and  Father  Klocke 
endured  many  hardships  in  making  the  rounds  of 
the  various  missions.  Often  he  was  called  to  the 
bedside  of  the  sick  in  the  middle  of  the  night, 
frequently  traveling  for  miles  in  a  lumber  wagon 
in  tlie  midst  of  a  drenching  rain. 

During  the  quarter  of  a  century  that  Father 
Klocke  has  been  in  the  field,  the  work  has  grown, 
so  that  the  territory  once  under  his  sole  supervi- 
sion now  has  twelve  priests  and  thousands  of  fam- 


ilies. Much  of  this  is  due  to  bis  indefatigable 
energy  and  perseverance.  The  church  at  Du  Quoin 
was  twice  destroyed  b}'  storms.  The  foundation 
for  the  present  fine  structure  was  laid  July  1, 
1889,  by  the  Rt.-Rev.  Bishop  Janssen,  of  Belle- 
ville, in  tlie  presence  of  more  than  twenty  priests. 
The  new  edifice  was  built  at  a  cost  of  $24,000  and 
is  called  the  "Gem  of  Southern  Illinois,"  being 
one  of  the  finest  structures  in  this  part  of  the  state. 
The  school  and  other  property  cost  $12,000.  The 
church  was  dedicated  November  5,  1890.  Tiie 
school  was  finished  in  October,  1892,  and  dedi- 
cated December  5  of  that  year. 

The  twenty-fifth  anniversary  of  Father  Klocke 's 
ministerial  life  was  celebrated  June  21,  1893,  not 
only  by  Catholics,  but  also  by  Protestants  as  well. 
The  people  upon  that  occasion  deemed  it  a  pleas- 
ure and  a  privilege  to  do  honor  to  the  man  who 
in  his  plain,  unassuming  way  has  done  so  much 
good  in  their  midst.  It  is  the  wish  of  all  that  the 
Father  ma^'  live  to  celebrate  with  his  people  his 
golden  jubilee. 

^ ^*^. _^ 

f®^'" "'yw^' ^^ 


^lENJAMIN  F.  WILL.  To  this  gentleman 
belonged  the  distinction  of  being  one  of 
the  pioneers  of  Jackson  County,  where  for 
many  3'ears  he  cultivated  a  fine  farm  on 
section  26,  Somerset  Township.  This  place  con- 
tinued to  be  his  home  until  he  was  called  from 
earth,  December  12,  189.3.  So  successful  was  he 
in  his  undertakings  that  he  became  the  owner  of 
three  hundred  and  sixty  acres  of  valuable  land, 
and  also  gave  to  his  childi-en  four  hundred  and 
twentj^  acres.  The  farm  is  surrounded  and  divided 
into  fields  by  good  fencing,  while  granaries,  barns 
and  other  requisites  of  a  modern  estate  are  to  be 
found  conveniently  located. 

In  Somerset  County,  Pa.,  the  subject  of  this 
sketch  was  born  Juh'  19,  1824,  being  the  .son  of 
Peter  and  Mary  (Gebhart)  Will,  natives  of  Penn- 
sjivania.  He  was  of  German  descent,  his  paternal 
great-grandfather  having  been  a  native  of  that 
count!'}'.     In  1836,  accompanying  his   parents,  he 


846 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


came  west  to  Illinois,  and  for  a  few  months  so- 
journed in  Sangamon  County,  near  the  present 
site  of  Springfield.  The  removal  from  their  east- 
ern home  was  made  with  a  two-horse  carriage 
and  a  wagon  drawn  by  four  horses,  and  not  only 
were  all  the  household  effects  thus  conveyed,  but 
also  the  fatlier,  mother  and  nine  children.  The3' 
were  some  four  weeks  en  route  to  the  new  home, 
and  meantime  camped  at  niglit  wherever  the 
darkness  overtook  them. 

In  the  fall  of  1836  the  family  came  to  Jackson 
County  and  settled  in  Somerset  Township,  where 
the    parents  resided  until  their  death.     Of   their 
children   four  survive,   viz.:     John,  who  lives   in 
Ava,  111.;  Daniel,  whose  home  is  in  Campbell  Hill, 
111.;  Mrs.  Margaret  Wheeler,  a   widow,  living   in 
Somerset  Township;  and   George  G.,  who  also  re- 
sides  in   Somerset   Township.     Our   subject    was 
reared  to  manhood  principall}'  in  Jackson  County, 
where  from  youth  he  was  familiar  with  the  scenes 
of  pioneer  life.     His  first  home  after  coming  to   j 
Somerset  Township  was  a  loa;  cabin,  which,  with    I 
its  puncheon  floor  and  clapboard  roof,  presented    I 
a  tjpical  picture  of  frontier  existence. 

All  the  hardships  incident  to  life  in  a  new  and 
undeveloped  country  Mr.  Will  experienced  in  his 
}Outh,and  much  of  his  time  was  devoted  to  clear- 
ing land,  of  which  he  improved  about  three  hun- 
dred acres.  However,  he  did  not  devote  his  at- 
tention exclusively  to  farming,  but  in  addition 
thereto  he  and  a  brother,  Alexander  (now  deceased), 
operated  a  sawmill  for  twenty  years,  meeting  with 
considerable  success  iu  that  undertaking.  He 
was  a  man  of  extended  information  upon  topics 
of  general  and  local  interest,  but  his  knowledge 
was  gained  by  self-culture,  his  educational  advan- 
tages having  been  the  most  limited.  In  childhood 
he  was  a  pupil  in  the  neighboring  schoolhouse, 
which  was  built  of  logs  and  furnished  with  slab 
seats  resting  on  wooden  pins. 

August  26,  1847,  Mr.  Will  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Susan  A.,  daughter  of  Henry 
Whipkey,  one  of  the  pioneei-s  of  Jackson  County, 
having  settled  here  some  time  during  the  '40s. 
Mrs.  Will  was  born  in  Somerset  County-,  Pa.,  and 
by  her  union  with  our  subject  became  the  mother 
of  the  following  named  children:     Rollin  D.,  who   , 


lives  in  Ava  Township,  Jackson  County;  Freeman, 
also  a  resident  of  this  count)-;  Corda,  wife  of  H. 
Gill,  living  in  Somerset  Township;  George,  also 
of  this  township;  Irvin,  who  lives  in  Murphysboro, 
111.;  Ollie,  wife  of  Frank  Freedline,  of  De  Soto 
Township;  Emma,  who  married  Philip  Fager,  and 
lives  in  Murphysboro,  111.;  Jane,  who  is  the  wife  of 
J.  Childers,  of  Jackson  County;  Nora,  the  wife  of 
Joseph  Schrader,  of  Murphysboro;  Birdie,  now 
Mrs.  James  Red.  of  De  Soto  Township;  Julia,  living 
with  her  mother;  and  Catherine,  deceased. 

In  his  political  sentiments  Mr.  Will  was  a  Re- 
publican, and  voted  at  the  first  election  ever  held 
in  Somerset  Township.  While  he  was  frequently 
solicited  to  accept  offices  of  trust,  he  invariably 
refused,  preferring  the  quietude  of  home  life  to  the 
excitement  of  public  affairs.  In  his  religious  be- 
lief he  was  a  Lutheran,  and  at  the  time  of  his 
death  was  serving  as  Trustee  of  the  church  prop- 
erty. His  father,  in  coinpan\-  with  Philip  Kimmel 
and  a  few  other  pioneers,  built  the  first  church 
edifice  of  that  denomination  in  the  countj'. 
Throughout  his  entire  life  it  was  his  aim  to  pro- 
mote the  well-being  of  his  fellow-citizens  and  aid 
in  the  development  of  the  county's  resources,  and 
his  labors  in  behalf  of  his  community  entitle  him 
to  prominent  rank  among  its  honored  pioneers. 


eM.  THORNTON,  M.  D.,  of  Osage  City, 
,  Franklin  County,  ranks  high  in  the  medi- 
,  cal  profession,  and  has  an  extensive  prac- 
tice in  Franklin,  Perry,  Randolph  and  Jackson 
Counties.  He  was  born  in  Greene  County,  Ala., 
in  1850,  and  is  a  son  of  Luke  and  Nanc}'  Thorn- 
ton, who  were  cotton  planters  in  comfortable  cir- 
cumstances. The  Doctor  is  the  eldest  of  six  chil- 
dren, the  others  being  Webster,  Hezekiah,  James 
A.,  Samuel  and  MaiT.  When  a  mere  lad,  he  ac- 
companied his  parents  to  Mississippi,  and  in  his 
youth  attended  Baldwin's  Academy  in  that  state, 
also  an  academy  in  Alabama. 

At  the  age  of  twenty  our  subject  settled  in  De 
Soto,  Jackson  Country,  111.,  and  began  the  stud}'  of 
medicine  iu  Murphysboro.  He  was  unasually  dili- 
gent in  his  studies,  and  derived  much  benefit  from 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


847 


attending  the  lecture  courses  at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and 
Louisville,  Ky.  In  1876  lie  was  graduated  from 
the  Louisville  Medical  College,  and  at  once  com- 
menced the  practice  of  liis  profession.  About  the 
same  time  he  was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss 
Addie,  daughter  of  .Tames  Osborn,  one  of  Jackson 
County's  earliest  settlers  and  most  respected  citi- 
zens. The  Osborn  family  is  of  Virginian  descent. 
The  Doctor  and  his  wife  are  the  parents  of  six 
children,  of  whom  five  are  living,  namely:  Nina, 
Edna,  Nellie,  Blanche  and  Gold.a.  Zona  died  in 
infancy. 


-f^ 


=-f 


OIIN  IIEINBOKEL.  A  compendium  of 
biographies  of  representative  citizens  of 
.Jackson  Connty  would  be  incomplete  did 
^^  it  fail  to  contain  that  of  Mr.  Ileinbokel. 
As  a  loyal  and  gallant  soldier  during  the  dark 
days  of  the  Civil  War,  as  a  reliable  and  progress- 
ive citizen,  and  as  an  energetic  agriculturist,  he 
claims  the  respect  of  his  fellow-men.  The  valu- 
able farm  which  he  owns  and  operates  is  located 
on  section  4,  Degognia  Township,  and  from  its 
fertile  soil  he  annually  reaps  bountiful  harvests 
of  grain. 

Born  in  the  province  of  Hanover,  Germany, 
October  8,  1834,  the  subject  of  this  sketch  was 
orphaned  by  the  death  of  his  mother,  Elizabeth, 
when  he  was  about  nine  days  old.  Leaving  the 
child  with  his  grandfather  Krieg,  the  father,  .John 
Ileinbokel,  crossed  over  to  England  soon  after  the 
death  of  his  wife,  and  there  he  secured  a  position 
as  foreman  in  a  sugar  house.  There  lie  also  mar- 
ried again,  becoming  the  father  of  two  daughters 
by  his  second  union.  John  never  saw  his  father 
nor  liis  mother,  and  for  a  number  of  years  has  not 
heard  of  the  former,  whom  he  supposes  to  be  dead. 

Until  Ills  fifteenth  year  our  subject  remained  in 
the  Old  Country,  and  attended  the  parochial  school 
until  liis  confirmation  on  Easter  Sunday  of  the 
year  1849.  In  the  fall  of  the  same  year  lie  was 
sent  to  his  uncle,  Peter  Ivrieg,  in  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
who  was  employed  in  a  sugar  refinery.  There  the 
lad  expected  to  make  his  home,  but  the  deatli  of 
his  uncle  that   winter    threw    him   on  his  own  re- 


sources— an  orphan,  friendless  and  almost  penni- 
less. Soon,  however,  he  secured  a  position  in  a 
brickyard,  where  he  gave  such  good  satisfsiction 
that  he  was  retained  in  that  occupation  for  ten  or 
eleven  years. 

May  19,  1859,  Mr.  Ileinbokel  married  Mary, 
daughter  of  Henry  and  Mary  Strackeljahn,  all  of 
whom  were  natives  of  Prussia.  Mrs.  Ileinbokel 
was  born  February  28,  1840,  and  was  orphaned  by 
her  mother's  death  when  she  was  a  child  of  seven; 
her  father  died  when  she  was  seventeen.  She  was 
the  fourth  in  order  of  birth  in  the  family,  which 
consisted  of  four  sons  and  one  daughter.  By  her 
marriage  she  has  become  the  mother  of  thirteen 
children,  eleven  of  whom  survive:  Caroline  H., 
wife  of  H.  H.  Bunselineyer,  whose  sketch  appears 
elsewhere  in  this  volume;  Henry  A.;  Herman  F. 
and  Annie  M.  (twins),  the  latter  being  the  wife 
of  William  Luchow,  a  farmer  living  near  Name- 
oki,  III.;  Minnie  D.,  who  married  Otto  Iloinann, 
a  farmer  living  near  Wagner's  J^anding;  John 
A.,  Mary  S.,  Kate  E.,  Emma  M.,  Elizabeth  A.  and 
William  H.  J. 

In  the  spring  of  18C1,  when  the  war  broke  out, 
Mr.  Heinbokel  enlisted  in  Company  F,  Fifth  Regi- 
ment Home  Guards  of  St.  Louis,  and  served  for 
three  months,  during  which  time  thej'  operated 
along  the  Missouri  River.  They  reached  Boone- 
ville  the  day  Lyons  evacuated  the  place.  Leav- 
ing two  companies  to  hold  the  town,  the  remainder 
of  the  regiment  moved  on  to  Lexington,  where 
they  staid  for  six  weeks.  On  the  expiration  of 
their  term  of  service,  the  troops  returned  to  St. 
Louis  and  were  discharged.  On  the  return  trip, 
the  steamer  "White  Cloud"  was  attacked  by  guer- 
rillas at  Glasgow  City.  At  almost  the  first  volley 
Mr.  Heinbokel  was  wounded  in  the  leg  and  car- 
ried into  the  cabin.  Three  times  that  day  the 
same  band  made  an  attack  on  the  boat  from  be- 
hind trees  on  the  bluffs,  riding  across  the  bends  of 
the  river  and  secreting  themselves  before  the  boat 
could  pass. 

After  some  six  weeks'  loss  of  time  on  account 
of  his  wound,  Mr.  Heinbokel  crossed  over  into 
Illinois  and  worked  in  the  potato  harvest  for  his 
brother-in-law,  Henry,  who  was  farming  near 
Nameoki.     During  the  winter  he  was  employed  in 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


a  slaughter  house  in  St.  Louis,  and  m  the  spring 
of  the  following  year  rented  land  near  Nameoki, 
this  state,  and  began  the  life  of  a  farmer,  in  which 
occupation  he  is  still  engaged.  Renting  land  near 
his  own  holding,  he  carries  ou  an  extensive  farm. 
Wheat,  corn  and  potatoes  are  his  staple  crops.  Of 
his  original  purchase  of  one  hundred  and  forty- 
five  acres,  over  eiglity-tive  have  gone  into  the 
river. 

In  religious  connections,  Mr.  Heinbokel  and  his 
entire  family  are  members  of  the  Evangelical 
Lutheran  Church.  In  politics  he  is  a  Republican, 
and  these  hard  times  serve  to  strengthen  his  party 
faith.  When  in  Madison  County  he  served  for 
eight  years  as  School  Director,  and  in  his  present 
home  he  has  served  in  the  same  capacity  for  a 
number  of  years.  When  we  consider  the  fact  that 
he  was  reared  an  orphan  and  was  early  obliged  to 
make  his  own  way  in  the  world;  when  we  con- 
sider also  that  he  came  to  this  country  without 
means,  a  mere  lad,  we  cannot  fail  to  believe  that 
he  deserves  great  credit  for  gaining  his  well 
merited  success. 


^^^1 


■m 


IP-^ 


|Ir^,  OBERT  EJIERY,  an  extensive  land  owner 
l*V  °^  Randolph  County,  owns  and  operates  a 
Ji  w  finely  improved  farm  situated  on  section 
\\0  30,  township  7,  range  5.  He  was  born  in 
Staffordshire,  England,  August  19,  1830,  and  is  a 
son  of  William  and  Mary  A.  (Such)  Emery,  na- 
tives of  the  same  shire  as  that  in  which  his  birth 
occurred.  In  18-49  the  parents,  accompanied  b}- 
their  seven  children,  emigrated  to  the  United 
States,  and  in  September  of  that  year  settled  in 
township  7,  range  5,  Randolph  Count}-,  where  for 
a  number  of  j-ears  he  operated  as  a  renter.  In 
1853  the  father  purchased  the  farm  where  our  sub- 
ject now  lives. 

Upon  the  farm  which  thej-  improved  and  trans- 
formed into  one  of  the  best  in  the  locality,  the 
parents  continued  to  reside  until  their  deaths. 
Their  children  were  William,  John,  Robert,  Steph- 
en, Mar}-  Ann,  Henrj-  C.  and  Alfred.  Of  these, 
four  are  living,  namely:  William,  of  Concordia, 
Kan.,  who  during  the  late  war  enlisted  as  a  mem- 


ber of  Company  E,  Thirtieth  Illinois  Infantry; 
our  subject;  Stephen,  of  Albina,  Oregon,  and 
Henry,  who  resided  in  Oklahoma  for  some  time, 
and  now  lives  in  California. 

For  a  short  time  after  coming  to  this  county, 
Robert  remained  with  his  parents.  lie  then  went 
to  Cliester.  where  he  entered  the  em  pi  03-  of  M.  S. 
McCormack  to  learn  the  blacksmitii's  trade.  A 
year  later  Mr.  McCormack  sold  the  shop  to  John 
Kennedy,  with  whom  our  subject  remained  for  six 
months.  Going  from  there  to  Opossum  Prairie, 
he  finished  his  apprenticeship  with  D.  Cunning- 
ham. After  assisting  his  father  on  the  farm  for  a 
short  time  he  opened  a  blacksmith  shop  in  town- 
ship 7,  range  6,  where  he  remained  for  three  vears. 
Meantime  he  established  a  home  of  his  own.  In 
September  of  the  year  1854  he  was  united  in  mar- 
riage w-ith  Miss  JIary  M.  Conder,  who  was  born  in  , 
Owen  Count}-,  lud.,  November  15,  1831,  and  came 
to  this  county  in  the  fall  of  1850,  in  company  with 
her  parents,  Martin  and  Catharine  (Fiscus)  Conder, 
who  were  natives  respectively  of  Kentucky  and 
North  Carolina.  Mrs.  Emery  was  one  of  nine 
children,  whose  names  are,  John,  Mary  M.,  Fred- 
erick, Solomon,  Levi,  Elizabeth,  Adam,  Eliza  J. 
and  Elins.  The  union  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Emery  has 
resulted  in  the  birth  of  eight  children,  five  of  whom 
are  living,  viz.:  R.  N.,  Clara  A.,  Waller,  Ilattie  M. 
and  John.  With  one  exception,  the  children  are 
all  married  and  have  families. 

In  1856  Mr.  Emery  moved  to  Rockwood,  and 
thence  in  the  year  1871  he  came  to  his  present 
farm  in  township  7,  range  5,  where  he  has  since 
continued  to  live,  with  the  exception  of  two  years 
spent  in  Rockwood.  Buying  the  home  farm  in  the 
year  named,  he  lias  since  greatly  improved  the 
place,  and  now  lias  one  of  the  comfortable  homes 
of  the  county.  He  has  deeded  to  iiis  son  twenty- 
five  acres  of  his  farm  of  one  hundred  and  fifty-one 
acres.  Here  lie  and  his  wife  hope  to  pass  their  de- 
clining years,  surrounded  by  the  comforts  which 
they  have  earned  by  persistent  labor  and  good 
management.  They  and  their  children  are  mem- 
bers of  the  Christian  Church,  and  attend  services 
in  the  chapel  on  the  home  farm.  Mr.  Emery  is  a 
generous  contributor  to  religious  enterprises,  and 
donated  the  ground  on  which  the  church  stands. 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


849 


Politically  he  was  a  Democrat  prior  to  1860,  but 
since  that  time  has  bpen  a  supporter  of  Republican 
principles.  lie  and  his  family  are  numbered  among 
the  best  people  of  the  county,  where  they  have  so 
long  made  their  home,  and  they  have  gained  a 
warm    place  in  tlie   hearts  of   their  fellow-citizens. 


G: 


L-7- 


:£) 


^ 


NDREW  KP:IMAN.     The  farmers  of  Jack- 
(@/4ji    son  County  are  as  a  class  men  of  business 
(a    integrity,  industrious  liabits  and  excellent 
(^'  moral  character,  and  even  a  brief  outline 

of  their  lives  is  worth}'  of  the  consideration  of  all 
who  appreciate  true  worth.  One  who  has  been 
identified  witli  the  agricultural  interests  of  Levan 
Township  for  many  3'cars,  and  who  is  known  as 
one  of  the  most  energetic  farmers  of  the  commu- 
nity, is  Andrew  Reiman,  the  owner  of  a  finely  im- 
proved estate. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  born  in  Somerset 
County,  Pa.,  November  22,  1815,  and  is  a  son  of 
Charles  and  Catherine  (Ma}')  Reiman.  Upon  the 
home  farm  he  spent  his  boyhood  years,  and  at  the 
age  of  nineteen  years  commenced  to  learn  the 
trade  of  a  carpenter,  at  which  he  was  employed 
for  the  ensuing  thirteen  years.  When  twenty-two 
years  of  age,  in  1837,  he  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  ^Margaret  Zeigler,  an  orphan,  who  was 
born  in  Pennsylvania.  Though  without  means, 
the  young  couple  commenced  housekeeping,  and 
although  obliged  to  use  the  strictest  economy  in 
their  expenditures,  were  nevertheless  contented, 
and  gradually  accumulated  a  competence. 

For  several  years  after  his  marriage,  Mr.  Reiman 
followed  the  carpenter's  trade,  and  with  his  sav- 
ings, amounting  to  about  -$800,  purchased  the  old 
Reiman  homestead.  After  two  years  he  disposed  of 
the  property  and  came  west,  sojourning  for  a  short 
time  in  various  places,  and  finally  landing  in 
Murphysboro  with  four  children  and  a  capital  of 
fifty  cents,  which  with  his  accustomed  generosity 
he  loaned  to  a  stranger.  He  obtained  employment 
at  log  chopping  and  boarded  among  the  neighbor- 
ing families,  of  whom  there  were  very  few.  Some 
of  the  first  structures  in  Murphysboro  were  built 


by  him,  and  he  did  considerable  pioneer  work  in 
this  section  of  the  state. 

Abandoning  the  trade  of  a  carpenter  in  1861, 
Mr.  Reiman  has  since  engaged  in  farming,  and 
such  has  been  his  success  that  he  was  at  one  time 
the  owner  of  two  thousand  acres.  As  each  of  his 
eight  sons  attained  the  age  of  twenty-one,  he  was 
given  two  hundred  and  sixty  acres  with  which  to 
commence  agricultural  pursuits,  and  as  payment 
for  his  services  during  boyhood.  His  children  are 
named,  John,  William,  Catherine,  Mary,  Joseph, 
George,  Harriet,  Thomas,  Charles,  P^dwin,  Andrew 
and  Pollen.  Catherine  and  Charles  are  deceased; 
the  others  are  prosperous  and  useful  citizens, 
prominent  in  their  several  communities,  and  widely 
known  as  energetic  farmers.  After  a  happy  mar- 
ried life  extending  over  a  period  of  fifty-two  years 
and  eighteen  days,  Mr.  Reiman  was  bereaved  by 
the  death  of  his  faithful  wife,  September  20,  1889. 

While  not  an  active  partisan,  our  subject  al- 
ways casts  his  ballot  for  the  principles  of  Democ- 
racy, and  has  been  tl\^  incumbent  of  various  town- 
ship offices.  His  life  has  been  one  of  industry, 
and  in  former  years  it  was  his  frequent  habit  to 
toil  all  day  at  carpentering,  then  returning  home 
at  dark,  spend  the  evening  in  making  furniture  or 
constructing  various  useful  articles  for  the  house. 
He  sold  his  Murphysboro  property  in  1862,  and 
afterward  made  a  number  of  purchases,  until  he 
was  one  of  the  most  extensive  land  owners  in  the 
county.  In  all  his  enterprises,  he  has  been  guided 
by  judgment  and  excellent  executive  ability,  and 
what  he  has  and  what  he  is  to-day  are  attributable 
to  the  possession  of  the  qualities  of  honesty,  perse- 
verance and  energy. 


<jf^r  M.  WARD,  M.  D.  The  calling  of  a  physi- 
|pj(g)'i  cian  is  not  only  one  of  the  most  arduous, 
/1\  but  one  of  the  most  responsible  pursuits  in 

which  man  can  engage,  and  he  who  attains  a  high 
reputation  in  this  profession  must  necessarily  be 
endowed  with  physical  endurance,  keen  intelli- 
gence and  excellent  judgment.  The  subject  of 
this  sketch  is  one  whose  extensive  practice  and 
high   standing   in    professional  circles  prove  con- 


850 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


clusivel3'  his  mental  and  physical  endowments  and 
his  painstaking  efforts  to  continually  add  to  his 
knowledge  and  skill. 

Dr.  Ward  is  a  native  of  this  state,  having  been 
born  in  Jefferson  County,  in  which  place  his  par- 
ents located  in  an  earl3'  day.  The  father  bore  the 
name  of  Daniel  Ward  and  was  a  native  of  Vir- 
ginia. He  was  a  farmer  by  occupation,  and  at  the 
time  of  his  entering  the  Union  army,  in  1863,  was 
conducting  a  valuable  estate.  His  decease  occurred 
while  on  the  march  between  Duval's  Bluff  and 
Pine  Bluff,  Ark.,  in  1864.  He  was  the  father  of 
nine  children,  all  of  whom  grew  to  manhood  and 
womanhood. 

The  father  of  Mrs.  Ward,  Isaiah  Youngblood, 
came  to  Illinois  from  Alabama  in  an  early  day. 
The  paternal  grandfather  of  our  subject,  Lloyd 
Ward,  hailed  from  Ireland,  and  after  coming  to 
the  United  -States  was  married  and  here  spent  the 
rest  of  his  life. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  grew  to  mature  years 
on  his  father's  farm  in  Jefferson  County  and  pros- 
ecuted his  early  studies  in  the  common  schools 
near  his  home.  Later  he  attended  the  Southern 
Illinois  Normal  at  Carbondale,  and  when  a  j'oung 
man  of  nineteen  engaged  in  teaching  school,  and 
in  this  way  earned  the  money  which  enabled  him 
to  carr}'  out  his  long  cherished  plan  of  becoming  a 
ph3'sician.  When  circumstances  permitted  him  to 
prosecute  his  medical  studies,  3'oung  Ward  entered 
the  Missouri  jNIedical  College  at  St.  Louis,  from 
which  institution  he  was  graduated  in  March,  1879. 
Immediately  on  receiving  his  diploma  Dr.  Ward 
came  to  Tamaroa,  and  since  that  time  he  has  been 
engaged  in  the  practice  of  his  profession  in  Frank- 
lin, Washington,  Jefferson  and  Perry  Counties. 

The  year  prior  to  his  graduation  Dr.  Ward  was 
married  to  Miss  Addie,  daughter  of  Thomas  A. 
Lovelady,  a  native  of  Tennessee.  Mrs.  Ward  at 
the  time  of  her  marriage  was  residing  in  this 
count}',  and  by  her  union  with  our  subject  has  be- 
come the  mother  of  four  children,  Parlej-  G.,  Ma- 
rian Katie,  Velma,  who  is  deceased,  and  Leland. 

As  has  already  been  stated,  the  Doctor  has  built 
up  an  extensive  practice  in  this  and  surrounding 
counties,  and  as  a  private  citizen  is  highl}'  es- 
teemed for  his  public  spirit  and  interest  in  all  that 


is  beneBcial  to  the  members  of  the  community  and 
the  county  at  large.  While  attending  medical 
lectures  he  sat  side  b}'  side  with  Dr.  Cronin,of  Chi- 
cago fame. 

Dr.  Ward,  of  this  sketch,  was  Pension  Kxaminer 
of  Perry  County  under  President  Harrison,  and  as 
might  be  expected  is  a  stanch  Republican.  With 
his  wife  he  is  a  devoted  member  of  the  Presby- 
terian Church,  and  sociall}'  is  prominently  con- 
nected with  the  Masonic  fraternity. 


^^ll'UGU&T  W.  F.  WILDE,  teacher  of  St. 
^aM     Paul's  Parochial  School  of  Wine  Hill,  is  a 

(/  ii  native  of  Freistadt,  Wis.,  to  wliich  place 
his  parents  had  emigrated  in  18.39  or  1840 
from  the  province  of  Pommen,  Prussia.  He  was 
the  second  in  order  of  birth  of  tiie  famil}'  of  ten 
children,  eight  of  whom  survive.  Until  fourteen 
3'eais  of  age  he  attended  the  parochial  school  at 
Freistadt,  which  was  under  the  supervision  of 
three  different  teachers.  When  nineteen  he  en- 
tered the  business  college  at  Milwaukee,  where  he 
remained  about  five  months,  and  in  March  of  1866 
entered  the  Church  College,  at  Addison,  Dii  Page 
County,  III.,  graduating  from  that  institution  in 
1867. 

In  July  of  that  year  Mr.  Wilde  began  his  career 
as  a  teacher,  in  which  profession  he  has  continued 
ever  since.  Accepting  a  position  at  Warsaw,  111., 
he  remained  in  that  city  until  1879,  when  he  was 
called  to  his  present  position.  His  long  service  in 
each  place  speaks  well  for  his  attainments  and  ex- 
ecutive ability.  As  an  instructor  he  is  conscien- 
tious, painstaking  and  thorough,  and  succeeds  not 
onlj'  in  advancing  the  bright  pupils  rapidly  in 
their  studies,  but  also  in  creating  in  the  minds  of 
the  thoughtless  and  the  dull  a  desire  for  the  ac- 
quisition of  knowledge. 

July  26,  1868,  Mr.  Wilde  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Miss  Therese  A.,  daughter  of  Fred  and 
Ernestine  (Schenzel)  Schlenter,  natives  of  Schwes- 
sow,  Prussia.  Tiie  father  died  when  Therese  was 
but  three  months  old,  and  the  mother  passed  away 
five  3'ears  later.  Thus  carl}-  orphaned,  she  was 
reared  in   the    home  of  her  mother's  sisters.     To 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


851 


Mr.  Wilde  and  his  wife  were  born  six  children, 
five  of  whom  survive.  Their  names  are,  Edward 
G.  C,  George  H.,  Albert  G.,  Emil  H.  W.  and  Chris- 
tina. One  child  died  in  early  infancy,  before  re- 
ceiving baptism  and  a  name. 

Mr.  Wildeaud  his  entire  family  are  members  of  St. 
Paul's  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church  at  AVine  Hill, 
in  winch  they  labor  earnestly  for  the  advancement 
of  the  church  and  the  moral  and  intellectual  wel- 
fare of  the  entire  comiDunit}-.  Thev  are  loved  and 
respected  by  their  neighbors  for  their  kindly  traits 
and  pleasing,  hospitable  manner.  During  war 
times  Mr.  Wilde  was  a  member  of  the  Republican 
party,  but  at  present  atliliates  with  tliose  of  Demo- 
cratic faith. 


\|'UDGE  G.  W.  ANDREWS,  United  States 
Inspector  of  Government  Land  Offices. and 
y=^  a  highly  repected  citizen  of  Murphysboro, 
^^f/  was  born  in  Daj'ton,  Ohio,  February  22, 
1842.  His  grandfather,  Hugh  Andrews,  was  born 
in  Pennsylvania  and  was  a  land  speculator.  In 
1810  he  went  to  Ohio  with  his  family-  and  became 
the  owner  of  several  thousand  acres  of  land.  He 
served  in  the  War  of  1812  as  Lieutenant.  Sam- 
uel A.  Andrews,  the  father  of  our  subject,  was 
born  in  Dauphin  County,  Pa.,  in  1801,  and  was 
reared  and  educated  in  a  log  schoolhouse.  He 
owned  a  farm  of  three  hundred  and  forty  acres 
in  Montgomery  County,  Ohio,  one  of  the  finest 
in  the  community,  whicli  he  operated  until  his 
death,  in  1889.  In  politics  he  was  a  Democrat, 
and  from  eighteen  years  of  age  until  iiis  death  he 
was  an  Elder  in  the  Presbyterian  Church.  The 
family  is  of  Scotch-Irish  descent.  Mrs.  Andrews, 
whose  maiden  name  was  Margaret  Ramsey,  was  a 
native  of  the  Keystone  State.  She  died  October 
19,  1869,  at  the  age  of  sixty-niue.  In  the  family 
were  eleven  children,  nine  of  whom  grew  to  ma- 
ture j'ears. 

Our  subject  is  the  fourth  son.  He  was  reared 
on  a  farm  and  educated  in  the  common  and  high 
schools  and  Fairfield  Academy  and  Hayesville 
(Ohio)  College.   He  taught  school  for  one  j-ear,  and 


in  1862  entered  the  University  of  Michigan.  The 
following  year  he  entered  the  law  department  of 
that  school,  from  which  he  was  graduated  in 
March,  186,5,  with  the  degree  of  LL.B.  In  April 
of  the  same  year,  he  came  west  to  Jonesboro,  and 
in  Ma\'  came  to  Murphysboro,  opening  a  law  of- 
fice in  connection  with  U.  E.  Robinson,  but  after 
a  year  the  partnership  was  dissolved.  In  1877 
he  was  elected  on  the  Democratic  ticket  as  County 
■ludge,  which  position  he  filled  for  five  years.  In 
1882  he  retired  and  resumed  private  practice.  In 
1886  he  was  appointed  Postmaster  of  this  place, 
but  in  May,  1889,  resigned  on  account  of  the 
change  in  the  administration.  He  then  once  more 
took  up  the  practice  of  his  profession,  and  in  Ma}-, 
1893,  he  received  the  appointment  of  Inspector 
of  Land  Offices  of  the  United  States.  In  Ma}-  he 
reported  for  duty  in  Washington,  and  in  June 
was  sent  to  Oklahoma,  and  thence  to  the  north- 
western states.  He  is  one  of  three  who  have  the 
general  supervision  of  these  offices. 

Judge  Andrews  was  married  at  Ann  Arbor, 
Mich.,  December  19,  1867,  to  Miss  Jennie  Slocum, 
who  was  born  in  Norwich,  N.  Y.  She  is  a  daugh- 
ter of  Smith  E.  Slocum,  who  was  a  member  of 
the  Sixty-second  New  York  Regiment,  and  died 
of  wounds  received  in  the  late  Civil  AVar.  Five 
children  were  born  to  them:  .Samuel  A.,  of  Green- 
ville, Miss.,  an  employe  of  the  Mississippi  Yalle}' 
Railroad  Company;  Ella  J.,  ;Myra  M.,  William  H. 
and  Eugene  S. 

The  Judge  is  a  man  of  excellent  business  and 
executive  abilit}-,  and  has  been  connected  with  a 
number  of  the  leading  interests  of  this  place.  For 
a  number  of  years  he  was  engaged  in  real-estate 
dealing  and  built  his  residence  and  double  store, 
a  three-story  brick  building.  He  has  been  con- 
nected with  the  railroad  interests  of  this  commu- 
nity and  owns  an  interest  in  the  Murphysboro 
Street  Railway.  He  has  also  a  highly  improved 
farm  of  two  hundred  and  thirty  acres.  Although 
his  life  has  been  a  busy  and  useful  one,  he  has 
found  time  to  serve  in  positions  of  public  trust 
and  has  ever  been  found  true  and  faithful.  From 
1867  until  1877  he  was  Master  in  Chancery,  for 
two  years  was  City  Attorney,  was  Alderman  for 
two  terms,  and  served  as  Mayor  from    1882  until 


852 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


1884.  For  ten  consecutive  j'ears  he  was  Chair- 
man of  the  Democratic  County  Central  Commit- 
tee and  was  delegate  to  the  National  Convention 
in  Chicago  in  1892.  Socially,  he  is  a  Knight 
Templar  Mason,  and  also  belongs  to  the  Odd  Fel- 
lows' society.  Mrs.  Andrews  holds  membership 
with  the  Presbyterian  Church. 


/^jEORGE  ANGIIOUSE,  a  farmer  residing  on 
[If  ,_-^  section  28,  Degognia  Township,  Jackson 
'^^ij  County,  where  he  owns  and  operates  one 
iiundred  and  sixty  acres  of  fine  bottom  land,  was 
born  in  Cincinnati  about  the  year  1841  or  1842. 
His  raotlier  dying  at  his  birth,  and  his  father  when 
he  was  onl^-  four  years  old,  the  record  of  his  birth 
is  forever  lost.  To  liave  some  day  b}'  which  to 
count  his  years,  he  has  chosen  November  22  as 
the  anniversar\'  of  his  birth.  This  is  one  of  the 
few  instances  Itnown  in  which  a  man  has  chosen 
his  own  birthda}'. 

After  the  death  of  his  parents,  our  subject  was 
tatvcn  into  a  family  to  be  reared,  but  being  ill- 
treated,  an  uncle,  Henry  Plump,  took  compassion 
on  the  child  and  took  him  into  his  own  family. 
About  the  time  George  was  four  years  old,  the 
family  removed  to  Indiana  and  settled  near  Evans- 
ville,  where  the  uncle  died  four  years  later.  The 
orphaned  lad  continued  to  reside  with  the  familj' 
until  his  nineteenth  year,  when  he  started  out  in 
life  for  himself.  His  schooling  was  verj'  limited, 
and  tiie  information  he  has  gained  upon  topics  of 
current  or  historical  importance  has  been  acquired 
through  self-culture. 

The  first  work  to  occupy-  tlie  mind  and  energj- 
of  Mr.  Anghouse  was  in  a  brick  yard  in  Evans- 
ville,  where  he  was  employed  during  the  season 
of  1860.  Spending  the  following  winter  at  home, 
the  spring  found  him  at  work  on  a  farm  opposite 
Henderson,  Ky.,  where  he  remained  until  the  late 
autumn.  The  nest  ^-ear  he  was  again  employed 
in  the  brick  jard  in  which  he  had  previously 
been  at  work,  and  was  advanced  to  a  better  posi- 
tion than  he  had  previously  held.  The  following 
four  years  were  spent  in  working  on  the  farm 
upon  which  he  had  been  foimerly  employed,  fol- 


lowed by  a  winter  season  in  a  sawmill.  The  next 
}'ear  he  took  charge  of  the  engine  of  the  sawmill, 
in  which  occupation  he  continued  for  the  four 
ensuing  years.  In  the  meantime  he  moved  to 
Jackson  County,  III.,  and  has  at  various  times 
since  been  similarly  emplo3'ed. 

February  14,  1871,  Mr.  Anghouse  was  united 
in  marriage  with  Miss  .Sarah,  daughter  of  David 
and  Parmelia  (Tindal)  Rigs,  natives  respectively 
of  Tennessee  and  Chester,  111.  Mrs.  Anghouse 
was  born  in  Chester  November  .5,  18.54,  and  was 
the  fourth  in  a  family  of  eight  children  born  to 
her  parents.  There  were  also  two  children  born 
to  her  father  of  a  former  marriage.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Anghouse  have  had  eleven  children,  four  of  whom 
survive:  Am^^  E..  Fred,  Mary  and  August.  Of 
those  deceased,  one  died  unnamed  in  infancy.  The 
others  were  Annabelle,  Barbara,  George  E.,  John 
H.,  Parmelia  M.  and  Emma. 

For  a  number  of  years  Mr.  Anghouse  engaged 
in  farming  on  rented  land,  but  in  1889  he  pur- 
chased his  present  holding  and  began  to  improve 
it  and  make  a  liome  for  his  declining  years.  His 
residence  is  a  comfortable  two-story  frame  house, 
and  the  neccssarj'  barns  and  outbuildings  on  his 
place  are  conveniently  arranged,  making  in  all  a 
fine  homestead.  In  religious  belief  Mr.  Anghouse  is 
a  member  of  the  Lutheran  Church,  his  nearest  place 
of  worship  being  Fountain  Bluff.  It  was  by  a 
minister  of  this  church  that  those  of  his  children 
that  have  received  the  ordinance  were  baptized. 
In  politics  he  is  a  Republican  and  gives  that  party 
his  earnest  support. 


,EV.  CHARLES  FREDERICK  LIEBE,  tlic 
minister  in  charge  of  St.  Paul's  Evangeli- 
cal Lutheran  Churcli  at  Wine  Hill,  is  a  na- 
'^^tive  of  Loessnitz,  kingdom  of  Saxon3',  Ger- 
manj',  where  he  was  born  September  30,  1842.  He 
is  the  third  in  the  family  of  four  children  born  to 
Charles  F.  and  Emih'  (Herman)  Liebe,  natives  of 
Saxony.  His  paternal  grandfather  also  bore  the 
name  of  Charles  F.,  making  three  generations  of 
the  same  name. 

Between  the  j-ears  of  sis  and  fourteen  the  sub- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


853 


ject  of  this  sketch  attended  the  parochial  schools 
of  his  native  city,  and  at  the  age  of  fifteen  became 
a  pupil  in  the  technical  school  at  Loessnitz,  re- 
maining four  years  in  that  institution.  When 
twenty-one  years  of  age  he  became  a  student  of 
the  seminary-  at  Steden,  province  of  Nassau,  where 
he  continued  for  one  year.  At  the  expiration  of 
that  time  he  came  to  America  and  entered  tlie 
Lutheran  Concordia  Seminary,  on  .Jefferson  Street, 
St.  Louis,  where  he  completed  his  studies.  In 
August,  1865,  he  entered  upon  his  ministerial  ca- 
reer as  a  missionary  preacher,  laboring  in  Missouri, 
Kansas  and  Nebraska,  all  of  which  country  was 
at  that  time  very  new  and  undeveloped.  Many  a 
trip  of  thirty  or  forty  miles  w.as  accomplished 
without  seeing  a  house. 

Novembei  27,  1867,  Rev.  Mr.  Liebe  reached  the 
city  of  New  Orleans,  where  he  received  his  first 
charge,  being  sent  to  the  congregation  of  St.  John 's 
Cburch,  on  Prieur  Street,  to  whicli  he  ministered 
until  July  4,  1873.  After  visiting  a  few  months 
with  relatives  of  iiis  wife  in  Benton  County,  Mo., 
he  was  assigned  to  St.  Paul's  Chuich  of  Wine  Hill, 
111.,  arriving  here  November  7,  and  being  duly  in- 
stalled two  days  later.  In  this  parish  he  has  con- 
tinued to  the  present  time. 

The  lady  who  March  8,  1868,  became  the  wife 
of  Rev.  Mr.  Liebe,  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Mary 
Wege,  and  was  born  near  Lake  Creek,  Benton 
Count3%  Mo.,  Januarj-  30,  1847,  being  the  second 
in  order  of  birth  in  a  family  of  six  children,  five  of 
whom  survive.  Her  father,  Muritz  Wege,  was  a 
native  of  Lauban,  Upper  Lausitz,  Germany.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Liebe  were  the  parents  of  eleven  children, 
of  whom-Marj',  Celestina  and  Paul  are  deceased. 
The  eight  who  survive  are:  Emily  A.  M.,  Frieda 
A.  M.,  Frederick  C.  T.,  Martin  H.  W.,  Adolph  W. 
A.,  Agnes  D.  A.  S.,  Selnia  E.  C.  C-  and  Paula  M. 

In  political  matters  Mr.  Liebe  usually  votes  the 
Democratic  ticket,  although  he  is  not  so  partisan 
as  to  vote  it  straight,  but  gives  his  support  to  the 
most  worthy  man,  irrespective  of  party  ties.  In 
everything  that  pertains  to  the  spiritual  welfare  of 
his  flock  he  is  deeply  interested.  His  long  pastor- 
ate, covering  a  period  of  more  than  twenty  years, 
bespeaks  the  esteem  in  which  he  is  held  by  his 
parishioners  at  Wine  Hill.  The  home,  presided 
34 


over  b}'  Mrs.  Liebe,  is  a  quiet  retreat  for  her  hus- 
band in  his  studious  moods  and  a  hospitable  place 
for  their  visiting  friends,  of  whom  there  are  as 
man^'  as  know  the  pastor  and  his  woithy  wife. 
That  he  may  long  remain  with  them  is  the  earnest 
wish  of  the  enlightened  congregation  of  St.  Paul's 
Evangelical  Lutheran  Church. 


\tp^7 ELIX  Hr(HIES.  A  prominent  place  among 
|pr^  the  agriculiurisUs  of  Randolph  County  is 
/1|>  the  just   meed   of  the   efforts  of  our  sub- 

ject, who  is  located  on  section  17,  township  6, 
range  7.  His  farm,  which  consists  of  seventy-five 
acres,  is  a  highlj'  productive  tract,  the  fertility  of 
which  has  been  kept  above  par  by  a  wise  rotation 
of  crops  and  the  use  of  the  best  fertilizing  agents. 
A  first-class  set  of  buildings  has  been  erected 
upon  it,  and  the  other  improvements  made  stamp 
it  as  the  home  of  one  who  believes  in  progress  and 
enterprise.  Mr.  Hughes  lives  surrounded  with  all 
the  comforts  of  life,  and  may  well  be  gratified  with 
his  financial  standing. 

(Jur  subject  is  the  son  of  Heniy  and  Maiy  (Mc- 
Donough )  Hughes,  the  former  a  native  of  this  coun- 
t)',  where  he  was  reared  and  lived  until  his  death, 
October  5,  1871,  when  Randolph  County  lost  one 
of  its  prominent  and  esteemed  citizens.  His  good 
wife  died  in  December,   1891. 

Felix  Iluglies  was  the  third  child  in  the  parental 
famil}',  and  was  born  near  Ellis  Grove,  this  county, 
June  8,  184.').  His  studies  were  pursued  in  the 
district  school  of  his  native  township,  and  in  com- 
mon with  the  sons  of  other  farmers,  he  early  learn- 
ed the  details  of  an  agricultural  career.  He  re- 
sided under  the  parental  roof  until  his  marriage, 
when  he  began  clearing  tlie  farm  on  which  he  yet 
resides.  The  place  was  covered  with  a  heavy 
growth  of  timber,  and  not  a  tree  had  been  felled. 
Ho  at  once  set  about  its  improvement  industrious- 
ly, and  b_y  his  sagacity  and  perseverance  has  made 
of  It  what  it  is  to-day,  a  beautiful  and  attractive 
estate. 

September  16,,  1868,  Miss  Cylvira  Miller,  a 
daughter  of  David  and  Minerva  (Gant)  Miller, be- 
came the  wife  of  our  subject.     She  is  a  native  of 


854 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Randolph  County,  as  were  also  her  parents.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Hughes  are  devout  members  of  the  Bap- 
tist Church,  and  in  that  denomination  the  former 
was  Clerk  for  twenty-tliree  years.  Socially,  he  is 
a  member  of  Kaskaskia  Lodge  No.  86,  A.  F.  &  A. 
M.,  and  was  Senior  Deacon  for  a  period  of  six 
j-ears.  He  has  served  as  Captain  of  the  Second 
Vail  of  Reynolds  Cliapter  at  Chester  for  two  years. 
Politically,  the  Republican  party  always  has  his 
support,  but  he  has  never  been  an  aspirant  for 
official  duties,  preferring  the  quietude  of  domestic 
life. 

.-    ^J- 


J^  OHN  ROMANN,  a  farmer  residing  ou  sec- 
I  tion  4,  Degognia  Township,  Jackson  Coun- 
I  ty,  where  he  operates  a  farm  of  some  eighty-  ' 
^  '  five  acres  of  rich  alluvial  land,  was  born  in 
the  village  of  Dachslehren,  Canton  Zurich,  Switz- 
erland, April  7,  1832.  He  is  a  son  of  Rudolph 
and  Elizabeth  Romann,  also  natives  of  Switzer- 
land, who  died  in  the  land  of  their  birth  in  1861 
and  1870  respectively.  His  preliminary  education 
was  secured  in  his  native  village  and  was  later 
supplemented  by  a  liigher  course  in  the  polytech- 
nical  school  of  Zurich. 

When  a  youth  of  seventeen  our  subject  was  ap- 
prenticed to  a  cabinet-maker,  serving  three  j'ears, 
for  wliieh  his  father  had  to  pa3'.  At  the  close  of 
his  apprenticeship  he  continued  to  work  for  his 
preceptor  and  another  manufacturer  as  a  journey- 
man for  a  period  of  three  years,  at  the  expiration 
of  which  time  he  emigrated  to  America.  In  the 
spring  of  1853  he  was  united  in  marriage  with 
Miss  Selina,  daughter  of  Hartman  and  Annie  (Hil- 
debrand)  Keller,  who  was  born   .January   7,  1833. 

In  the  fall  of  the  following  year  after  his  mar- 
riage, Mr.  Romann,  together  with  his  young  wife 
and  their  tirst-born  son, left  Switzerland, embarked 
at  Havre  for  New  York  and  after  a  voyage  of  thirty- 
two  days,  landed  in  the  New  World.  After  a  few 
days'  rest  in  New  York  they  proceeded  to  Cincin- 
nati, remained  there  about 'a  fortnight  and  then 
went  to  Louisville,  where  he  secured  a  position  and 
worked  at  his  trade.  In  that  city  he  remained  until 
the  "know-nothing"  riots  in  the  summer  of  1855. 


Thence  he  went  to  Can nel ton, Perry  County,  Ind., 
and  found  a  situation  in  a  cotton  factory,  remain- 
ing there  until  the  spring  of  1857.  He  then  again 
crossed  into  Kentucky,  to  Hawesville,  opposite 
Cannelton,and  found  work  in  a  coal  mine,  remain- 
ing, however,  but  a  few  months. 

That  being  the  j'ear  of  the  panic,  times  were 
veiy  hard,  work  scarce  and  money  scarcer.  Going 
to  St.  Louis,  Mr.  Romann  found  employment  on 
steamboats;  also  worked  in  a  sugar  refinery  and  in 
a  pork  house.  Going  up  the  river  on  a  steamboat 
he  found  work  in  the  harvest  fields  in  Iowa  and 
Illinois,  around  Rock  Island.  Upon  his  return  to 
St.  Louis  he  found  work  still  very  scarce  and 
crossed  the  river  into  Illinois,  where,  near  Name- 
oki,  he  secured  employment  in  the  potato  har- 
vests of  Samuel  Squires.  Securing  work  among  the 
farmers,  our  subject  removed  his  family  hither, 
and  in  the  spring  of  1864  began  farming  for  him- 
self, working  on  shares.  In  1864  he  purchase(f  a 
team  and  commenced  agricultural  pui-suits  on  his 
own  account. 

Renting  laud,  Mr.  Romann  continued  farming 
in  Madison  County  until  November  of  1888,  when 
he  purchased  his  present  estate  in  Jackson  County 
and  removed  his  family  to  their  new  home.  Of  the 
original  purchase  of  one  hundred  and  twenl\'-five 
acres,  alrout  forty  have  been  washed  awa^'  b^'  the 
encroachment  of  the  Mississippi.  On  the  farm 
have  been  erected  a  fine  two-story  residence,  two 
commodious  barns  and  other  buildings.  From  tlie 
rich  loamy  soil  Mr.  Romann  reaps  bountiful  har- 
vests. Corn,  hav,  melons  and  potatoes  are  the 
principal  crops,  and  in  addition  he  raises  live 
stock. 

Unto  the  union  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Romann  have 
been  born  eight  children,  six  sous  and  two  daugh- 
ters, the  latter  deceased.  The  sons  are,  Walter 
(who  was  born  in  Switzerland),  John,  Otto,  Ar- 
nold, Edwin  and  Louis.  The}'  are  members  of  the 
Evangelical  Lutherau  Church,  but  as  no  congrega- 
tion IS  near  tiiem  their  affiliation  is  not  so  close  as 
it  has  been  heretofore.  During  their  residence  in 
Madison  County  the  family'  had  an  exciting  ex- 
perience in  a  cyclone,  March  8,  1871.  Their 
house  was  demolished,  their  furniture  and  clothing 
blown  away  and   Mr.  Romann  seriously  injured. 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


855 


so  much  so  that  he  was  laid  up  some  six  weeks. 
Ever3'  year  since  solemn  services  have  been  held 
in  the  church  there  on  the  anniversary  of  the 
ealamit3-.  Tliree  successive  years,  commencing 
with  1881,  their  crops  were  ruined  liy  floods,  and 
since  Coming  to  .Jackson  County  they  have  twice 
suffered  the  same  calamity,  in  1892  and  1893.  The 
house  in  which  tlie  family  first  lived  had  to  be 
moved  away  owing  to  the  encroachment  of  the 
river,  forcing  the  building  of  their  {)resent  resi- 
dence in  the  spring  of  1893. 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  Mr.  Rumann  has  had 
many  hardships  to  encounter  and  obstacles  to 
overcome.  The  path  to  success  has  not  been  an 
easy  one  to  travel,  and  had  it  not  been  for  his  in- 
domitable pluck  he  might  have  despaired  of  win- 
ning the  goal.  What  he  is  and  what  he  has  are  due 
to  his  efforts  in  the  face  of  great  obstacles,  and  to 
the  young  his  life  furnishes  an  example  of  perse- 
verance well  worthy  of  their  emulation.  In  politics 
Mr.  Romann  is  a  standi  Republican  and  looks  for 
better  times  when  the  party  again  comes  into 
power.  He  is  now  serving  as  School  Trustee 
for  his  township.  While  In  Madison  County  he 
served  as  Road  Commissioner  of  Venice  Township 
and  also  filled  the  positions  of  Road  Overseer  and 
School  Director.  In  the  spring  of  1893,  during 
his  absence  in  St.  Louis,  his  partj'  friends  nomin- 
ated him  for  .Justice  of  tiio  Peace.  Desiring  to 
devote  his  entire  time  and  energies  to  his  farm,  he 
took  his  sons  and  a  neighlior  to  vote  with  him 
against  himself,  and  vvas  thereby  defeated  b3'  three 
votes,  much  to  his  own  satisfaction. 

iiHOMAS  J.  AVILKINSON,  Superintendent 
of  the  load  department  of  the  St.  Louis 
Division  of  the  Mobile  &  Ohio  Railroad, 
has  been  connected  with  this  company  since  the 
building  of  the  line  in  1870.  He  was  born  in  Bal- 
timore, Md.,  December  8,  1844.  His  grandfather, 
Thomas  C.  Wilkinson,  was  a  native  of  England,  and 
after  emigrating  to  the  New  World  followed  farm- 
ing in  Baltimore  County.  IJe  served  in  the  War 
of  1812.  The  father  of  our  subject,  William  .J. 
Wilkinson,  was  born,  reared   and   followed    agri- 


cultural pursuits  in  Baltimore  County.  After  a 
time,  however,  he  embarked  in  merchandising  in 
the  city  of  Baltimore,  where  he  carried  on  business 
until  his  death.  He  married  Eliza  15ond,  a  native 
of  Maryland,  and  her  death  occurred  in  Murphys- 
boro  in  1856.  In  the  family  were  three  children, 
of  whom  two  are  yet  living:  Thomas  J.,  and  Will- 
J.,  who  is  foreman  in  the  cross-cut  saw  department 
of  the  Diston  Saw  Works,  of  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

In  B.altimore  Mr.  Wilkinson  of  this  sketch  was 
reared,  and  in  its  public  schools  .acquired  an  excel- 
lent education.  When  a  young  man  he  learned 
bridge  building,  and  for  four  years  was  employed 
in  the  capacity  of  bridge  builder  on  the  Philadel- 
phia, Wilmington  &  Baltimore  Railroad.  Believ- 
ing that  the  west  furnished  better  opportunities 
for  young  men,  in  1868  he  emigrated  to  Quincy, 
111.,  and  worked  on  the  iron  railroad  bridge  which 
was  being  built  across  the  Mississippi  at  that  point. 
He  afterward  worked  on  the  Government  bridge 
at  Rock  Island,  and  subsequentl}'  spent  one  year 
in  Minnesota  as  foreman  of  the  bridge  building 
department  of  the  Minneapolis  &  St.  Louis  Rail- 
road. When  the  Cairo  <fe  St.  Louis  Road  was  be- 
gun, he  formed  a  connection  with  the  company 
and  was  foreman  during  its  entire  construction, 
working  in  Alexandei'  and  .Jackson  Counties.  The 
track  was  completed  to  Murphysboro  in  the  fall  of 
1873,  and  to  Cairo  in  1874.  From  the  spring  of 
that  year  until  1877  he  was  employed  on  railroad 
bridge  work  in  Minnesota  and  Wisconsin,  but  in 
June  of  the  latter  year  returned  to  Illinois  and 
became  foreman  of  the  pile  driving  and  bridge 
building  of  the  St.  Louis  &  Cairo  Road,  which 
position  he  filled  until  1880. 

In  that  year  Mi-.  Wilkinson  was  apjiointed  Su- 
perintendent of  bridges  and  buildings  under 
Charles  Hamilton,  then  general  manager,  and  dis- 
charged the  duties  of  that  position  until  1886, 
having  charge  of  the  road  between  St.  Louis  and 
Cairo.  The  road  was  then  sold  to  the  Mobile  & 
Ohio  Company,  and  he  had  charge  of  the  work  of 
changing  the  road  bed  from  a  narrow  gauge  to 
the  standard  width  from  St.  Louis  to  Corinth, 
Miss.  He  continued  as  Superintendent  of  the 
bridge  work  between  those  points  until  1888, 
when  the  division  was  shortened.     It  now  covers 


856 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


the  distance  between  St.  Louis  and  Cairo.  In  1890 
he  was  appointed  loadraaster  b}'  Division  Super- 
intendent Hamilton,  and  has  been  continued  in 
that  office  since  H.  W.  Clarke  has  been  Division 
Superintendent.  Mr.  Wilkinson  is  also  Superin- 
tendent of  the  road-way  department. 

In  Minneapolis,  Minn.,  in  1875,  was  celebrated 
the  marriage  of  our  subject  and  Miss  Eva  H.Shaw, 
a  native  of  Jackson,  Mich.  Their  home  has  been 
in  Murpliysboro  since  1886.  He  is  a  member  of 
the  Masonic  fraternity  and  the  Jlethodist  Episco- 
pal Church  North.  In  his  political  views  he  is  an 
advocate  of  Democracy.  He  holds  membership 
with  the  building  and  loan  association  of  Sparta, 
111.  His  work  is  of  a  responsible  character,  but 
the  various  positions  he  has  filled  have  found  in 
him  a  faithful  incumbent,  one  worthy  of  all  trust. 


'^  OHN  M.  CURLESS.  Prominent  among  the 
prosperous  agriculturists  of  Jackson  Coun- 
ty may  be  mentioned  the  name  of  Mr.  Cur- 
less,  a  resident  of  section  25,  Degognia 
Township,  where  he  owns  and  operates  a  farm  con- 
sisting of  fort}'  acres  of  rich  bottom  land.  A  man 
of  enterprise  and  public  spirit,  the  success  which 
he  has  gained  is  the  reward  of  merit  and  is  justly 
deserved.  The  appearance  of  his  farm  is  such  as 
to  indicate  the  thrift  and  energy  of  the  proprietor, 
who  in  1892  erected  a  commodious  two-stor}-  resi- 
dence. In  this  house  he  is  now  comfortably  situ- 
ated, and  when  everything  is  completed  to  his  sat- 
isfaction, he  will  have  one  of  the  nicest  homes  in 
this  locality. 

Born  in  Indiana,  December  13,  1839,  our  subject 
is  a  son  of  Job  and  Eliza  (Lowe)  Curless,  natives 
respectively  of  Kew  Jersey  and  Ohio,  who  prior  to 
the  year  1844  came  to  Jackson  County,  settling 
on  Jones'  Ridge.  There,  when  John  M.  was  a 
child  of  about  seven  years,  his  father  passed  away 
and  was  buried  on  the  farm  near  his  late  home. 
The  mother  was  called  from  earth  about  seven 
years  later,  from  which  time  our  subject  has  been 
self-supporting.  He  was  the  next  to  the  youngest 
in  a  family  consisting  of  seven  children.  His 
schooling  was  limited  to  three  months'  attendance 


in  a  subscription  school  in  charge  of  AVilson  Ray, 
a  short  time  under  the  tutelage  of  his  uncle,  John 
Lowe,  and  about  three  months  at  Georgetown, 
where  a  Miss  Durfee  was  the  teacher. 

Notwithstanding  his  few  opportunities  to  at- 
tend school,  Mr.  Curless  has  acquired  a  good  prac- 
tical education,  and  is  a  well  informed  man.  As 
a  worker  he  cannot  be  excelled.  It  was  his  am- 
bition in  boyhood  to  give  satisfaction  to  all  who 
might  emplo}'  him,  and  it  is  with  credit  to  him 
that  it  ma}'  be  said  that  he  was  never  dischargtd 
by  anyone  for  whom  he  worked.  Neither  was  he 
over  arrested,  nor  at  any  time  placed  in  the  cala- 
boose or  guard  house.  On  the  other  liand,  he  h-as 
been  a  law-abiding,  peaceful  and  lo3'al  citizen,  one 
who  is  an  honor  to  his  coramunit}-. 

Since  purchasing  his  first  forty  acres,  Mr.  Cur- 
less has  added  an  eight3--acre  tract  of  timber  land, 
which  will  be  cleared  and  put  under  cultivation. 
Corn  and  potatoes  are  the  principal  crops  raised 
on  his  farm,  and  these,  with  the  raising  of  a  good 
grade  of  hogs,  constitute  his  mone^-making  capi- 
tal. During  the  Civil  War  he  was  one  of  the  boys 
in  blue  who  went  to  the  front  and  aided  in  pro- 
tecting the  Union.  In  August,  1862,  he  enlisted 
in  Company  A,  Eightieth  Illinois  Infantry,  and 
served  until  Februar}-  of  the  following  year,  when 
he  was  discharged  on  account  of  disabilities.  He 
volunteered  to  act  in  the  artillery  and  served  in 
that  capacity  at  the  battle  of  Perryville,  K3'.  Since 
that  time  he  has  suffered  from  heart  trouble,  which, 
fortunately,  does  not  interfere  seriously  with  his 
farming  operations.  From  the  war  until  recently', 
Mr.  Curless  was  a  stanch  Democrat,  but  the  events 
of  the  past  year  (1893)  have  convinced  him  that 
the  Republicans  are  the  only  ones  who  can  success- 
fully conduct  the  affairs  of  the  Government. 

The  first  marriage  of  Mr.  Curless  occurred  April 
5,  1866,  his  wife  being  Lavina  Franklin.  On  the 
4th  of  November,  1889,  he  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Mrs.  Sarah  Evans,  the  widow  of  John 
Evans,  who  died  in  East  Carondelet,  111.,  in  1888. 
Mrs.  Curless  is  the  daughter  of  Mike  and  Penetty 
(Fisher)  Olbert,  natives  of  Jackson  County.  The 
mother  died  when  Sarah  was  less  than  a  year  old, 
and  the  father  passed  away  December  31,  1892. 
Unto  the  union  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Curless  two  chit- 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


85? 


dren  have  been  born,  Charlotte  and  French.  By 
her  former  marriage  Mrs.  Curless  has  a  son,  James 
A.  Evans,  whose  birth  occurred  July  4,  1887. 


^^OTTFRIED  NI  EH  ALTS,  who  for  almost  a 
III  (^^  quarter  of  a  century  has  followed  farming 
^^^  in  township  6,  range  6,  Randolph  County, 
is  a  native  of  Germany,  and  his  birth  occurred 
in  December,  1838.  He  is  a  son  of  Theodore  and 
Katherine  (Dickerman)  Niehaus,  both  of  whom 
were  also  natives  of  Germany.  The  early  life  of 
our  subject  was  spent  under  the  parental  roof. 
He  acquired  his  education  in  the  public  schools  of 
his  native  land,  which  he  attended  until  fourteen 
years  of  age,  when  he  left  the  schoolroom  to  earn 
his  own  livelihood. 

Mr.  Niehaus  began  work  for  himself  as  a  farm 
hand  and  was  thus  employed  for  several  years,  in 
fact  his  time  was  thus  passed  until  his  emigra- 
tion to  America.  That  important  event  occurred 
in  1871,  when  he  crossed  the  Atlantic  to  the  New 
World.  On  landing  in  New  York  he  at  once  re- 
sumed his  westward  journej-,  continuing  his  trav- 
els until  he  had  arrived  at  Chester,  111.  Here  he 
engaged  in  farm  work  in  the  employ  of  others  for 
about  a  year,  on  the  expiration  of  which  period, 
with  the  capital  he  had  acquired  through  industry, 
economy  and  good  management,  he  purchased  the 
farm  on  which  he  now  resides.  He  has  devoted 
his  time  and  attention  exclusively  to  his  business 
interests  and  has  met  with  excellent  success  in  his 
undertakings,  becoming  a  very  prosperous  farmer. 
His  well  tilled  fields  and  the  neat  appearance  of 
his  place  indicate  the  careful  supervision  of  the 
owner.  The  farm  is  well  improved  with  good 
buildings  and  all  modern  accessories  and  conven- 
iences. 

It  was  in  1871  that  Mr.  Niehaus  was  united  iu 
marriage  with  Miss  Theresa  Gausman,  who  came 
to  America  with  her  parents  during  her  girlhood. 
Her  father  and  mother  are  both  now  deceased. 
To  our  subject  and  his  wife  have  been  born  six 
children,  and  with  the  exception  of  Catherine, 
who  died  at  the  age  of  six  years,  all  are  3-et  living. 
They  are  as  follows:    Mary,  now  the  wife  of  Ed 


Myers,  a  resident  of  Cutler,  111.;  John,  who  aids  in 
the  operation  of  the  home  farm;  Lizzie,  Frank  and 
Katie,  all  of  whom  are  yet  at  home. 

Mr.  Niehaus  and  his  entire  family  are  members 
of  the  Catholic  Church,  and  to  its  support  con- 
tribute liberally.  Since  becoming  an  American 
citizen  our  subject  has  exercised  his  right  of  fran- 
chise iu  support  of  the  Republican  party,  but  has 
never  sought  or  desired  the  honors  or  emoluments 
of  public  office.  He  may  truly  be  called  a  self- 
made  man.  for  since  an  early  age  he  has  made  his 
own  way  in  the  world,  depending  alone  on  his  own 
resources.  He  need  never  have  occasion  to  regret 
his  emigration  to  the  New  World,  for  here  he  has 
been  prospered  and  is  now  recognized  as  one  of 
the  substantial  and  well-to-do  citizens  of  the  com- 
munity. 

• ^^P •    . 


W.  ELLIS,  M.  D.,  a  practicing  physician  and 
surgeon  of  Murph3'sboro,  was  born  in  Frank- 
lin, Johnson  County,  Ind.,  November  23,  1858. 
His  paternal  grandfather  removed  in  an  early  day 
from  Pennsylvania,  and  later  settled  in  Indiana. 
The  father  of  our  subject,  John  R.  Ellis,  was  born 
in  Brown  County,  Ohio,  and  was  reared  upon  a 
farm  in  Johnson  County,  Ind.  At  the  age  of 
twenty-one  he  embarked  iu  the  lumber  business, 
and  for  some  time  operated  a  sawmill  and  engaged 
in  selling  lumber,  an  enterprise  in  which  he  was 
fairly  successful.  Coming  to  Jackson  County  in 
1883,  he  has  since  made  liis  home  iu  Murpliysboro, 
and  is  still  actively  engaged  in  the  lumber  busi- 
ness. His  wife,  whose  maiden  name  was  Susan 
Slack,  was  born  in  Johnson  County,  Ind.,  and  was 
a  daughter  of  John  Slack,  a  native  of  Ohio  and  an 
early  settler  of  Johnson  County,  Ind. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  is  the  eldest  of  five 
children.  He  was  reared  in  Franklin,  Ind.,  and  at- 
tended the  college  at  that  place  for  a  time,  after 
which  he  conducted  his  medical  studies  under  a 
prominent  physician  of  Trafalgar,  Ind.  In  1881 
he  entered  the  Indiana  Medical  College  at  Indian- 
apolis, from  which  he  was  graduated  two  years 
later.  He  opened  an  oHice  at  Mt.  Comfort,  Ind., 
and  commenced  the  practice  of  his  profession,  re- 
maining in   that  place   until  1886.     Meantime  he 


858 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


was  elected  and  served  as  County  Coroner.  From 
Mt.  Comfort  he  removed  to  Linden,  Ind.,  where 
he  engaged  in  practice  until  Maj-  of  1889. 
Since  that  time  he  has  resided  m  Murph3sboro, 
where  he  conducts  an  extensive  general  practice. 
With  liis  father,  he  owns  eighty  acres  of  improved 
farming  land  in  Levan,  and  he  is  also  the  owner 
of  an  eighty-acre  tract  in  Sand  Ridge. 

In  Spencer,  Ind.,  in  1884,  Dr.  Ellis  was  united 
in  marriage  witli  Miss  Mary,  daughter  of  Ciiesley 
Acuff, a  merchant  and  an  old  settler  of  that  town. 
Three  children  have  blessed  the  union,  Cora,  Cal- 
lie  and  Edward  K.  In  his  social  connections  the 
Doctor  is  a  member  of  tlie  Masonic  fraternity  and 
is  surgeon  and  examining  physician  of  the  Ancient 
Order  of  Foresters  and  the  Mystic  Circle;  also  ex- 
amining physician  for  the  Brotherhood  of  Fire- 
men and  the  Brotherhood  of  Railway  Trainmen. 
In  religious  belief  he  is  a  Universalist.  Politically, 
he  is  strong  in  his  adherence  to  tiie  principles  of 
the  Democratic  party. 


fJLLIAMSON  DILDAY.     Among  the  pros- 
'!    perous  agriculturists  of  -Jackson  County, 


prominent  mention  should  be  made  of  Mr. 
Dilday,  who  resides  on  section  10,  Degognia 
Township,  and  is  the  owner  of  two  hundred  and 
sixty  acres  of  fine  wheat  land  lying  among  the 
hills  of  sections  10  and  15.  A  native  of  Georgia, 
he  was  born  on  the  21st  of  September,  1831.  He 
is  a  son  of  Ellas  and  Pheriha  (Wimpy)  Dilday, 
wlio  were  born  near  Charleston,  S.  C,  and  died  in 
June,  1892,  at  the  ages  of  eight^'-flve  and  eighty- 
three  respectively.  Grandmother  Wimpy  died 
during  the  preceding  year,  at  tlie  advanced  age  of 
a  century.  Grandfather  Dilday,  who  was  a  soldier 
in  the  Revolutionary  War,  died  some  thirty  j'ears 
ago,  at  the  age  of  ninetj'-seven.  His  son  Elias 
took  part  in  the  Seminole  War  in  Florida,  and 
three  of  the  sons  of  the  latter,  including  our  sub- 
ject, fought  for  the  Union  in  the  late  Rebellion. 
When  our  subject  was  a  child  of  two  years  his 
father  emigrated  to  Eastern  Tennessee,  where  he 
remained  some  seven  years.  Thence,  in  the  year 
1842,  he  removed  to  Illinois,  settling  near  Jones- 


boro,  in  Union  County,  and  made  his  home  there 
until  his  death.  Our  subject's  first  school  days  were 
spent  in  Tennessee.  He  had  to  pass  the  house  of 
the  famous  David  Crockett  in  going  to  school  and 
well  remembers  having  been  led  over  the  footlog 
across  a  stream  near  his  home  b}-  the  daughter  of 
the  illustrious  hunter. 

After  removing  to  Union  County,  Mr.  Dilday 
attended  the  subscription  schools,  but  his  educa- 
tion has  been  secured  principally  by  study  at 
home.  He  remained  with  his  father  until  his 
twenty-first  birthday,  which  occurred  on  Sunday. 
He  then  left,  intending  to  go  south  and  work  at 
the  cooper's  trade,  which  he  had  learned  under  his 
father.  However,  having  had  to  wait  some  time 
for  a  boat,  his  funds  ran  low  and  he  therefore 
started  up  stream  instead  of  down.  Stopping  at 
Chester,  he  found  work  as  a  journeyman  in  the 
shops  there.  After  a  few  months  spent  in  that 
city,  he  returned  to  Union  County',  where  he  en- 
gaged in  farming  for  one  year.  Then  coming  to 
Jackson  County,  he  here  began  the  life  of  an  agri- 
culturist, in  which  he  has  since  continued. 

November  17,  1854,  Mr.  Dildaj'  was  united  in 
marriage,  upon  the  farm  where  he  now  makes  his 
home,  with  Miss  Perisadi,  daughter  of  Dr.  H.  C. 
and  Nancy  (O'Daniel)  Hodges,  natives  of  Ala- 
bama. Mrs.  Dilday  was  born  March  9,  1834,  and 
died  April  26,  1870,  after  having  become  the 
mother  of  seven  children.  Two  of  the  number  are 
now  living,  D.  C.  and  Reuben  E.  The  second 
marriage  of  Mr.  Dilday-  occurred  March  26,  1871, 
his  wife  being  Elizabeth  Turner,  who  was  born  in 
Union  County  November  7,  1850.  She  is  the 
daughter  of  Albert  and  Mary  A.  Turner,  natives 
of  Tennessee  and  at  present  residents  of  Union 
County,  111.  Seven  children  have  been  born  of 
Mr.  Dilday's  second  marriage,  viz.:  Elias  B.,  Sam- 
uel J.,  Emzia,  Albert  T.,  Clinton,  Calvin  and 
Ralph  E. 

Enlisting  in  March  of  1865  as  a  member  of 
Company  B,  Sixt3'-fifth  Illinois  Infantiy,  Mr.  Dil- 
da}^  served  until  the  close  of  the  war.  During  his 
vo^'age  from  New  York  to  North  Carolina  to 
join  the  army  at  the  front,  a  terrific  storm  was  en- 
countered, which  raged  for  some  thirt3'-six  hours- 
and  tossed  the  vessel  at  its  mercy  upon  the  foam- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


859 


crested  waves.  The  experience  was  one  of  the 
most  perilous  of  Mr.  Dildaj-'s  life,  and  such  was 
the  horror  of  the  storm  that  he  says  he  has  seen 
enough  of  the  water  to  satisfy  him  the  remainder 
of  his  daj's.  Of  fourteen  who  left  Rockwood  with 
him  he  is  the  only  one  that  survives. 

In  politics  Mr.  Dilday  is  a  Democrat.  A  few 
weeks  after  attaining  his  majority  he  voted  for 
Pierce  and  has  continued  in  that  faith  ever  since. 
For  thirty  years  he  held  the  ofHce  of  .Justice  of  the 
Peace,  for  four  terms  ofliciuted  as  Supervisor  and 
for  ten  3'ears  was  School  Director.  He  is  a  con- 
tributor to  the  Free  Will  Baptist  Church  at  Anti- 
och,  with  which  his  wife  is  identified.  Socially,  he 
is  a  member  of  Rockwood  Lodge,  I.  O.  0.  F.,  to 
which  he  has  belonged  some  twenty-five  years,  and 
wiiich  he  has  represented  as  a  delegate  in  the 
Grand  Lodge  of  the  state.  He  is  one  of  the  few 
remaining  of  the  earliest  settlers  and  is  highly  re- 
spected by  a  large  circle  of  friends. 

FREDERICK  W.  BROWN,  a  resident  of 
Ava,  is  an  extensive  land  owner,  possess- 
ing some  six  hundred  and  seventy-six 
acres  in  Degognia  Township,  Jackson  County,  of 
which  he  cultivates  about  sixty  acres  and  leases 
the  balance  to  tenants.  He  is  a  son  of  .lames  M. 
Brown  (whose  life  sketch  appears  elsewhere  in  this 
work)  and  was  born  near  Shiloh  Hill,  Randolph 
County,  October  30,  1843.  Most  of  his  schooling 
was  secured  in  the  Old  Zion  schoolhouse  before 
the  family  removed  to  Rockwood,  in  1857.  He 
attended  the  subscription  schools  of  that  place  for 
the  two  years  succeeding. 

After  his  school  days  were  ended,  Mr.  Brown 
accepted  a  position  in  a  mill,  where  he  remained 
until  the  spring  of  1860.  "Later  he  aided  in  the 
management  of  his  father's  large  farm,  remaining 
thus  engaged  until  August  15,  1862,  when  he  en- 
listed in  Company  C,  Eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry, 
and  accompanied  his  regiment  to  the  front.  From 
Jackson,  Tenn.,  he  went  with  his  company  into 
active  service,  being  at  different  times  under  the 
command  of  Generals  Logan,  Washburn,  Steele 
and  Rej'nolds.  He  took  part  in  the  siege  of  Vicks- 


burg  and  was  present  at  the  surrender  of  the  city. 
After  the  fall  of  Vicksburg  the  Eighteenth  was 
assigned  to  the  Seventh  Army  Corps  in  the  Army 
of  the  Arkansas,  where  tliej'  remained  until  the 
close  of  the  war. 

June  4,  1864,  a  number  of  companies  were  con- 
solidated, C  and  II  forming  a  new  companj-.  A, 
and  from  that  date  until  the  close  of  the  Rebellion 
they  were  in  charge  of  a  pontoon  bridge  across 
tiie  Arkansas  River,  at  Little  Rock.  They  were 
discharged  in  that  city  July  8,  1865,  were  paid  off 
at  Springfield,  111.,  and  reached  home  early  in  Au- 
gust of  the  same  year.  Mr.  Brown  then  resumed 
civic  pursuits.  March  7,  1866,  he  was  united  in 
marri.age  with  Miss  Mary  E.,  daughter  of  Joiin 
Young,  of  Chester.  This  estimable  lad}'  was  born 
November  1,  1845,  and  by  her  marriage  has  be- 
come the  mother  of  five  children,  namely:  Alice 
K.,  the  wife  of  Frank  Fletcher,  a  painter  and  pa- 
per-lianger  of  Murphysboro,  111.;  Laura  M.,  wife  of 
William  M.  Jernigan,  a  cooper  of  Ava;  Minnie  15., 
Eunice  P.  and  Edward  Austin. 

In  November,  1866,  Mr.  Brown  entered  upon 
a  mercantile  career  at  Rockwood,  in  which  he  con- 
tinued until  October,  1868.  Disposing  of  his  stock 
of  goods,  he  then  began  trading  in  horses  and 
mules,  meantime  making  his  headquarters  in  Mem- 
phis. In  that  business  he  was  engaged  until 
.January,  1872,  when  he  -took  a  position  in  tlie 
stockyards  of  that  city,  and  for  a  year  occupied 
that  place.  Following  this,  he  accepted  a  position 
as  bookkeeper  for  Col.  Jesse  Forest,  who  conducted 
a  sale  and  liver}'  stable  on  Monroe  Street,  Mem- 
phis. Remaining  in  that  position  until  Maj', 
1874,  Mr.  Brown  then  returned  to  Jackson  Coun- 
ty, and  has  made  iiis  home  here  ever  since. 

In  addition  to  farming.  Mr.  Brown,  in  connec- 
tion with  iiis  brothers,  ran  a  threshing  machine 
every  season  until  the  year  1880.  That  year  ac- 
cepting a  position  with  Dean  Brothers,  merchants 
and  millers  of  Ava,  he  removed  witli  his  fam- 
ily to  that  place,  where  he  has  remained  ever 
since.  After  three  years  with  Dean  Brothers  he 
operated  a  store  for  the  sale  of  agricultural  imple- 
ments, in  which  business  he  continued  for  two 
years.  Disposing  of  his  stock  of  implements  he 
traveled  a  twelvemonth  for  a  cigar  and  tobacco 


860 


PORTRAIT  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


firm.  In  1886  he  accepted  his  old  position  with 
Dean  Brothei-s,  remaining  in  their  eraploj'  four 
j'ears  longer.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time  he 
resumed  agricultural  pursuits,  in  which  he  is  at 
present  engaged.  He  still  makes  his  home  in  Ava, 
while  he  conducts  his  farm  in  Degognia. 

Socinliy  Mr.  Brown  is  a  member  of  the  Knights 
of  Honor,  of  which  organization  he  was  Reporter. 
He  is  also  prominently  connected  with  the  Ava 
Post,  G.  A.  R.  Politically  he  is  a  firm  believer  in 
and  supporter  of  the  Prohibition  platform,  and 
votes  his  party  ticket  as  well  as  talks  for  it.  Botli 
in  Jackson  and  Randolph  Counties  he  and  his 
.  family  are  well  and  favorably  known,  and  his  rep- 
utation for  honesty,  excellent  judgment  and  pro- 
gressive spirit  is  justly  merited  by  his  honorable 
and  useful  career. 


^^ ^mM® ^ 

»|i  ■!«  i|>  tf*  1^1 1^'  »^n^  »^«^«^«^  «^  t\*  t\*  »j« 


eHARLES  COLUMBUS  SMITH  was  a  highly 
respected  and  enterprising  citizen  of  Mur- 
physboro,  and  his  history  well  deserves  a 
place  in  this  volume.  He  was  born  in  Cape  Girar- 
deau County,  Mo.,  May  22,  1848.  His  father  was 
an  early  settler  of  that  county  and  engaged  in 
merchandising.  He  married  Miss  .Jane  McLean, 
who  is  now  Mrs.  Lovell,  of  Cape  Girardeau. 

C.  C.  Smith  was  the  eldest  of  three  children. 
His  father  died  when  he  was  quite  young,  and  he 
had  to  aid  in  the  support  of  the  family-.  He  was 
reared  upon  tiie  farm  of  his  maternal  grandfather 
and  acquired  his  education  in  the  common  schools 
and  the  high  school  of  .lonesboro.  111.  He  also 
completed  the  course  in  the  Bryant  &  Stratton 
Business  College  of  St.  Louis,  after  which  he  be- 
gan clerking  for  John  Vastine,  at  Preston,  111.  A 
year  later  he  embarked  in  teaching  in  Jackson, 
Mo.,  where  he  continued  until  1871,  when  he  lo 
cated  upon  a  farm  in  his  native  county  and  for 
five  3'ears  continued  its  cultivation.  On  the  ex- 
piration of  that  period  he  removed  to  the  city  of 
Cape  Girardeau,  and  for  about  three  years  was 
superintendent  of  the  Grange  store. 

At   that   place,  on   the   14th  of  March,  1871,  he 


was  united  in  marriage  with  Miss  Mary  E.  McLain, 
a  native  of  Cape  Girardeau  and  a  daughter  of 
John  A.  McLain,  who  was  also  there  born  and 
reared.  Her  grandfather,  David  McLain,  a  native 
of  North  Carolina,  is  numbered  among  the  early 
settlers  of  Missouri  and  became  an  extensive 
farmer  and  a  prominent  citizen.  The  father  was 
also  an  influential  man  in  the  community.  His 
death  occurred  in  January,  1893.  His  wife,  who 
bore  the  maiden  name  of  Susan  McLaughlin,  was 
born  in  Virginia,  and  is  still  living  in  Missouri. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  McLain  had  a  family  of  eight  chil- 
dren, of  whom  Mrs.  Smith  is  the  eldest.  She  is  a 
cultivated  and  intelligent  lady  and  one  whose 
friends  throughout  the  cominunitj'  are  many. 
Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs. Smith  were  born  three  children: 
Minnie,  wife  of  E.  R.  Neill,  of  Murph3sboro, 
Harry  and  Albert. 

In  1879  Mr.  Smith  came  with  his  family  to 
Murphysboro  and  enteied  into  partnership  with 
William  H.  McLaughlin  under  the  firm  name  of 
Smith  Sc  McLaughlin,  dealers  in  general  merchan- 
dise. Retiring  from  this  connection  in  1855  he 
embarked  in  business  alone  at  the  corner  of  Broad 
and  Walnut  Streets,  and  three  years  later  bought 
out  the  store  of  .Samuel  Desberger.  He  fitted  out 
an  elegant  establishment,  and  the  "Trade  Palace," 
as  it  was  called,  became  the  finest  store  in  the  place. 
It  was  well  stocked  with  desirable  goods,  and  Mr. 
Smith  did  a  most  successful  business,  his  trade  in- 
creasing until  it  assumed  extensive  proportions. 
By  close  attention  to  all  details,  careful  manage- 
ment and  enterprise,  he  won  the  success  which  made 
him  one  of  the  substantial  citizens  of  Jackson 
County.  He  was  also  one  of  the  organizers  of  the 
Board  of  Trade  and  served  as  its  President  until 
his  death.  Of  the  Cripple  Revenge  Threshing 
Machine  Company  he  was  Treasurer.  A  public- 
spirited  and  progressive  man,  he  contributed  lib- 
erally to  the  support  of  all  enterprises  which  were 
calculated  to  promote  the  general  welfare.  In 
politics  he  was 'a  Democrat.  After  only  a  week's 
illness  he  passed  away,  November  18, 1892, and  his 
death  was  widely  and  deeply  mourned. 

Mrs.  Smith  still  makes  her  home  in  Murphys 
boro,  where  she  is  both  widely  and  favorably 
known.     She  holds  an  enviable  position  in  social 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


861 


circles  and  has  the  warm  regard  of  all.  She  owns 
both  business  and  residence  property,  and  with 
the  English  Lutheran  Church  hold  membership. 

-*  -=^^>-^^<^=^-^ 

SUSTAV  f!  WIEBUSCH,  a  farmer  and  mer- 
chant living  at  Wagner's  Landing,  Jack- 
s^«_5^  son  Count}-,  was  born  in  Chester,  111., 
March  11,  1856.  He  is  a  son  of  Christopher  and 
Hannah  (Kipp)  Wiebusch,  natives  respectivelj'  of 
Hanover  and  Westphalia,  Germany.  His  educa- 
tion was  secured  in  the  Chester  schools.  It  was 
his  intention  to  enter  Blackburn  University,  at 
Carlinville,  and  he  started  there,  but  while  en 
route  was  taken  sick  and  suffered  a  long  illness, 
after  which  he  did  not  start  again. 

At  the  age  of  twenty-one,  Mr.  Wiebusch  began 
the  life  of  an  agriculturist,  settling  in  Fountain 
Bluff  Township,  .lackson  County,  upon  a  farm  be- 
longing to  his  father.  There  he  remained  for  three 
years,  working  in  partnership  with  his  brother. 
While  a  resident  of  that  township  he  was  married, 
in  Fountain  Bluff,  Februaiv  5, 1880,  his  wife  being 
Miss  Emma  JScheurenberg.  This  lady  was  the 
daughter  of  Charles  and  Margaret  (Schmidt)  Scheu- 
renberg,  and  was  born  in  Dubuque,  Iowa,  August 
9,  1859.  .She  was  educated  in  German}-,  whither 
her  father  had  removed  when  she  was  about  six 
3-ears  of  age. 

At  the  time  of  his  marriage,  Mr.  Wiebusch  rented 
a  farm  of  Godfred  Rueckels,  and  during  his  four 
years'  residence  on  that  place  his  wife  died.  Later 
he  discontinued  farming  and  went  west,  where  he 
found  eraploj-ment  in  Kansas,  Nebraska  and  south- 
western Missouri.  He  followed  railroading  prin- 
cipally, making  Kansas  City  liis  headquarters. 
After  a  year  in  the  west,  he  returned  to  Jackson 
Count}-,  bought  a  store  at  Wagner's  Landing,  and 
in  February  of  1886  embarked  in  the  mercantile 
business.  In  this  enterprise  he  has  been  success- 
ful, gaining  a  reputation  throughout  the  surround- 
ing countrj-  as  a  reliable  and  honorable  merchant. 
In  his  store  he  carries  a  well  selected  stock  of 
goods  such  as  are  usually  kept  in  a  country  store. 
His  establishment  is  also  the  locatif)n  of  the  post- 
office  of  Wagner's  Landing,  and  Mr.  Wiebusch  has 


been  the  Postmaster  since  1888,  his  commission 
being  dated  .June  14  of  that  year.  He  has  charge 
of  the  steamer  landing  and  trades  quite  exten- 
siveh'  in  country  produce,  which  he  ships  north 
by  boat. 

The  first  marriage  of  Mr.  Wiebusch  resulted  in 
the  birth  of  five  children,  three  of  whom  are  now 
living:  Alfred  C,  Clara  M.  and  Annie  K.  (one  of 
twins).  The  deceased  are  Emily  and  Emma.  On 
the  7th  of  April,  1886,  he  was  again  married, 
choosing  as  his  wife  Miss  Emma,  daughter  of 
Fred  and  Doris  (Heitmaifn)  Buekmann.  Mrs. 
Wiebusch  was  born  July  19,  1858,  and  by  her  mar- 
riage has  become  the  mother  of  five  children,  of 
whom  the  only  survivors  are  Walter  8.  and  Ida 
E,  D.  The  deceased  children  are  Doris,  Oscar  and 
Edward. 

In  their  religious  connections  Mr.  Wiebusch  and 
his  estimable  wife  are  identified  with  the  Evan- 
gelical L'ltheran  Church  at  Chester,  in  whicii  they 
are  active  workers,  and  to  the  support  of  which 
they  contribute  liberally.  In  his  political  rela- 
tions he  affiliates  w-ith  the  Democratic  party,  the 
principles  of  which  he  upliolds  with  fidelity.  While 
a  resident  of  Fountain  Bluff,  he  served  for  five 
years  as  School  Treasurer,  and  in  his  present  dis- 
trict he  filled  the  same  position  for  six  years,  after 
which  be  declined  re-election. 


ENRY  C.  LINDENBERG  is  following  his 
chosen  occupation,  that  of  agriculture,  on 
section  18,  township  7,  range  5,  Randolph 
County,  where  he  engages  in  general  farm- 
ing and  stock-raising  upon  a  tract  of  ninety-four 
acres  of  excellent  land.  He  is  a  native  of  this 
county,  having  been  born  here  December  10,  1856. 
His  parents,  Clemens  and  Cnristina  Liudenberg, 
were  natives  of  German}-,  whence  in  1838  they 
emigi-ated  to  America  and  settled  in  Randolpii 
County,  111.  Upon  a  tract  of  one  hundred  and 
twenty  acres  entered  from  the  Government,  tlie 
father  commenced  farming  and  continued  thus  en- 
gaged throughout  his  entire  life.  AVithsuch  success 


862 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL    RECORD. 


did  he  pursue  his  chosen  calling  that  he  placed  his 
property  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation,  intro- 
duced a  number  of  valuable  improvements  and 
added  fift}--four  acres  to  the  original  purchase. 
His  death  occurred  April  6,  1880.  His  widow  is 
still  living  and  makes  her  lioine  in  Randolph 
County. 

In  the  parental  family  there  were  eightcbildren,^ 
of  whom  four  are  now  living,  as  follows:  Clemens 
H..  Henry  C,  Elvina  and  Herman  P.,  all  residents 
of  Randolph  County.  They  are  well  educated 
both  in  English  and' German,  and  are  honorable 
and  useful  citizens  of  this  community'.  The  subject 
of  this  sketch  passed  the  years  of  boyhood  and 
youth  in  an  uneventful  manner.  On  the  11th 
of  November,  1881,  he  was  united  in  marriage 
with  Miss  Louise  S.  Welge,  who  was  one  in  a  fam- 
ily of  nine  children,  those  surviving  being  Louise 
S.,  Adolph  H.,  Amelia  M.,  Anna  L.  and  Elvina  L., 
all  honored  residents  of  this  county.  The  parents 
of  Mrs.  Lindenberg  are  Henr^'  and  Lena  (Dettmer) 
Welge,  natives  of  Germany,  wlio  emigrated  to  the 
United  States  in  1842  and  settled  in  R.indolph 
Countj', wliere  they  now  occupy  a  position  among 
the  prominent  citizens  and  honored  pioneers  of 
this  section  of  the  state. 

The  union  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lindenberg  has  re- 
sulted in  the  birth  of  five  children,  as  follows: 
Elvina  C,  who  was  born  November  2,  1882;  Lena 
A.,  August  27,  1884;  Rudolph  H.,  September  9, 
1888;  Edward  H.,  October  7,  1890,  and  Hulda  S., 
January  23,  1893.  The  children  are  bright  and 
intelligent  for  their  j'eai-s,  and  will  be  given  the 
advantages  of  both  German  and  English  edu- 
cations. The  religious  home  of  the  family  is  in 
the  Lutheran  Church,  to  which  the  parents  of  both 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lindenberg  belonged. 

By  careful  reading  and  habits  of  observation, 
Mr.  Lindenberg  has  supplemented  the  informa- 
tion gained  in  the  common  schools  and  is  now  as 
well  informed  upon  general  topics  perhaps  as  anj' 
other  resident  of  the  township.  As  a  general 
farmer  and  stock-raiser,  he  brings  to  bear  upon  the 
tilling  of  the  soil  and  tiie  breeding  of  stock  the 
best  and  most  approved  methods  of  modern  times, 
and  skill,  together  with  industry,  has  secured  for 
him  material  success.     I  n  politics  he  is  a  Democrat 


and  is  at  present  serving  as  Director  of  School 
District  No.  4.  He  and  his  wife  are  held  in  the 
highest  esteem  in  the  community  where  the\'  re- 
side and  are  foremost  in  all  measures  for  the  pro- 
motion of  religious  and  social  enterprises. 


(^ 


^^1 


^r^ 


'-^^1 


-^■^ 


^ 


\Y|OHN  H.  REYNOLDS,  a  farmer  occupying 
one  liundred  and  sixt^-eight  acres  on  sec- 
tion 3,  Degognia  Township,  Jackson  Coun- 
ty, was  born  in  St.  Louis  Jul^-  9,  1838.  He 
is  the  eldest  of  four  children  born  to  the  union  of 
Robert  and  Melinda  (Evans)  Reynolds,  natives  of 
Kentucky.  His  father  dying  in  1846,  his  mother 
was  afterward  married  to  Thomas  Yearsley,  and 
b}'  that  union  had  two  children,  a  son  and  a 
daughter.  John  secured  his  education  in  the  schools 
of  St.  Louis,  and  was  one  of  the  first  pupils  in  the 
high  school  when  it  was  organized  under  the  su- 
perintendeiice  of  J.  D.  Low. 

At  the  age  of  sixteen  Mr.  Reynolds  entered  the 
carriage  shop  of  John  D.  McAuliff  and  learned 
the  trade  of  a  carriage  blacksmith.  Remaining 
there  until  the  outbreak  of  the  Rebellion,  he  then 
secured  a  position  in  the  Quartermaster's  Depart- 
ment, in  which  he  worked  at  his  trade  in  repairing 
ambulances,  etc.  After  spending  some  four  months 
in  Corinth,  Miss.,  he  returned  to  the  north  to  take 
charge  of  his  mother's  farm,  her  husband  having 
died.  He  purchased  land  in  Bradley  Township, 
Jackson  County,  and  resided  there  most  of  the 
time  for  the  succeeding  sixteen  3'ears. 

Between  that  time  and  the  date  of  coming  to  his 
present  holding,  Mr.  Reynolds  worked  at  his  trade 
and  also  established  a  carriage  factory  in  Red 
Bud.  As  soon  as  completed,  he  disposed  of  his 
interest  to  John  Roscoe  and  returned  to  Jackson 
Count}'.  A  brother,  who  owned  a  farm  on  sec- 
tion 3,  Degognia  Township,  died  in  1874,  and 
while  serving  as  administrator  of  the  estate  our 
subject  bought  out  the  interest  of  the  other  heirs 
and  has  since  operated  the  farm,  making  it  his 
home.  Upon  this  place  excellent  buildings  have 
been  erected  and  various  tine  improvements  made, 
which  stamp  it  as  the  abode  of  one  who  has  pros- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BlOaRAFHICAL  RECORD. 


86^ 


pered  in  worldly  affairs  and  possesses  good   judg- 
ment in  investments  and  enterprises. 

May  19,  1892.  Mr.  Reynolds  was  united  in  mar- ' 
riage  with  Mrs.  Jlaigaret  M.  Plant,  daughter  of 
Jesse  and  Sallie  (Segail)  Shepard.  Mrs.  Rej^nolds 
is  the  mother  of  a  son,  .John  W.  Diamond,  b}'  her 
first  husband.  In  politics  Mr.  Reynolds  has  al- 
ways been  a  stanch  advocate  of  Democratic  prin- 
ciples, lie  has  served  as  School  Trustee  and  has  been 
solicited  frequently  to  .accept  the  nomination  for 
otiier  offices,  but  has  persistently  refused,  prefer- 
ring to  give  his  entire  time  and  attention  to  his 
farming  interests.  Public  spirited,  interested  in 
all  movements  whicii  promise  to  add  to  the  pros- 
perity and  happiness  of  his  fellow-citizens,  he 
ma^'  well  be  looked  upon  as  an  excellent  repre- 
sentative of    true  manhood  and   good  citizenship. 

,1^  YMANN  HENRY  BUNSELMPn'ER.  This 
ij  )ji  enterprising  young  gentleman,  a  resident 
iy^^  of  .Jackson  County,  is  prosecuting  his 
(^)  chosen  calling,  that  of  agriculture,  with  a 
degree  of  energy  highly  commendable.  On  sec- 
tions 3  and  10,  Degognia  Township,  he  operates  a 
farm  comprising  one  hundred  and  twenty-one 
acres  of  rich  bottom  land.  He  is  an  industrious 
and  capable  farmer,  who  bj*  his  constant  devotion 
to  his  work  has  wrought  with  his  hands  a  successful 
career  in  his  chosen  occupation. 

The  parents  of  our  subject,  Frank  and  Mary 
(Roever)  Bunselmeyer,  natives  of  Germany,  had  a 
family  of  five  children,  three  of  whom  still  sur- 
vive. Henry,  who  was  second  in  order  of  birth, 
was  born  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  September  27,  1859, 
and  received  the  rudiments  of  his  education  in  the 
schools  of  that  city.  When  he  was  a  lad  of  ten 
years  his  mother  removed  with  her  second  husband, 
Fred  Winter,  to  Madison  County,  111.,  and  he  be- 
came a  pupil  in  the  district  schools  of  Sand  Prai- 
rie. Afterward  he  prosecuted  his  studies  in  the 
Colli usville  High  School  for  one  scholastic  year. 

Together  with  Herman  Slrackeljahn  our  subject 
raised  a  crop  of  potatoes  in  1881,  and  the  fol- 
lowing year  he  bought  a  team  and  put  in  a  crop 
in  partnership  with  Gust  Frazen.     In  the  fall  of 


that  year  he  was  married  and  removed,  together 
with  his  father-in-law,  to  Degognia  Township, 
Jackson  County,  where  he  has  since  resided. 
The  ladv  with  whom  he  has  linked  his  for- 
tunes is  Caroline,  daughter  of  John  and  Mary 
(Strackeljahn)  Ileinbokel,  natives  of  Hanover,  Ger- 
many. Mrs.  Bunselmeycr  was  born  in  Nameoki, 
111.,  October  5,  1863,  and  is  the  second  in  order  of 
birth  in  a  familv  of  thirteen  children.  The  date  of 
her  marriage  was  November  5,  1882,  and  the  union 
has  resulted  in  the  birth  of  eight  children,  six  of 
whom  are  now  living.  They  are:  John  F.,  Mary 
Elizabeth,  Mary  Caroline,  August  H.  J.,  Frank  H. 
W.  and  Annie.  The  two  deceased  are  Henry,  who 
died  in  infancy,  and  Fred  II.,  who  passed  from 
earth  at  the  age  of  three. 

In  politics  Mr.  Bunselmeyer  adheres  to  the  Re- 
publican party  as  the  one  wiiose  principles  are  for 
the  best  government.  His  fellow-citizens,  appreciat- 
ing his  fitness  for  official  positions,  liave  chosen  him 
to  represent  them  in  a  number  of  local  offices,  in  all 
of  which  he  has  served  with  efficiency  and  suc- 
cess. At  the  present  time  he  is  Commissioner  of 
Highw.iys  and  is  also  filling  the  position  of  School 
Director.  He  and  his  entire  family  are  members 
of  the  Lutheran  Church  and  are  attendants  at  the 
services  of  the  organization  at  Fountain  Bluff.  In 
social  circles  they  are  highly  regarded  as  people  of 
worth  and  occupy  a  prominent  place  among  the 
best  families  of  the  community.  Mr.  Bunselmeyer 
is  a  progressive  young  man,  who  is  devoting  his 
energies  to  the  improvement  of  the  farm,  while  at 
the  same  time  he  is  interested  in  matters  of  local 
importance. 


^)^(^ 


^^  HARLES  H.  ROE,  ex-Circuit  Clerk  of  Perry 
[l(  Count}',  and  a  well  known  citizen  of  Pinck- 

^>^'  nevville,  is  a  native  of  the  Buckeye  State. 
He  was  born  in  Dayton,  Ohio,  Februaiy  24,  1842, 
and  is  a  son  of  Thomas  S.  Roe,  a  native  of  Cin- 
cinnati, who  was  born  in  1818.  The  father  grew  to 
manhood  in  Dayton,  and  was  graduated  from  the 
Louisville  (Ky.)  Medical  College  in  1841.  Imme- 
diately thereafter  he  began  practice.  In  1843  he  re- 
moved to  Shawneetown,  111.,  and  also  engaged  in 
practice  in  Mt.  Vernon,  Nashville  and  Chester,  this 


864 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


state.  In  1857  he  came  to  Pincknej-ville,  where 
he  died  October  12,  1873.  He  was  one  of  the 
leading  pliysicians  of  Illinois,  winning  high  repu- 
tation among  his  professional  brethren.  His  fa- 
ther, Daniel  Roe,  was  born  at  Oyster  Baj',  Long 
Island,  in  1780;  his  parents  were  natives  of  Wales 
and  came  to  this  countr}'  prior  to  the  Revolution. 
Early  in  life  Daniel  became  a  minister  of  the  Swe- 
denborgian  Church,  but  later  abandoned  the  pul- 
pit and  entered  the  legal  profession,  practicing  in 
Cincinnati  and  Da3'ton,  Ohio.  He  was  a  man  of 
broad  views  and  liberal  education  and  was  the 
owner  of  considerable  property.  About  1810  he 
moved  from  Langlej-,  Ky.,  to  Ohio,  and  settled  in 
Lebanon,  where  his  sons  pydvvard  and  Charles  were 
born.  He  thence  moved  to  Cincinnati,  and  later 
to  Dayton.  He  laid  out  an  addition  to  the  lat- 
ter place  which  is  now  in  the  heart  of  the  citj'. 
His  death  occurred  there  in  the  year  1843.  His 
cliildren  were  Thomas  S.,  Charles  C,  who  went 
to  California,  was  enrolled  among  the  "Forty- 
niners"  of  that  state,  and  on  his  return  located  in 
Louisville,  Ky.,  where  he  died  in  the  3'ear  1889, 
and  Edward  R.  The  latter  was  a  graduate  of  the 
Louisville  Medical  College;  he  practiced  medi- 
cine for  several  years,  and  was  at  one  time  Circuit 
Clerk  of  McLean  County,  111.  He  was  afterward 
United  States  Marshal  for  the  Southern  District 
of  Illinois,  but  the  greater  part  of  his  attention 
was  given  to  writing  works  of  Action.  The  last 
fifteen  years  of  his  life  were  spent  in  Chicago, 
where  he  devoted  his  entire  time  to  literary  work. 
His  stories  are  extensively  read,  and  gained  for 
him  a  high  reputation  as  an  author.  He  died  in 
Chicago  in   November,  1893. 

The  mother  of  our  subject  bore  the  maiden 
name  of  Anna  Maria  Boyer.  She  was  born  in  Lan- 
caster Count}'.  Pa.,  and  was  a  daughter  of  Jacob 
Boyer,  a  native  of  the  same  stale  and  a  tinner 
by  trade.  He  went  to  Ohio  in  an  early  da}' 
and  served  as  organist  in  the  German  Reformed 
Cliurch  of  Dayton  for  manj-  years.  He  died  in 
that  city  in  1860,  leaving  quite  a  fortune.  In  his 
family  were  thirteen  children,  including  George 
P.,  who  was  Auditor  of  Montgomer}'  County,  Ohio, 
for  several  j'ears;  Thomas  W..  who  was  First  Lieu- 
tenant  in    the  First   Ohio    Regiment  during   the 


war  and  died  in  St.  Louis,  where  he  was  a  member 
of  the  Harter  Medicine  Company;  and  Frances, 
who  became  the  wife  of  a  Mr.  Kane,  a  prominent 
citizen  of  Dayton,  Ohio.  Mrs.  Roe  died  in  Pinck- 
ne^'ville  in  1870. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  the  eldest  of 
three  brothers,  he  and  his  brother  Robert  C.  being 
members  of  Company  G,  Twelfth  Illinois  Infantry, 
during  the  late  war.  Robert  C.  was  killed  at  Ft. 
Donelson  February  15,  1862.  Frank  M.  served 
for  years  as  Deputy  County  Clerk  of  Perr}^  Coun- 
ty, retiring  in  December,  1892,  and  is  now  engaged 
in  merchandising  in  Pinckneyville.  On  the  break- 
ing out  of  the  Rebellion  Charles  H.  and  his  brother 
Robert  responded  to  the  first  call  for  troops,  en- 
listing August  1,  1861.  He  participated  in  the 
battles  of  Ft.  Heni'}',  Ft.  Donelson,  Shiloh,  Corinth 
and  those  of  the  Atlanta  campaign,  and  was  mus- 
tered out  of  the  service  August  1,  1864.  Re-en- 
tering the  Quartermaster's  Department,  he  was 
with  Sherman  on  the  memorable  march  to  the  sea 
and  in  the  Carolina  campaign. 

Mr.  Roe  returned  to  Pinckneyville  in  1865,  and 
in  the  fall  of  that  year  was  appointed  Deputy 
Circuit  Clerk.  In  August,  1867,  he  was  appointed 
to  the  office  to  fill  an  unexpired  term,  and  was 
thereafter  continuously  elected  Circuit  Clerk  until 
the  fall  of  1892.  He  thus  served  for  a  quarter  of 
a  century,  and  Perry  County  h.as  known  no  more 
accommodating  official  in  that  office  than  he. 

September  16,  1866,  was  celebrated  the  marriage 
Mr.  Rge  and  Miss  Harriet  V.,  daughter  of  Hum- 
phrey B.  Jones,  who  was  for  sixteen  years  Circuit 
Clerk  of  Perry  County,  he  being  the  first  to  hold 
that  office  on  the  organization  of  the  county  in 
1827.  To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Roe  were  born  nine  chil- 
dren, who  are  now  living:  Fannie  G.,  wife  of  Henry 
Maasberg,  of  Pinckneyville;  Jennie  .J.,  wife  of 
Thomas  L.  Wallace,  of  Pinckneyville;  Harriet  M., 
at  home;  Robert  B.,  who  is  in  the  drug  business  at 
Pinckneyville;  Charles  H.,  Thomas  IL,  John  D., 
Zoe  Inez  and  Ernestine  C. 

In  politics  Mr.  Roe  has  always  been  a  Republi- 
can. That  he  has  the  confidence  .and  good  will  of 
his  fellow-townsmen  is  shown  b}'  his  frequent  re- 
election to  office,  and  that  fact  also  indicates  the 
fidelit}'  and  ability  with  which   he  discharged  his 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


865 


duties.  Socially  he  is  connected  with  the  Grand 
Army  post,  in  which  he  for  many  years  served  as 
Adjutant.  He  has  led  an  honorable  and  upright 
life,  was  a  valiant  defender  of  the  Old  Flag,  and 
Perry  County  numbers  him  among  its  best  citizens. 


'\|(OSEPH  BEARK.  Probably  no  resident  of 
Chester  is  more  deserving  of  representa- 
tion in  this  volume  than  Joseph  Beare,  who 
though  a  native  of  Berne,  Switzerland,  was 
a  resident  of  this  country  for  more  than  a  half- 
ceutur}'.  Here  he  pursued  a  course  which  resulted 
in  securing  fur  him  the  hearty  respect  of  those 
who  knew  him  and  gave  him  a  proud  rank  among 
the  farmers  and  business  men  of  Randolj)!!  Coun- 
ty. His  death  was  mourned  by  all  who  knew  him. 
Our  subject  was  born  April  1,  1815,  to  Josejjh 
and  Margaret  Beare.  His  parents  emigrated  to 
the  United  Slates  when  he  was  twelve  years  of  age 
and  spent  a  few  years  at  Cleveland,  Ohio.  Com- 
ing to  Randolph  County  and  settling  on  a  farm, 
they  here  spent  the  remainder  of  their  days  in 
ease  and  comfort.  .Josepii  attended  the  schools  of 
Switzerland,  obtaining  but  a  meager  education,  and 
after  coming  to  America  aided  his  father  in  cultiva- 
ting the  farm.  From  time  to  time  he  was  enabled 
to  purch.ase  land  of  his  own,  and  in  its  cultivation 
was  more  than  ordinaril3'  successful,  and  at  the 
time  of  his  demise  was  among  tlie  most  progressive 
and  extensive  farmers  in  the  county.  Besides  his 
agricultural  interests  he  engaged  in  merchandis- 
ing in  Chester  for  a  number  of  years,  and  also  had 
large  lumber  interests  in  that  city.  There  he  was 
residing  at  the  time  of  his  death,  which  occurred 
Augusts.  1887.  In  his  demise  the  city  and  county 
lost  one  of  their  most  valued  citizens.  He  was  a 
thoroughly  practical  man,  of  sturdy  habits  and 
excellent  character,  and  his  good  deeds  won  for 
him  a  warm  place  in  the  hearts  of  his  many  friends. 
In  September,  1848,  Mr.  Beare  married  Miss 
Mary,  daughter  of  James  and  Mary  (Vance)  Gil- 
lespie, who  came  from  Tennessee  to  Randolph 
County,  where  they  both  died.  Seven  children 
came  to  bless  the  home  of  our  subject  and  his  wife, 
as  follows:    Nellie,  who  is  the  wife  of  William  A. 


Reid  and  resides  in  St.  Louis;  Ida,  Mrs.  Bion  Mc- 
Cloud,  who  makes  her  home  in  Chester;  Lizzie, 
who  married  William  Schuchert  and  also  lives  in 
Chester;  and  William,  Joseph,  Willis  and  Ernest, 
who  are  deceased.  The  good  wife  and  mother  is 
still  living  and  makes  her  home  with  Mrs.  Mc- 
Cloud.  She  is  a  Spiritualist  in  her  religious  views, 
as  was  also  her  beloved  husb.and.  In  politics  Mr. 
Beare  was  a  Democrat  and  was  very  active  for  his 
party,  having  held  many  important  city  offices  in 
Chester. 


^  EORGE  NEVILLE.  It  often  seems  that  the 
younger  men  outstrip  their  elders  in  the 
^^1  race  for  political  honors.  Activity  and  en- 
erg}-  are  greater  in  youth  than  in  after  life,  and 
a  child  properly  trained  to  habits  of  industry  and 
frugality  will  most  likely  win  success  early  in  life. 
Such  has  been  the  exi)erience  of  George  Neville, 
the  present  City  Treasurer  of  Chester,  whose  sketch 
now  invites  attention  from  the  reader. 

A  native  of  this  state,  our  subject  was  born  in 
Pana  August  2,  1865,  and  is  the  son  of  Capt. 
James  Neville,  whose  birthplace  is  also  in  Illinois. 
The  father  is  a  man  of  fine  education,  being  a 
graduate  of  the  college  at  Lebanon,  this  state.  He 
also  prosecuted  his  studies  in  Chicago,  and  later  in 
Omaha,  Neb.,  where  he  is  at  present  residing,  and 
is  now  Judge  of  the  District  Court.  Mrs.  Neville 
departed  this  life  in  1870,  while  residing  in  Chester. 

Our  subject  was  the  elder  of  two  sons  born  to 
his  parents,  and  in  his  school  days  attended  the 
public  schools  in  this  city.  Later  he  went  east 
and  entered  Cornell  University,  at  Ithaca,  and 
after  completing  his  studies  there  relumed  home 
and  engaged  in  the  clothing  business  for  some 
3-eais.  His  partner  in  this  enterprise  was  P.  G. 
Jones,  and  the  business  was  conducted  under  the 
title  of  Neville  it  Jones,  dealers  in  men's  furnish- 
ing goods. 

The  lady  whom  our  subject  married  in  1885  was 
Miss  Mary,  daughter  of  G.  S.  Jones.  To  them  has 
been  born  one  child,  (iabriel  G.,  whose  birth  oc- 
curred January  19,  1886.  In  his  political  rela- 
tions Mr.  Neville  always  votes  with  the  Demo- 
cratic party,  on  which   ticket  lie  was  elected  City 


866 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


Treasurer  in  April,  1893.  He  has  been  an  energetic 
worker  in  the  ranlis  of  his  party,  and  at  various 
times  has  represented  it  on  the  Count}'  Central 
Committee.  Socially,  he  is  an  Odd  Fellow  and  a 
member  of  Lodge  No.  57.  He  is  also  a  Knight  of 
Pythias.  He  is  always  glad  to  assist  in  anj-  way 
in  promoting  the  interests  of  his  township,  which 
he  has  served  faithfully  in  man\'  positions  of  trust. 
Throughout  the  count}-  he  has  many  friends,  who 
recognize  the  nobility  of  his  character  and  realize 
that  he  deserves  to  be  held  in  the  highest  esteem.  , 
In  August,  1892,  he  was  admitted  to  practice  law  ' 
in  Mt.  Vernon,  this  state.  He  is  one  of  the  young- 
est members  of  the  legal  fraternity,  and  it  is  safe 
to  predict  thjjt  he  will  reach  the  top  round  of  the 
ladder  of  success. 


JUDGE  M.  F.  SWORTZCOPE  is  a  prominent 
resident  of  Grand  Tower,  and  one  well 
worth}'  of  representation  in  this  volume. 
He  comes  from  an  old  Bohemian  family,  and 
the  name  was  originally  spelled  Schwartzkopf. 
His  father,  Joseph  Swortzcope,  was  born  and 
reared  in  Bohemia,  and  became  a  weaver.  He 
served  as  a  soldier  under  Napoleon,  and  was 
wounded  at  the  battle  of  Austerlitz  by  a  musket 
ball  in  the  left  upper  arm.  He  married  Catherine 
Anna  Broixdam,  who  was  a  native  of  Cologne, 
and  was  of  French  and  German  descent.  Their 
marriage  was  celebrated  in  Cologne  in  1807,  and 
in  1814  they  emigrated  to  America,  locating  in 
Elizabethtown,  Md.,  where  the  father  followed  his 
trade.  He  afterwards  went  to  Chambersburg,  Pa., 
thence  to  Bedford, and  in  1835  to  St.  Louis.  Later 
he  made  his  home  on  a  farm  in  St.  Charles  County, 
Mo.,  and  on  selling  that  removed  to  Cottleville, 
that  stale,  where  he  died  in  1847,  at  the  age  of 
eighty-two.  His  wife  passed  away  in  1851,  at 
the  age  of  eighty  years.  They  were  members  of 
the  Catholic  Church. 

Our  subject  is  the  only  survivor  in  a  family  of 
seven  children.  He  was  born  in  Chambersburg, 
Pa.,  April  3,  1820,  and  all  of  his  school  privileges 
were  acquired  in  Pennsylvania  prior  to  his  four- 
teenth  year.     He  then  served  an  apprenticeship 


to  the  cooper's  trade,  which  he  followed  for  a 
number  of  yeai-s.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  he  emi- 
grated to  Madison  County,  111.,  later  went  to  Mis- 
souri, and  afterwards  returned  to  Ohio,  where  he 
followed  coopering.  He  located  in  Chester,  111., 
in  1842. 

The  same  year  Mr.  Swortzcope  married  Zerelda 
Harmon,  who  was  born  in  Randolph  County,  111., 
in  March,  1821.  In  1845  they  removed  to  Mur- 
physboro,  and  there  our  subject  followed  his  trade 
until  1869,  when  tuey  came  to  Grand  Tower.  Six 
children  were  born  to  them,  of  whom  three  are 
now  living,  Susan  E.,  Emma  B.  and  Walter.  The 
mother  of  this  family  died  in  1854. 

Mr.  Swortzcope  was  numbered  among  the  valiant 
defenders  of  the  Union  during  the  late  war.  He 
enlisted  in  August,  1861,  and  was  mustered  into 
the  United  States  service  on  the  18tli  of  Septem- 
ber, as  a  member  of  Company  A,  Thirty-first  Illi- 
nois Infantry.  He  was  promoted  to  he  First  Lieu- 
tenant and  Quartermaster,  April  2,  18()2,  and  thus 
served  until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  participated 
in  the  battles  of  Belmont,  Ft.  Henry,  Ft.  Donel- 
son  and  the  siege  of  Corinth.  The  regiment  was 
under  the  command  of  John  A.  Logan,  with  whom 
he  was  very  intimate,  a  strong  affection  existing 
between  the  two  men.  Mr.  Swortzcope  partici- 
pated in  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  and  the  battles  of 
Champion  HiUs  and  Raymond,  and  his  regiment 
acted  with  the  escort  of  honor  to  General  Grant 
on  the  capture  of  Vicksburg.  In  the  spring  of 
1864  he  returned  home  on  a  veteran  furlough, 
and  when  his  leave  of  absence  had  expired,  re- 
joined his  command  in  Georgia,  participating  in 
the  battle  of  Kenesaw  Mountain,  the  siege  of  At- 
lanta, the  march  to  the  sea,  and  the  battles  of  Sa- 
vannah and  Bentonville.  He  served  as  Assistant 
Quartermaster  of  the  Seventeenth  Army  Corps 
from  the  landing  at  Port  Royal,  S.  C,  until  must- 
ered out  at  Goldsboro,  N.  C,  April  8.  1865. 

Mr.  .Swortzcope  is  a  member  and  has  served  as 
Commander  of  John  A.  White  Post  of  Grand 
Tower.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  Odd  Fel 
lows'  society,  and  has  represented  the  local  lodge 
in  the  Grand  Lodge.  He  deserves  great  credit  for 
his  success  in  life.  When  a  young  man  of  twenty- 
four,  he  could  not  do  a  simple  example  in  subtrac- 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


867 


tion,  but  he  bought  an  arithmetic  and  slate,  and 
without  assistance  mastered  all  of  the  problems  in 
the  book,  and  his  reading,  experience  and  observa- 
tion have  made  him  a  well  informed  man.  In 
1858  he  was  elected  County  Surve}'or  of  Jackson 
Count}',  and  was  serving  his  second  term  when  the 
war  broke  out.  In  1854  he  was  Associate  Justice 
of  the  County  Court,  and  in  1865  was  elected 
County  Judge,  which  position  he  filled  four  years. 
He  has  also  been  Notary  Public,  Road  Supervisor 
and  School  Director,  and  is  now  the  efficient  and 
popular  Surveyor  of  Jackson  County.  In  the  dis- 
ciiarge  of  his  public  duties  he  has  ever  been  found 
faithful  and  true,  and  his  frequent  re-election  to 
oflice  indicates  the  confidence  reposed  in  him. 


^^  APT.  J.  C.  LOUNSBURY,  who  for  more 
(l(  _^  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  was  captain  of 
^^^  a  vessel  on  the  Mississippi  River,  has  been 
residing  in  Perry  County  since  18G0.  His  inter- 
ests here  are  centered  in  township  4,  range  1, 
where  he  owns  three  hundred  acres  of  valuable 
land,  which  is  one  of  the  best  managed  farms  in 
this  part  of  the  state.  Mr.  Lounsbur}'  was  born  in 
Orange  County,  N.  Y.,  in  1823,  and  on  coming 
west  in  1846,  located  in  Cincinnati.  He  immedi- 
ately engaged  as  mate  of  a  vessel  running  to  New 
Orleans,  and  continued  to  act  in  that  capaeitj'  for 
about  ten  3ear&,  when  he  was  promoted  to  be  cap- 
tain. 

While  following  the  river,  our  subject  had 
charge  of  some  of  the  best  boats  on  the  Mississippi 
and  was  only  induced  to  abandon  that  line  of 
work  on  account  of  the  illness  of  his  wife.  In 
1860,  he  came  to  Perry  County'  and  purchased  a 
quarter-section  of  land.  The  lady  whom  he  mar- 
ried while  residing  in  Cincinnati  was  Miss  Han- 
nah A.,  daughter  of  Dr.  V.  W.  and  Diautha  Leon- 
ard. Their  marriage  occurred  September  5,  1850, 
and  to  them  have  been  born  five  children,  viz.: 
Emma,  now  Mrs.  William  Fielden,of  Washington; 
J.  Edward,  who  assists  his  father  in  carrying  on  the 
farm;  Lillie,  Mrs.  George  McClelland,  of  Okla- 
homa; John  C,  now  residing  in  Sedalia,  Mo., 
where  he  is  in  the  employ  of  the  Missouri  Pacific 


Railroad  Company;  and  Esther,  the  wife  of  Frank 
Walts,  of  Du  Quoin. 

The  Lounsbuiy  family  originally  came  from 
Scotland,  where  they  were  well-to-do  people. 
Grandfather  Joshua  Lounsbury  was  born  and  reared 
in  Westchester  County,  N.  Y.  During  the  Revo- 
lutionary War,  he  rendered  valiant  service  to  his 
country  as  Colonel  of  his  regiment.  Our  subject 
is  also  descended  from  Revolutionary  stock  on  his 
mother's  side.  The  wife  of  our  subject  traces  her 
genealogy  back  to  Timothy  Stanley,  who  came 
from  England  with  the  Pilgrims  in  the  "May- 
flower." 

Our  subject  was  reared  on  his  father's  farm, 
where  he  remained  until  leaehiug  his  sixteenth 
year.  As  before  stated,  he  followed  the  river 
until  the  Civil  War,  when  he  located  on  his 
present  beautiful  estate  and  is  now  engaged  in  a 
general  farming  business.  He  manages  his  affairs 
in  such  a  way  as  to  bring  him  in  a  good  income 
and  thus  ranks  among  the  well-to-do  farmers  of 
this  locality.  Politically,  Captain  Lounsbury  is  a 
stanch  Democrat,  and  socially  is  an  Odd  Fellow. 
With  his  family  he  is  a  devoted  member  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church  and  is  highly  respected  in 
the  community  where  he  has  spent  so  many  j-ears. 


AMUEL  W.  DUNAWAY.  The  subject  of 
this  sketch  was  born  in  Williamson  Coun- 
I  ty,  111.,  August  2,  1841.  His  parents,  Sam- 
uel and  Julia  (Tarple})  Dunaway,  were 
natives  of  Virginia  and  of  English  descent.  At  an 
early  day  in  the  history  of  southern  Illinois,  the 
father  cast  his  fortune  among  the  residents  of 
Williamson  County,  and  there  he  met  and  married 
IMiss  Tarpley.  Thej'  had  a  large  family  of  chil- 
dren, seven  of  whom  are  now  living. 

Being  a  man  of  ceaseless  activity  and  good 
judgment,  Mr.  Dunawaj-,  Sr.,  amassed  a  comforta- 
ble fortune,  which  represented  the  result  of  his 
own  industry  and  efforts,  assisted  by  his  excellent 
Christian  wife.  He  was  not  penurious  with  his 
money,  but  generous  and  open-handed  to  a  fault, 
and  aided  every  worthy  project  that  would  en- 
hance the  prosperity   of  his  community.     He  was 


868 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


engaged  in  the  mercantile  and  real-estate  business, 
and  in  his  transactions  was  ever  reliable  and  hon- 
orable, so  that  he  won  and  retained  the  confidence 
of  his  fellow-citizens.  In  the  progress  and  ad- 
vancement of  the  county  he  was  an  important 
factor.  Their  first  railroad  was  perhaps  consid- 
ered their  mo.st  important  step  onward,  and  he 
was  President  of  that  road  for  many  years. 

.Samuel  W.  Dunaway  followed  in  his  father's 
footsteps  in  business.  Wliile  pursuing  his  voca- 
tion at  Marion,  Williamson  County,  in  1863,  he 
married  Jliss  Virginia,  daughter  of  Dr.  J.  P. 
Thorn,  a  Virginian  by  birth  and  a  successful  pb}-- 
sician.  Two  children  were  born  of  the  marriage, 
a  son  and  a  daughter.  Alw.i^y?  being  an  earnest 
advocate  of  education  and  higher  improvement, 
Mr.  Dunaway  located  in  Carbondalc  that  his  chil- 
dren might  have  the  advantages  of  the  .State  Nor- 
mal situated  here.  After  graduating  in  this  school 
he  sent  them  east  to  scliool  and  to  Europe. 

In  politics,  Mr.  Dunaway  is  an  enthusiastic  Dem- 
ocrat, though  not  a  partisan.  At  the  present  time 
(1894).  lie  holds  the  position  of  resident  Trustee 
of  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Southern  Illinois 
Normal.  An  active  business  man,  progressive  citi- 
zen and  pleasant  companion,  lie  finds  his  greatest 
pleasure  in  his  friends,  his  business  and  his  home. 


f-- 


ji  _  ON.  CHARLES  B.  COLE,  part  owner  of  the 
jirjjj  H.  C.  Cole  Milling  Companj-,  stands  among 
1^^  the  foremost  business  men  who  have  con- 
'^P  tributed  so  largely  to  the  financial  prosper- 
ity of  this  part  of  the  count}'.  "With  true  public 
spirit  and  characteristic  liberality  he  has  aided 
every  enterprise  that  would  in  any  wa^'  advance 
the  welfare  of  the  community,  promote  the  growth 
of  Chester  or  improve  its  conditions. 

A  native  of  Illinois,  our  subject  w.is  born  in 
Chester,  May  6,  1845,  and  is  the  son  of  Hermon 
C.  and  Emily  (Cocks)  Cole,  for  a  further  history 
of  whom  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  sketch  of 
Hermon  C.  Cole,  found  elsewhere  in  this  Record. 
Our  subject  received  his  early  education  in  the 
public  schools  of  this  city,  and  after  completing 


his  studies  here  entered  the  engineering  depart- 
ment of  Harvard  Universit}',  where  he  took  a 
thorough  course.  On  returning  to  this  city  he  en- 
tered his  father's  mill  and  h.as  continued  in  its 
operation  to  the  present  time.  His  father  dying 
in  1874,  he  and  his  brothers  Z.  T.  and  H.  C.  suc- 
ceeded to  the  business.  The  mill  is  supplied  with 
all  the  most  improved  machinery  and  turns  out 
flour  of  a  fine  quality. 

The  parental  family  included  four  sons,  of  whom 
Charles  B.,  of  this  sketch,  is  the  eldest.  The  others 
bear  the  respective  names  of  Zachary  T.,  Harry  C. 
and  Edward  E.,  the  first  two  of  whom  are  partners 
in  the  mill.  The  H.  C.  Cole  Milling  Company  is 
one  of  the  most  extensive  plants  of  its  kind  in  this 
part  of  the  state,  its  capacity  being  seven  hundred 
and  fifty  barrels  of  flour  per  day.  Its  large  ele- 
vators have  a  capacity  of  two  hundred  thousand 
bushels  of  grain,  which  is  bought  from  farmers  of 
this  section.  The  compau_v  turns  out  the  highest 
grades  of  winter  wheat  flour,  their  leading  brands 
being  "H.  C.  Cole's  Omega,"  "FFFG,"  '-Cole's 
Mill  Extra"  and  "Sancho  Panza."  The  products 
of  the  mill  find  their  waj-  to  various  portions  of 
the  country,  being  shipped  as  far  east  as  Boston 
and  as  far  south  .as  New  Orleans.  As  before  stated, 
the  mills  are  fitted  out  with  the  most  modern  ma- 
chinery, having  a  large  Corliss  engine  of  three 
hundi-ed  and  fifty  horse  power.  They  are  located 
on  the  line  of  the  Wabash,  Chester  &  Western 
Railit)ad,  which  they  find  very  convenient  for 
shipping.  In  1888  the  mills  were  incorporated 
under  the  name  of  the  H.  C.  Cole  Milling  Com- 
pany, having  been  established  in  1839. 

Charles  B.  Cole  has  been  a  conspicuous  figure  in 
public  and  political  life  of  the  town  and  count}-  for 
man  J'  years,  and  )^•!ls  elected  to  the  Legislature  on 
the  Democratic  ticket  in  1886.  As  a  memter  of 
various  important  committees  while  in  the  Lower 
House  he  was  instrumental  in  bringing  about  much 
needed  legislation  to  protect  and  advance  the  in- 
terests of  the  state  and  people.  He  was  a  menil)er 
of  the  Board  of  Education  of  Chester  for  twelve 
years.  He  was  appointed  receiver  of  the  Iron 
Mountain,  Chester  <fc  Eastern  Railroad  in  1876, 
and  since  1878  has  been  Vice-President  and  ilau- 
,   ager  of  the  Wabash,  Chester  &  Western  Railroad 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


869 


Compan}',  the  present  owners  of  the  former  road. 

May  12.  1869,  Mr.  Cole  married  Miss  Laura  A. 
Laj'man,  who  was  born  in  Tennessee  June  21, 
1847.  At  her  death,  which  occurred  July  11, 
1878,  she  left  three  daughters  and  one  son.  The 
lady  whom  our  subject  married  in  1882  was  Miss 
Mary  E.  Palmer,  of  New  Hampshire. 

No  man  has  done  more  for  the  upbuilding  of 
Chester  and  its  general  improvement  than  our  sub- 
ject, who  has  proved  a  valuable  acquisition  te  the 
citizenship  of  this  localitj-.  His  prompt  and  meth- 
odical business  habits,  good  financial  talent  and 
taet  in  the  management  of  affairs  have  brought 
him  before  the  public  at  various  times,  and  in  every 
position  he  h.is  promoted  the  interests  of  his  na- 
tive place  with  characteristic  abilitj".  He  is  Presi- 
dent of  the  Millers'  National  Association  and 
Vice-President  of  the  Millers'  National  Insurance 
Company,  which  was  organized  in  1876,  and  which 
is  one  of  the  most  solid  institutions  of  its  kind 
in  the  United  States. 


«^ 


^^ 


ARLAN  P.  PORTER,  who  resides  on  section 
21,  Vergeunes  Townshij),  Jackson  County, 
is  numbered  among  the  leading  farmers  of 
this  community,  and  owns  and  operates 
two  hundred  acres  of  valuable  land,  having  placed 
the  same  under  a  high  state  of  cultivation  and  im- 
proved it  with  all  tlie  accessories  and  convenience 
of  a  model  farm.  It  is  pleasantly  located  within 
a  half  mile  of  the  village  of  Vergennes  and  is  one 
of  the  valuable  and  desirable  farms  of  the  neigh- 
borhood. 

Its  well  known  owner  was  born  in  Vergennes 
Township,  October  30,  1849,  and  is  a  son  of  Ben- 
jamin E.  Porter,  who  was  born  in  Ohio  February 
11,  1826.  At  the  age  of  twenty'  he  came  to  Illi- 
nois and  settled  in  this  locality.  His  father,  Rus- 
sell Sumner  Porter,  afterwards  emigrated  to  Illi- 
nois. In  the  family  of  the  latter  were  seven  chil- 
dren, Eliphas,  Solomon,  John,  Lawrence,  Benja- 
min; Sarah  J.,  wife  of  ,Iohn  A.  McNerne}-,  and 
Phcebe,  wife  of  W.  Gray.  The  father  died  in  1873, 
at  the  age  of  sixty  years.  He  was  a  member  of 
the  Presbyterian  Church,  and  with  one  exception 
35 


all  of  his  children  held  membership  with  the  Meth- 
odist Church.  In  politics  he  was  a  Henr^-  Clay 
Whig  until  the  organization  of  the  Republican 
party.  He  cast  the  first  Republican  ballot  in  Jack- 
son County.  He  took  a  very  prominent  part  in 
church  and  benevolent  work.  In  1868,  he  re- 
moved to  Jasper  County,  Mo.,  where  he  spent 
three  j'ears,  and  then  returned  to  Illinois. 

Benjamin  F.  Porter,  father  of  our  subject,  was 
married  in  this  county  to  Elizabeth  Parish,  Sep- 
tember 14,  1848,  and  they  became  the  parents  of 
the  following  children:  Harlan,  of  this  sket(^li; 
Edward  and  Edwin,  twins,  born  November  5,  1855, 
and  died  in  infancy;  Henry  S.,  horn  January  21, 
1853;  Lucy  A.,  who  was  born  March  30,  1855,  and 
died  at  the  age  of  fourteen:  Lucretia  D.,  who  was 
born  August  1,  1857,  married  Walker  Sheets,  and 
died  fourteen  months  later;  Marj-  E..  born  March 
16,"  1860,  became  the  wife  of  Frank  Verbeck,  and 
had  two  children,  Henry  and  Eugene;  Martha  J., 
born  April  19, 1862;  and  Nellie,  born  September  18, 
1871.  She  is  now  the  wife  of  John  Murray.  Ben- 
jamin F.  Porter  and  three  of  his  brothers  enlisted 
in  the  Union  arm3',  but  as  it  was  necessary  for  one 
of  tliem  to  remain  at  home  and  provide  for  the 
four  families  they  drew  lots,  and  Benjamin  was 
the  one  who  remained. 

Harlan  P.  Porter  continued  upon  tiie  old  home 
farm  until  he  had  attained  his  majorit3'.  He  re- 
moved with  his  family  to  Missouri,  and  returned 
with  them  to  Jackson  Counly  in  September,  1870. 
On  the  17tli  of  November  following,  he  married 
Virginia  M.  Spencer,  and  their  union  has  been 
blessed  with  the  following  children:  Lucy  A., born 
December  30,  1874;  Clara  S.,  September  24.  1877; 
Benjamin  E.,  November  26,  1879;  Otto  H.,  Febru- 
ary 1,  1882;  Sterling  C,  February  29,  1884;  Leon- 
ard J.,  November  27,  1886;  Russell  H.,  January 
1,  1889;  Beulah  E.,  June  1,  1891;  and  Bert,  Jan- 
uary 7,  1894.  Mrs.  Porter  was  born  March  8, 
1854.  Her  father,  Edward  H.  Spencer,  of  Ver- 
gennes, came  from  southeastern  Missouri  to  this 
count}'  in  1861.  He  married  Frences  Trannel, 
and  their  children  were  as  follows:  Jackson;  Marj-, 
wife  of  John  Blacklock;  and  Eunice,  wife  of  Will- 
iam Brooks.  When  Mr.  Spencer  came  to  this  county 
he  purchased  the  old  Porter  farm,  and  made  it  his 


870 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


home  until  his  death,  November  25,  1865.  His 
widow  is  still  living  on  the  old  homestead  with 
her  son. 

For  four  years  after  his  marriage,  Mr.  Porter 
operated  rented  land,  and  then  purchased  forty 
acres  where  he  now  lives,  adding  to  it  until  he  be- 
came owner  of  his  present  fine  farm.  He  and  his 
wife  are  members  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  of 
Vergennes,  and  are  highly  respected  people.  He 
takes  an  active  part  in  local  politics,  votes  with 
the  Republican  party,  and  on  that  ticket  has  been 
elected  to  all  the  township  offices  except  that  of 
clerk.  He  has  not  been  out  of  ofHce  for  the  past 
twenty  years,  a  fact  which  indicates  his  fidelit}'  to 
duty  and  the  confidence  reposed  in  him  by  his  fel- 
low-townsmen. He  is  a  member  of  the  Masonic 
lodge  of  De  Soto  and  the  Odd  Fellows'  lodge 
of  Vergennes,  and  has  filled  various  offices  in 
these  organizations,  also  represented  them  in'the 
Grand  Lodge.  He  is  a  man  of  great  energy  and 
determination,  and  though  he  has  met  obstacles 
and  diHiculties,  he  has  overcome  these  by  deter- 
mined effort,  and  has  steadily  worked  his  way  up- 
ward to  success,  being  how  the  possessor  of  a  hand- 
some competence.  He  is  recognized  as  one  of  the 
prominent  citizens  of  the  community,  and  has  the 
high  regard  of  all. 


"^tfi  3K  '^^  I^  3!^  '^J^ 


i^^^^^^ 


Wj;ILLIAM  FO.STER,  one  of  the  honored 
pioneers  of  Randolph  County,  who  is  now 
engaged  in  farming  in  township  5,  range 
6,  where  he  owns  and  operates  two  hundred  and 
twenty  acres  of  good  land,  is  a  representative 
of  one  of  the  earliest  families  of  this  commu- 
nity. The  Fosters  are  of  Scotch  descent,  and  the 
family  was  represented  in  this  country  in  a  very 
early  day.  The  grandfather,  John  Foster,  was  a 
native  of  South  Carolina,  and  the  father,  Robert 
Foster,  was  born  February  13,  1785,  in  the  Abbey- 
ville  District  of  South  Carolina,  where  he  lived 
until  nineteen  years  of  age,  when, in  1804,  he  emi- 
grated to  Randolph  County,  111.,  settling  near 
Evansville.  He  there  made  his  home  until  his 
death,  which  occurred  February  12,  1831.  His 
remains  were  interred  in  the  Kelly  Cemetery.     By 


occupation  he  was  a  distiller.  In  politics  he  was 
a  Democrat,  and  in  his  social  relations  he  was  a 
Mason.  He  held  membership  with  the  United 
Presbyterian  Church,  contributed  liberally  to  its 
support,  and  took  an  active  part  in  church  work. 
His  wife,  who  bore  the  maiden  name  of  Susanna 
McClinton,  was  born  in  September,  1791.  Shewasa 
daughter  of  John  McClinton,  and  died  December 
6,  1829. 

The  marriage  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Foster  was  cele- 
brated in  1809,  and  they  became  the  parents  of 
eight  children:  Sam,  born  January  15,  1810;  John, 
September  25,  1811;  James  A.,  March  9,  1814; 
Periuclia,  in  June,  1816;  Elizabeth  J.,  in  October, 
1818;  William,  of  this  sketch,  October  4,  1820; 
David  A.,  January  13,  1822;  and  Nancy,  Febru- 
ary 9,  1826. 

Upon  the  old  homestead  "William  Foster  lived 
until  1829.  He  tlien  went  to  the  home  of  his 
uncle,  Sam  McClinton,  with  whom  he  remained 
for  nine  years.  On  the  expiration  of  that  period 
he  began  working  for  Dr.  Farman,  of  Sparta,  and 
afterward  was  emploj'ed  in  a  mill  for  a  ^-ear. 
At  the  expiration  of  that  time  he  went  to  Red 
Bud,  where  he  continued  for  eleven  years.  In 
1844  he  purchased  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres  of 
raw  land  at  $10  per  acre,  and  began  the  develop- 
ment of  a  farm.  He  made  it  a  valuable  and  de- 
sirable place,  and  continued  its  cultivation  for  a 
quarter  of  a  century,  when  he  removed  to  his  pres- 
ent farm,  comprising  two  hundred  and  twenty  acres 
of  highly  improved  land. 

Mr.  Foster  was  married  March  14,  1844,  to 
Amelia  Rolls,  a  native  of  Randolph  County  and  a 
daughter  of  Edward  and  Jennie  (Hill)  Rolls,  who 
were  born  in  South  Carolina.  The  family  origi- 
nally came  from  Ireland  and  settled  in  Virginia. 
To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Foster  were  born  four  children. 
Edward,  born  in  1844,  is  a  farmer;  he  married 
Nancy  Temple,  and  the}'  have  one  son,  Charles. 
John  R.,  born  October  17,  1846,  married  Maggie 
AValson.  James,  born  June  27,  1851,  and  Emily 
Jane  are  deceased. 

In  1862  Mr.  Foster  entered  the  Unitfn  service 
as  a  member  of  Company  I,  Twenty-second  Illi- 
nois Infantry.  After  a  time  he  was  discharged  on 
account  of  ill-health.  Later,  however,  he  re-enlistec^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD- 


871 


in  Company  C,  Eightieth  Illinois  Infantry,  but  was 
again  discharged.  After  the  battle  of  Ft.  Donel- 
son  he  served  as  nurse  to  the  wounded  soldiers  for 
fifteen  da3's.  Although  he  was  not  retained  in 
the  service,  he  manifested  his  lo.yalty  to  the  Gov- 
ernment and  the  Union.  Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Foster 
are  members  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church, 
and  he  served  as  Trustee  for  some  time.  In  pol- 
itics he  is  a  Republican,  and  is  a  member  of  the 
Good  Templars'  socictj^  and  the  Union  League. 
On  starting  out  in  life  for  himself  he  worked  for 
twenty-five  cents  per  day,  but  by  diligence  and 
good  management  he  won  success, and  became  the 
owner  of  three  hundred  and  seven  acres  of  gocd 
land.  A  part  of  this  he  has  since  disposed  of,  but 
he  still  owns  two  hundred  and  twenty  acres, 
which  yield  to  him  a  golden  tribute  in  return  for 
his  care  and  labor. 


\\,  OHN  HENRY  HOMRIGHAUSEN,  a  farmer 
of  Monroe  County,  living  on  section  31, 
township  3,  range  8  west,  is  a  son  of  Henry 
and  Sophia  (Scharch)  Ilomrighausen.  He 
was  born  on  the  old  family'  homestead  where  he 
now  lives,  March  26,  1 859,  was  reared  under  the 
parental  roof  and  soon  became  familiar  with  all 
the  details  of  farm  life.  The  public  schools  of  the 
neighborhood  afforded  him  his  educational  priv- 
ileges, which,  added  to  experience  and  observation 
in  later  years,  have  made  him  a  well  informed 
man. 

On  the  6th  of  August,  1885,  Mr.  Ilomrighausen 
was  married  to  Miss  Catherine  Ritter,  a  daughter 
of  Balthazar  Ritter.  Her  father  was  a  native  of 
Germany,  and  crossing  the  Atlantic  to  the  New 
World  he  came  to  the  west  and  cast  his  lot  among 
the  early  settlers  of  Randolph  County,  111.  He  is 
still  living  in  this  state,  his  home  being  now  in 
Mascoutah,  St.  Clair  County.  His  daughter,  wife 
of  our  subject,  was  born  in  Randolph  County  on 
the  5th  of  June,  1864,  and  there  spent  her  early 
girlhood  days.  She  afterwards  went  with  her  par- 
ents to  St.  Clair  Count}',  where  she  grew  to  woman- 
hood and  was  educated.  Three  children  have 
been    born   to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Homrighausen,  a  son 


and  two  daughters,  namely:  Alma  Anna  Sophia, 
who  was  born  August  9,  1886;  Henry  Balthazar, 
born  on  the  20th  of  .July,  1889;  and  Mary  Sophia 
Catherine,  born  December  2,  1891. 

After  his  marriage,  Mr.  Homrighausen  settled 
upon  the  farm  which  has  since  been  his  home.  He 
now  owns  one  liundred  and  sixty  acres  of  good 
land,  sixt}-  acres  being  on  section  31,  sixty  acres 
in  Randolph  County,  and  forty  acres  in  the  ad- 
joining township.  It  is  all  well  improved  and 
under  a  high  state  of  cultivation.  He  devotes  his 
time  principally  to  the  raising  of  grain,  and  the 
well  tilled  fields  give  evidence  of  abundant  har- 
vests. Many  of  the  improvements  upon  the  place 
stand  as  monuments  to  his  thrift  and  enterprise. 
He  has  erected  a  comfortable  residence,  built  a  new 
granary  and  also  a  barn.  The  place  is  complete  in 
all  its  appointments,  being  supplied  with  all  mod- 
ern accessories  and  conveniences.  It  is  one  of  the 
best  improved  places  in  the  township,  and  the 
owner  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  leading  agricult- 
urists. 

Our  subject  is  a  member  of  the  Evangelical 
Church,  and  in  his  political  views  is  a  Republican. 
While  he  keeps  himself  well  informed  on  the  is- 
sues of  the  day,  as  all  true  American  citizens 
should  do,  he  has  never  sought  or  desired  the  hon- 
ors or  emoluments  of  public  office,  preferring  to 
devote  his  entire  time  and  attention  to  his  busi- 
ness interests,  in  which  he  has  met  with  signal 
success.  He  has  lived  an  upright,  honorable  life, 
and  throughout  the  community  is  held  in  high  re- 
gard. 

i-HOMAS  RELMAN.  No  resident  of  .lack- 
son  County  is  better  or  more  favorably 
known  than  the  gentleman  above  named, 
who  has  here  spent  his  entire  life.  Though  scarcely 
3'et  in  the  prime  of  life  he  has  already  attained  a 
degree  of  success  not  often  rewarding  the  efforts  of 
men  whose  years  greatly  outnumber  his.  His  farm 
is  one  of  the  best  in  Levan  Township,  and  is  im- 
proved with  substantial  buildings  and  the  various 
accessories  of  a  model  farm. 

Elsewhere  in  this  volume  mention  is  made  of 
Andrew  Reiman,  an  honored  pioneer  of  Jackson 


872 


PORTRAIT  AND  EJOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


County  and  the  father  of  our  subject.  The  latter  | 
was  the  ninth  child  iu  the  famil}-  and  was  born  in 
Murphjsboro  Township,  this  county,  April  23, 
1858.  In  childhood  he  was  quite  delicate  and  was 
ill  mucli  of  the  lime,  thus  being  prevented  from 
attending  school.  However,  as  j-ears  passed  by 
his  health  became  more  vigorous,  and  by  reading 
and  observation  lie  was  enabled  to  compensate  for 
lack  of  earl3'  training. 

At  the  age  of  twentj'-four  years,  in  1882,  Mr. 
Reiman  was  united  iu  marriage  with  Miss  Addie, 
daughter  of  Henrj'  Boucher,  an  earlj-  settler  of 
Levan  Township.  Immediately  after  his  marriage 
he  settled  upon  the  farm  where  he  has  since  re- 
sided. The  place  was  then  partly  improved  but 
in  some  parts  not  a  furrow  had  been  turned. 
Since  it  came  into  liis  possession  it  has  been 
greatl_y  changed,  as  he  has  erected  good  build- 
ings, fences  and  ever3thiiig  needful  for  carrying 
on  farming  to  the  best  advantage.  The  estate 
consists  of  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres  and  is 
devoted  to  general  farming  and  stock-raising. 

Unto  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reiman  were  born  five  chil- 
dren: Louis,  deceased;  Ralph;  Leona  May;  Car- 
rie, who  died  at  the  age  of  three  years;  and  an 
infant  that  died  unnamed.  While  Mr.  Reiman 
has  devoted  his  attention  principally  to  farming, 
he  also  takes  a  commendable  interest  in  public  af- 
fairs and  is  an  enthusiastic  champion  of  the  Dem- 
ocratic party.  As  a  citizen  he  is  progressive,  and 
as  a  farmer  efficient,  and  his  position  is  among  the 
foremost  residents  of  Levan  Township. 


^  I^ILLIAM  H.  DAVIS.  This  venerable  citi- 
\rJ//  zen  of  Somerset  Township  has  been  inti- 
'J^^  mately  associated  with  the  development 
and  growth  of  .lackson  County  for  more  than 
fifty  }'eais,  and  during  this  long  period  has  wit- 
nessed the  wonderful  progress  of  its  material  re- 
sources, as  well  as  contributed  his  quota  to  its 
advancement.  Kow  in  the  twilight  of  his  declin- 
ing years,  he  lives  retired  from  the  business  activ- 
ities of  life's  prime,  and  surrounded  by  the  com- 


forts accumulated  through  ceaseless  toil,  passes  his 
tinie  pleasantly  at  his  homestead  on  section  15. 

A  native  of  Indiana,  our  subject  was  born  in 
Floyd  County,  December  23,  1816,  being  a  son  of 
Amos  and  Ruth  (Gallon)  Davis,  natives  of  Vir- 
ginia. The  paternal  grandfather,  W.  H.  Davis, 
was  born  in  Wales  and  was  a  sea  captain  for  many 
years.  Tiie  lady  whom  he  married  was  a  native 
of  the  West  Indies.  Our  subject's  uncle,  William 
Davis,  fought  at  the  battle  of  Tippecanoe,  under 
General  Harrison,  and  was  there  killed.  The  fam- 
ily has  always  been  prominent  in  public  aflfairs, 
and  has  been  distinguished  by  patriotism  and  de- 
votion to  countiy. 

The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  reared  in  Floyd 
C©unt3-,  Ind..  meantime  receiving  such  advantages 
as  were  afforded  b3-  the  pioneer  schools  of  the 
liome  locality.  At  the  age  of  about  nineteen 
years  he  was  apprenticed  to  learn  the  trade  of  a 
blacksmith  and  served  for  eighteen  months,  aft«r 
which  he  followed  the  trade  for  several  3-ears. 
Later,  commencing  farming  operations,  he  also 
conducted  a  blacksmith  shop  in  connection  there- 
with, his  ventures  in  these  two  lines  meeting  with 
unvar3ing  success. 

As  earl3'  as  Februaiy,  1836,  when  Jackson  Coun- 
t3'  was  still  undeveloped  and  its  vast  resources 
existed  only  in  the  imaginatioti  of  a  few  buo3"ant 
pioneers,  Mr.  Davis  came  hither  and  made  a  set- 
tlement in  Somerset  Township.  For  a  time  he 
rented  a  farm  now  owned  b3'  Daniel  Kimniel, 
which  he  cleared  and  improved,  and  upon  which 
he  engaged  as  a  tiller  of  the  soil.  Subsequently 
he  settled  on  section  36,  Vergennes  Township, 
where  he  continued  to  make  his  home  until  1848. 
He  then  returned  to  Somerset  Township  and  lo- 
cated on  section  23,  where  he  resided  for  man3' 
3'ears  improving  a  farm,  which  became  one  of  the 
best  in  the  community.  His  next  home  was  on 
section  10  of  Somerset  Township,  whence  in  1887 
he  came  to  his  present  place  of  residence  at  Grange 
Hall. 

November  26,  1840,  Mr.  Davis  was  united  in 
marriage  with  Miss  Elvira  Hall,  who  died  in  1848, 
after  having  become  the  mother  of  three  chil- 
dren, Amos  H.,  John  L.  and  Elvira  (deceased). 
On  the  2d  of  April,  1873,  Mr.  Davis  married  Miss^ 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


878 


Elizabeth,  daughter  of  William  and  Rachel  Crow, 
early  settlers  of  Jackson  Count}-,  111.,  where  she 
was  born.  Mrs.  Davis  is  an  estimable  lady,  who 
is  highly  esteemed  throughout  the  township,  and, 
together  with  her  husband,  enjoj's  the  confidence 
of  a  large  circle  of  friends.  As  an  agriculturist, 
Mr.  Davis  has  been  very  successful.  He  has  given 
his  sons  about  eight  hundred  and  forty  acres,  and 
still  lias  in  his  possession  one  hundred  and  ninety- 
two  acres. 

In  matters  political  William  H.  Davis  is  stanch 
in  his  adherence  to  the  principles  of  the  Re- 
publican party,  and  upon  that  ticket  was  chosen 
Supervisor  of  Somerset  Township,  in  which  capa- 
city he  served  with  efficiencj'  and  devotion  to  the 
interests  of  the  people.  Soeiallj',  he  is  identified 
with  Somerset  Grange  No.  1553,  in  which  he 
served  as  Master  for  two  years.  During  the  half- 
century  covered  by  the  period  of  his  residence 
here  he  has  witnessed  the  marvelous  transforma- 
tion of  the  county  from  the  abode  of  wild  ani- 
mals to  the  home  of  an  intelligent  and  cultured 
people,  and  in  the  attainment  of  this  result  he  has 
assisted. 

!(-=;  UGH  COOPER,  formerly  one  of  the  repre- 
sentative citizens  of  township  5,  range  4, 
Perry  Count}',  departed  this  life  in  August, 
g)  1889.  He  was  a  man  of  decided  abilit}' 
and  was  generally  conceded  to  rank  among  the 
first  agriculturists  of  his  district.  He  started  out 
in  life  a  poor  boy  and  succeeded  in  accumulating 
a  handsome  property  of  over  two  hundred  acres, 
which  he  distributed  among  his  children  prior  to 
his  decease. 

A  native  of  South  Carolina,  our  subject  was 
born  in  1819,  and  was  }'ouug  in  j'ears  when  he  ac- 
companied his  parents  on  their  emigration  to  Illi- 
nois, locating  with  them  in  the  western  part  of 
Perry  County.  The  father  of  our  subject,  Andrew 
Cooper,  was  likewise  a  native  of  South  Carolina, 
and  although  a  tj'pical  southern  gentleman,  ob- 
jected strongl}'  to  slaver}'.  He  and  his  wife,  who 
prior  to  her  marriage  bore  the  name  of  ^largaret 
McKelvey,  became  the  parents  of  the  following 
children:    John;  Margaret,  deceased,  formerly  the 


wife  of  Capt.  James  Cunningham;  Elizabeth,  who 
married  William  Munford,  of  Coulterville;  Nancy, 
who  became  the  wife  of  Samuel  Burns,  of  Sparta; 
Ebenezer,  a  minister  in  the  United  Presbyterian 
Church,  of  Kingman  County,  Kan.;  and  Andrew, 
who  died  while  serving  as  a  soldier  in  the  late  war. 

Hugh  Cooper,  of  this  sketch,  grew  to  manhood 
in  this  county,  where  he  received  a  common  school 
education.  When  ready  to  establish  a  home  of 
his  own  he  married,  in  November,  1841,  Miss  Eliza 
Desper,  and  to  them  have  been  born  six  children 
who  grew  to  mature  years,  namely:  Sarah  A.,  the 
wife  of  Daniel  Benson,  of  Randolph  County; 
Nancy  J.,  who  married  Jasper  Thomas,  of  Perry 
County;  John  R.,  a  Presbyterian  minister,  of 
Brush,  Colo.;  Mary  E.,  who  married  Samuel  Doug- 
las, and  makes  her  home  in  this  county;  and  Albert 
J.  Our  subject  was  one  of  the  most  enterprising 
citizens  of  his  community  and  was  alw.avs  identi- 
fied with  the  movements  which  would  be  beneficial 
to  the  county.  In  politics,  he  voted  with  the  Re- 
publican party.  The  United  Presbyterian  Church 
found  in  him  one  of  its  most  active  members. 

John  R.  Cooper,  the  eldest  son  of  our  subject, 
has  been  a  minister  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  for 
eight  years.  His  youngest  son,  Albert  J.,  has  al- 
ways lived  in  this  county  and  now  owns  one  hun- 
dred and  forty  acres  of  land,  which  he  has  placed 
under  the  best  methods  of  improvement.  Besides 
raising  the  cereals,  he  gives  special  attention  to 
stock-raising  and  has  many  registered  animals. 
The  wife  of  our  subject  is  still  living  (1894),  at  the 
age  of  seventy-two  years,  and  since  the  death  of 
her  husband  has  made  her  home  with  her  young- 
est son. 


'^-- 


=-f 


<S^DMUND  S.  LYBARGER,  who  for  many 
l^  years  has  successfully  engaged  in  farming 
11' — ^  in  Randolph  County,  has  the  honor  of  being 
a  native  of  Illinois,  for  he  was  born  in  Kaskaskia, 
September  26,  1826.  He  is  the  fifth  in  order  of 
birth  in  the  family  of  Samuel  and  Mary  (Taylor) 
Lybarger.  His  father's  family  came  from  Penn- 
sylvania. Edmund  lost  his  mother  when  he  was 
only  about  eight  years  of  age,  and   he  was  taken 


874 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


to  live  with  Mr.  A^an  Zant,  of  Chester,  who  cared 
for  him  until  he  had  attained  to  man's  estate. 
His  educational  privileges  were  quite  limited,  for 
during  his  j'outh  his  time  was  largely  taken  up 
with  farm  work. 

Attracted  by  the  diseover3-  of  gold  in  Cali- 
fornia, in  1850  Mr.  Lybarger  crossed  the  plains 
to  the  Pacific  Slope.  He  worked  in  the  mines  for 
nearly  four  yeai-s,  and  during  that  time  made 
considerable  monej',  returning  to  his  Illinois  home 
with  $5,000.  He  remained  here  through  the  win- 
ter, and  in  the  spring  of  1855  again  went  to  Cali- 
fornia, where  he  spent  the  two  succeeding  years 
of  his  life.  In  1857  we  once  more  find  him  in  Ran- 
dolph County,  and  since  that  time  he  has  contin- 
uously engaged  in  farming.  Purchasing  wild  land, 
he  at  once  began  its  development  and  transformed 
the  raw  prairie  into  rich  and  fertile  fields,  which 
yield  to  him  a  golden  tribute  in  return  for  the 
care  and  labor  he  bestows  upon  them.  He  has 
made  manj'  excellent  improvements  upon  his 
place,  and  in  fact  it  is  complete  in  all  its  ap- 
pointments, being  numbered  among  the  model 
farms  of  the  county-.  The  owner  is  now  well  ad- 
vanced in  years,  but  he  still  enjoys  good  health 
and  manages  his  own  propert}'. 

On  the  23d  of  December,  1855,  was  celebrated 
tlie  marriage  of  Mr.  Lybarger  and  Miss  Helen 
Richardson,  daughter  of  Robert  H.  and  Prudence 
(Tanner)  Ricliardson.  Her  father  came  with  his 
parents  from  South  Carolina  to  Chester,  111.,  at  a 
very  early  daj-.  The  Tanner  family  originally 
lived  in  Kentucky.  Unto  our  subject  and  his 
wife  were  born  nine  children,  viz.:  Mary;  Robert 
R.,  of  Arkansas;  Esther  B.,  wife  of  Dr.  Dinsbeer, 
of  St.  Louis;  Oscar  W.,  of  St.  Louis;  Commodore 
C,  who  died  in  1888,  at  tlie  age  of  twenty-one; 
Henr3',  who  aids  in  the  cultivation  of  the  home 
farm;  Lillian  P.,  wife  of  Joseph  Hickman,  a 
farmer  residing  near  Ellis  Grove;  Eleanor  and 
Helen  Maud,  who  are  still  under  the  parental  roof. 

In  politics,  Mr.  Lybarger  has  been  a  life-long 
Democrat  and  a  warm  advocate  of  the  principles 
of  the  party,  although  he  has  never  sought  or  de- 
sired the  honors  or  emoluments  of  public  office. 
He  belongs  to  the  Presbyterian  Church,  and  his 
wife  is  a  member  of    the   Baptist    Church.     They 


are  worthy  people,  whose  well  spent  lives  have 
won  them  many  friends  throughout  this  commu- 
nity. • 


II/_^ERMON  C.  ( 

rjl    of  energy  a 
M)^   blunder  int 


COLE.  Success  is  the  creature 
and  tact.  Men  maj'  sometimes 
ito  fame  or  fortune,  but  unless 
(^)  the}'  possess  sterling  qualities,  the  sequel  to 
their  lives  is  apt  to  prove  that  they  were  unwor- 
thily intrusted  with  great  advantages.  Opportuni- 
ties come  to  every  man,  but  only  a  few  seize  upon 
them  and  rise  with  them  to  success.  It  is  not  be- 
cause their  opportunities  are  greater,  but  that  thej- 
possess  the  qualities  which  in  all  ages  have  been 
recognized  as  masters  of  success,  and  by  which 
they  are  enabled  to  take  advantage  of  that 

"Tide  in  the  affairs  of  men 
Which,  taken  at  the  flood,  leads  on  to  fortune; 
Neglected,  all  the  voyage  of  their  lives 
Is  bound  in  shallows  and  in  miseries." 

These  truths,  which  have  been  happily  expressed 
in  the  saying  that  "every  man  is  the  architect  of 
his  own  fortune,"  are  perhaps  nowhere  more  de- 
cidedlj-  manifest  than  in  the  business  activity  of 
new  countries.  It  is  there  that  energ}-,  enterprise 
and  administrative  ability  come  to  the  front.  The 
field  lies  open  to  every  one  alike,  and  the  highest 
success  is  reached  by  the  man  of  greatest  energies 
and  strongest  purpose.  Such  a  man  was  the  late 
Hermon  Camp  Cole.  As  a  business  man  he  was 
known  prominently,  not  only  throughout  southern 
Illinois,  but  elsewhere;  and  while  by  his  enterprise 
he  built  up  an  extensive  business  and  acquired  an 
ample  fortune,  he  at  the  same  time  developed  the 
resources  of  a  large  section  of  country,  and  was  of 
material  aid  in  promoting  the  interests  of  Ran- 
dolph County. 

The  family  with  which  Mr.  Cole  was  connected 
was  of  English  and  Welsh  descent,  and  its  Brst 
members  came  to  America  early  in  the  history  of 
the  Colonies.  For  several  generations  they  lived 
in  New  York  State,  and  in  Dutchess  County-,  that 
state,  Nathan  Cole,  our  subject's  father,  was  born 
March  7,  1783.  His  second  wife,  the  mother  of 
Hermon  C,  was  Sarah  Scott.  She  was  born  in 
Ridgefield,  Conn.,  in  1790,  and  at  the  age  of  four 


PORTRAIT  AND  BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


875 


years  was  taken  by  her  parents  to  Orange  Count}-, 
whence  in  1801  they  moved  to  Seneca  County. 
Nathan  Cole  and  Sarah  Scott  were  married  in 
1807,  and  became  the  parents  of  seven  sons,  some 
of  whom  became  prominent  in  business  and  poli- 
tics. 

In  1821  Nathan  Cole,  accompanied  b}-  his  fam- 
ily, removed  to  St.  Louis,  and  there  engaged  in 
business,  being  the  first  regular  pork-packer  in  the 
Mississippi  Valley.  lie  died  in  Chester  in  1840. 
Hermon  C,  the  third  of  his  sons,  was  born  in  Ovid, 
Seneca  County,  N.  Y.,  Maj'  9,  1813,  and  was  eight 
years  old  when  the  familj'  took  up  its  residence  in 
St.  Louis.  His  education  was  commenced  in  that 
city,  and  was  finished  in  Shurtleff  College,  at  Alton 
At  the  age  of  twenty,  without  capital,  he  began  in 
business  as  a  merchant  in  East  St.  Louis.  In  1837 
the  family  came  to  Chester,  where  the  father  erected 
the  first  flouring  mill  of  the  town,  while  H.  C. 
opened  a  store  and  engaged  in  merchandising. 
Aboutt  1840  he  became  interested  in  the  mill  as  a 
partner  of  Abner  Cole,  and  such  was  his  energy 
and  activit}',  that  within  a  few  j'ears  the  brands  of 
the  establishment  gained  the  highest  reputation 
throughout  the  west.  For  a  time  he  was  sole  pro- 
prietor of  the  mill,  but  later  took  into  partnership 
his  two  sons,  Charles  B.  and  Zachary  T.,  and  ex- 
tended his  business  by  opening  the  banking  house 
of  H.  C.  Cole  &  Co.  In  1867  he  disposed  of  his 
mercantile  business  to  William  Schuchert. 

In  June  of  1844,  ]\Ir.  Cole  married  Miss  Emily 
Cocks,  of  Stamford,  Conn.,  who  died  in  October, 
1859.  In  February  of  1862,  he  married  Mrs.  Sarah 
J.  Flannigan.  His  children,  six  by  the  first  wife, 
and  five  by  the  second,  were  named  as  follows: 
Charles  B.,  Zachary  T.,  Alice  E.,  Henry  C,  Eunice 
E.,  Edward  E.;  and  Cora  V., Grace,  Hermon,  New- 
ell and  Nathan.  Mr.  Cole  died  at  his  residence  in 
Upper  Alton,  111.,  October  20,  1874.  The  business 
of  the  firm  is  now  carried  on  by  the  sons,  Charles 
B.  (of  whom  mention  is  made  on  another  page), 
Zachary  T.  and  Henrj'  C.  A  general  banking  busi- 
ness has  been  carried  on  since  1872,  and  in  1875  a 
commodious  bank  was  opened  on  the  hill  in  Ches- 
ter, where  this  branch  of  the  business  is  now  car- 
ried on. 

The  part  Mr.  Cole  performed  in  promoting  the 


agricultural  interests  of  southern  Illinois  was  most 
important.  He  was  mainlj'  instrumental  in  de- 
veloping the  growing  capacity  of  a  section  that 
now  produces  the  finest  quality  of  wheat  raised  in 
the  United  States.  Few  men  in  Randolph  Coun- 
ty have  acquired  a  reputation  so  extended.  His 
name  was  a  synonym  for  all  that  was  honest  and 
sincere,  and  with  an  unstinted  hand  he  aided 
every  work  of  charity  and  religion.  Of  slight  but 
handsome  phjsique,  his  face  spoke  most  eloquently 
the  warmth  of  a  true  heart,  and  his  ej'e  sparkled 
with  kindness.  He  was  loved,  honored  and  trusted 
by  all  who  knew  him,  and  his  calm  and  peaceful 
death  was  cheered  with  the  hope  of  the  humble 
and  child-like  Christian. 

l(§),      ^^^kh.... -@J 

(^    "^^¥"  ^ 

^Wf  LBERT  JUDD  BLAKESLEE  is  President 
(@/lJ  of  the  Blakeslee  Manufacturing  Company, 
j  li  and  therefore  at  the  head  of  one  of  the 
^fl  leading  industries  of  Du  Quoin.  The 
prosperity  and  growth  of  this  place  are  due  to  the 
thrift  and  enterjirise  of  such  men  as  our  subject, 
and  it  is  with  pleasure  that  we  present  this  sketch 
to  our  readers.  He  was  born  in  Perryville,  Madi- 
son County,  N.  Y.,  March  1,  1824,  and  is  a  son  of 
Eli  Blakeslee,  who  was  born  at  Paris  Hill,  Oneida 
County,  N.  Y.,  ten  miles  from  Utica,  April  6,  1796. 
He  drew  lots  with  his  brother  as  musician  for  the 
War  pf  1812.  His  death  occurred  in  Du  Quoin  in 
1866.  His  father,  Eli  Blakeslee,  Sr.,  was  a  native 
of  Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  his  wife's  maiden  name 
was  Lettice  Curtis,  of  the  noted  Curtis  family. 
They  had  six  sons  and  six  daughters,  all  of  whom 
attained  mature  years,  married  and  reared  chil- 
dren. 

The  Blakeslee  family  was  founded  in  America 
by  two  brothers  who  came  to  this  country  before 
the  Revolutionary  War.  One  was  a  Tory  and  the 
other  joined  the  Continental  army.  After  the 
Colonies  had  achieved  their  independence  the 
former  went  to  Nova  Scotia,  where  his  descendants 
are  probably  living.  The  latter,  who  was  a  soldier 
under  Washington,  was  the  progenitor  of  the  fara- 


876 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL   RECORD. 


ily  in  America.  The  Blakeslees  are  natural  me- 
chanics and  many  of  them  have  followed  the  ma- 
chinist's trade. 

In  1845  Eli  Blakeslee,  Jr..  left  New  York  with 
his  family  and  took  up  his  i-esidence  in  Woodford 
County,  111.,  whore  he  and  his  sons  carried  on  a 
machine  shop  until  1858,  when  the}'  removed  to 
UUin,  in  the  southern  part  of  the  state.  There 
they  lost  $25,000  m  a  business  venture,  and  in 
1860  came  to  Du  Quoin  without  any  money.  The 
father  and  sons  started  a  small  factor}',  which  was 
the  foundation  of  the  now  extensive  Blakeslee 
Manufacturing  Company.  In  the  famil}-  were  four 
brothers.  The  eldest,  Lyman  Curtis,  was  interested 
with  him  in  founding  the  business,  but  later  went 
to  Penns^'lvania,  where  he  was  engaged  in  the  oil 
business.  His  death  there  occurred  in  1875.  Jul- 
ius Clark,  another  brother,  died  while  they  were 
in  business  in  Metamora.  ILilidon,  the  third 
brother,  was  interested  in  the  business  at  this 
place  until  his  death,  in  1878.  There  were  also 
three  sisters  in  the  family:  Frances  Marion,  who 
died  in  infancy,  in  1834;  Nancy  L.,  who  died  at 
the  age  of  twelve  }'ears,  in  1850;  and  Frances 
Maria,  the  wife  of  P.  K.  Root,  a  banker,  of  Little 
Rock,  Ark.,  who  served  as  a  soldier  in  the  Civil 
War. 

The  mother  of  this  family  bore  tiie  maiden 
name  of  Emily  Judd  and  was  born  in  New  York, 
November  21,  1799,  being  the  second  child  of 
Daniel  Clark  and  Debby  (Hatch)  Judd,  who  were 
married  September  9,  1796.  Her  father  was  a  son 
of  Daniel  Judd,  of  Colchester,  Mass.  The  Judds 
were  one  of  the  most  prominent  families  both  in' 
this  country  and  in  England.  They  trace  their 
ancestry  in  that  country  back  to  1300.  Thomas 
Judd  came  to  America  from  England  about  1634, 
and  settled  in  Cambridge,  Mass.  In  1836  he  re- 
moved to  Hartford,  Conn.,  and  it  is  not  improba- 
ble that  he  was  one  of  the  company  of  one  hun- 
dred men,  women  and  children  who  departed  from 
Cambridge  on  the  last  da}'  of  May  of  that  year. 
He  afterward  went  to  Northampton,  Mass.,  and 
his  death  occurred  either  in  that  place  or  in 
Springfield,  November  12,  1688,  at  the  age  of 
eighty  years.  He  was  a  very  prominent  man  in 
church.     The  mother  of  Mr.  Blakeslee  was  of  the 


seventh  generation  of  the  descendants  of  Thomas 
Judd. 

Debbie  Hatch,  the  maternal  grandmother,  was  a 
relative  of  Rufus  Hatcli,  and  others  of  that  family 
who  have  become  famous  in  the  financial  world 
of  New  York.  She  died  June  19,  1816.  Mrs.  Eli 
Blakeslee  was  one  of  several  children,  the  members 
of  the  family  being  Eunice,  Minerva,  Chester, 
Warren  and  Walter  (twins),  Daniel,  Nancy,  Amelia, 
David,  Mary,  Mehitable,  Clark  and  Harvey.  The 
Judds  were  members  of  the  Presbyterian  Church, 
and  the  Blakeslees  held  the  religious  faith  of  the 
Episcopalians.    Mrs.  Blakeslee  died  April  11,1869. 

Albert  J.  Blakeslee  was  given  the  advantages  of 
an  academic  education,  and  early  in  life  learned 
the  machinist's  trade  in  his  father's  shop.  At  that 
time  his  father  was  one  of  the  wealthy  men  of  the 
county,  but  subsequently  he  lost  much  of  his 
property,  and  when  they  came  west  it  was  to  make 
a  new  start  in  life.  They  accumulated  quite  a 
handsome  competence,  but  this  was  again  lost  at 
the  breaking  out  of  the  late  war,  and  they  had  to 
once  more  begin  anew  on  removing  to  Du  Quoin. 
The  family  has  been  noted  for  generations  for 
their  thrift  and  enterprise,  and  these  character- 
istics are  largely  possessed  by  our  subject. 

In  1851  was  celebrated  the  marriage  of  A.  J. 
Blakeslee  and  Sarah  J.  Wafer,  a  native  of  Putnam 
County,  111.,  and  a  daughter  of  Thomas  Wafer,  a 
native  of  South  Carolina  and  a  pioneer  of  Putnam 
County.  He  served  in  the  Black  Hawk  War.  In 
the  family  were  several  sons  and  daughters,  and 
one  of  the  number,  Edward  Clarkson,  was  a  sol- 
dier in  the  late  war.  Mrs.  Blakeslee  died  in  1883. 
In  their  family  were  five  children.  Eda  Elizabeth, 
wife  of  J.  C.  Sturgeon,  a  prominent  attorney  of 
Erie,  Pa.,  died  February  14,  1882,  leaving  two 
children,  Ralph  and  Berry.  Ella  Minerva  is  the 
wife  of  H.  P.  Scott,  an  attorney  of  Kansas  City, 
Mo.,  and  they  have  seven  children.  Eli  Thomas, 
who  was  educated  in  the  State  University  of 
Champaign,  married  Eva  Ward,  of  Du  Quoin, 
and  has  three  children.  Ward  Judd,  Hazel  and 
Helen ;  he  is  the  Secretary  and  Treasurer  of  the 
Blakeslee  Manufacturing  Company.  Clarence  Eu- 
gene, who  is  also  connected  with  .that  company, 
married  Miss  Lulu  A.,  daughter  of  Dr.  W.  T.  Mac- 


PORTRAIT   AND   BIOGRAPHICAL  RECORD. 


877 


lin.of  Dii  Quoin.  Albert  Harley  is  also  a  member 
of  the  firm.  'J'lie  second  wife  of  our  subject  bore 
the  maiden  name  of  Ursula  Woods  and  was  born 
in  Chautauqua  County,  N.  Y.  She  is  a  lady  of 
amiable  disposition  and  noble  character. 

Mr.  Blakeslee  has  been  identified  with  the  Epis- 
copal Church,  and  has  lived  a  most  exemplary 
Christian   life.     His   honorable,  upright  career  is 


well  worthy  of  emulation.  Socially,  he  is  a  Royal 
Arch  Mason.  He  has  one  of  the  finest  homes  in 
the  city,  and  with  him  resides  liis  son  Albert  Hur- 
ley. Tiiough  he  has  met  reverses  and  misfortune 
in  his  business  career  he  has  overcome  these  by 
strong  determination  and  has  steadily  worked  his 
way  upward  to  a  position  among  the  wealthiest 
citizens  of  the  county. 


f{  TT-ygnTrirEa 


"^ 


JRI0GI^fIE>F7l(gfIlL 


Adams,  Alfred 303 

Adams,  H.  W 840 

Adams,  John 2a 

Adams,  J.  P 8S3 

Adams,  John  Q 39 

Adams,  L.  L 709 

Albou,  G.N 785 

Alden.Roy fi:» 

Alexander,  James .^50 

Allen, J. R 268 

Allen,  Hon.  W.  J 227 

Allison,  G.B 221 

Allyn,  Rev.  Robert,  LL.  D.  ..828 

Altgeld,J.  P 187 

Andrews,  Hon.  G.  W 851 

Anghouse,  George S52 

Armbruester.  H.  G.,  M.  D....534 

Arnin.J.M 324 

Arthur,  Chester  A  9S 

Aszmann,  Max,  M.  D 450 

Austin,  Henry 556 


Baer,  John :»2 

Baker,  J.  D 254 

Baker,  T.  E 444 

Baltzell,  J.  S 222 

Bannister,  Jesse .312 

Barber,  Alexander 668 

Barber,  Ezekiel 332 

Barber,  J.  C,  M.  D 629 

Barnard,  William 831 

Barnes,  L.  E 439 

Barr,  Hon.  W.  W 422 

Barton,  J.  H aM 

Bates,  VV.  M 251 

Bean,T.  L 606 

Beare,  Christian 335 

Beare,  I.  C a46 

Beare,  J.  U 213 

Beare,  Joseph 866 

Beattie,  J.  B 300 

Beck,  Lewis 707 


Beckley,  Eli 370 

Beecher,  Capt.  A 204 

Beem,  J.  T 562 

Begemann,  Fritz 355 

Beggs,  Robert 712 

Beisner,  Henry 565 

Benson,  Dr.  V.  S 842 

Berger,  Emil 705 

Beveridge,  John  L 171 

Bicket,  Alexander 479 

Bilderback,  G.  H 355 

Bilderback,  Harvey 612 

Bis.sell,  William  H 151 

Blair.J.K 270 

Blakeslee,  A.  J 875 

BlakesIee.G.  F 643 

Blanchard.  Alvah  499 

Bodeker,  CD 834 

Bodeker,  Hon.  G.  H.  C 579 

Boedeker,  C.  H 321 

Bollinger,  George 415 

Bollinger,  Henry 324 

Boud,  Shadrach Ill 

Booth,  D.  S.,  M.D 379 

Borders,  W.  R 214 

Bost,  A.  H 466 

Bost,  W.  A 490 

Boucher,  Judge  Henry 732 

Bourchier,  John 312 

Bouscher,  Samuel 462 

Boyd,  D.  B 269 

Boyd,  Hon.  John 634 

Boyd,  Robert 260 

Boynton,  S.  R.,  M.  D 292 

Brands,  A.  L.,  M.  D 519 

Bratney,  J.  B 304 

Bridgeman,  J.  W 721 

Brinkman,  F.  W 60B 

Brinkman,  Sigmund 805 

Brocklesby ,  Thomas 514 

Brookings.  Hon.  W.  B 655 

Brown ,  Abram 794 

Brown ,  Charles 671 

Brown,  F.W 859 

Brown,  H.  C 668 

Brown,  John 786 

Brown,  Robert 218 

Brown ,  \Vi  I  liam 403 

Browuing.J.  M ...692 

Bryan,  Prof.  J.  M 664 

Buatte,  VV.  B 773 

Buchanan, James 75 


Buettner,  Ferdinand 754 

Buettner,  Henry 426 

Buettner,  Henry 365 

Bunselraeyer,  H.  H 863 

Burch,  J.  G 813 

Burch,  W.R 757 

Burge,  J.  J 224 

Burnett,  Andrew 261 

Burns,  T.  H 314 

Buscher,  Henry 4.56 


Caldwell,  J.  W 342 

Campbell,  G.  H 290 

Campbell,  W.  H 261 

Carlile,  WiUiam 777 

Carlin,  Thomas 135 

Carr,  M.  C,  M.  D 631 

Case,  F.  W 614 

Chadwick,  Capt.  T.  G 479 

Chambers,  W.  E 695 

Chaplin,  James 510 

Chapman,  E.  F.  A 676 

Chapman,  W.  A 629 

Cheatham,  Noah 645 

Chew,  A.  B 239 

Childs,  C.  J.,  M.  D 309 

Clark,  G.  W 574 

Clarke,  H.  W 774 

Clarke,  J.  C 593 

Cleary,  John 741 

Cleveland,  S.  Grover 103 

Clore,  B.  F 363 

Clore,  Harrison 456 

Clyde,  Andrew 807 

Cobbum.K.  R 764 

Coffer,  G.  T 738 

Cole,  Hon.  C.  B 868 

Cole,  H.  C 359 

Cole,  H.  C 874 

Coles,  Edward 116 

Collier,  W.  W •.  .217 

Conant,  J.  H 747 

Cooper,  Hugh 873 

Corey,  G.B 326 

Cover,  E.  W 707 

Cox,  G.  W.,  M.  D 603 

Craig,  Robert 50t 


Craig,  W.  J 470 

Crain,  F.W 532 

Crandle,  Mrs.  N.  E  824 

Crawford,  Bryce 257 

Crawford,  Edward 642 

Crawford,  H.  M 704 

Crawford,  Joseph 734 

Crisler,  A.  E 509 

Crisler.  Alexander 373 

Crisler,  J.  M .' 375 

Crowe,  James 500 

Cullom,  Shelby  M 175 

Curless,  J.  M 856 


Dagle,  Jean 514 

Daniel,  Bernard '.iSS 

Dauer,  John 263 

Davis,  D.  L .591 

Davis,  E.  A..  M.  D 621 

Davis,  Elias 698 

Davis,  Judge  A.  C 736 

Davis,  W.  C,  Jr 404 

Davis,  W.  H 872 

Dawson,  Daniel 443 

Dean,  G.  0 708 

Dean,  Murray 6.52 

Dean,  O.  A.,  M.  D 212 

Dean,  Hon.  W.  C 601 

Decker,  Hermann 589 

Dehner,  Conrad 257 

Delano,  J.  H 620 

Derousse,J.  F 830 

DeSpain,  J.  H 482 

Dettmering,  J.  H.  D 797 

Devine,  John 696 

Devine,  ITiomas 232 

Dilday,  Williamson 858 

Dinges,  H.  A.,  M.  D 294 

Doty.D.  M 372 

Douglas,  Andrew 323 

Douglas,  Hon.  J.  J 360 

Douglas,  J.  C 505 

Douglas,  R.  S 510 

Doza,  William 770 

Doza,  W.  H 770 

Dreves,  H.  F 210 


880 


INDEX. 


Driemeyer,  A.  A 

Druse,  Harrison 

Dudenbostel,  August 
Dudeobostel,  Louis. . 

Dunaway.  S.  W 

Duncan,  Joseph 

Dunu,D.  W.,  M.  D... 
Dyer,  Lewis,  M.  D. . . 


Eade,J.  C 

Easdale,  Hugb 

Eaton, S.  B 

Ebbrecht,  H.  E 

Eckeple,  Rev.  James. . 
Edmiston,  William... 

Edwards,  Ninian 

Edwards,  Capt.  M.  C. . 

Eisenmayer,  P.  H 

Ellis.  I.  W.,  M.  D 

Emerson,  ME 

Emery,  Robert 

Entsmin^er,  J.  E 

Ernest,  F.  B 

BIssick,  W.  W.,  M.  D. . 

Etherton,  A.J 

Everest,  Prof.  H.  W. . 
Ewing,  W.  L.  D 


Faherty,  H.  F 753 

Fallon,  F.  T 675 

Farner,  Noah 521 

Fiene,  Henry 4&1 

Fifer,  J.  W 183 

Fillmore,  Millard B7 

Firth,  J.  W 23.1 

Fleming.  John 576 

Floyd,  J.  A.  C 344 

Ford,  Thomas 139 

Foster,  D.  A 322 

Foster,  William 870 

Fountain,  W.  H 231 

Fox.H.  H 2.i3 

French,  A.  C 143 

French.G.  H.,  A.  M 523 

Frew,  P.  N .WS 

Frick,  William,  Sr 228 

Fridrichs,  W.  C 716 

Fritze,  A.  E.,M.  D 511 

Frizzell,  J.  H 610 

Fulllord,  John 3S1 


Gans.  Prof.  J.H. 
Qant,  A.O 


Gant,  Robert 442 

Garfield,  James  A 95 

Garner,  Andrew 220 

Garrett,  A.  B 76.') 

Gendron,  L.  C. 76» 

Gendron,  Luke 685 

Gerlach.  J.  D 441 

Geumalley,  Hon.  Charles 725 

Gilbert,  Ira 691 

Gill,  Hon.  J.  B 237 

Gilleuberg,  Heury 788 

Glister,  L.  H 713 

Goalby,  William 742 

Goddard,  R.  J 820 

Gollon,  Francis 219 

Goosens,  Rev.  Henry 821 

Gordon,  A.  G 405 

Gordon,  W.  A.,  M.  D 595 

Gorzny,  George 431 

Graff,  J.  A 836 

Graff,  Jacob .....566 

Grab,  Ferdinand 683 

Grab,  Hermann 4:M 

Grant,  Ulysses  S 87 

Gray,  Wiley 252 

Greeu,  T.  J 745 

Gregson,  Louis 302 

Griffith,  P.  W .560 

Grizzell,  C.  C,  M.  D 810 

Groppe,  Henry 206 

Gross,  B.  J.  L 222 

Grott,  John &14 

Guebert,  O.  F 293 

Guker,  Frederick 313 

Guthrie,  H.  R.,  M.  D 278 


Hack,  Christopher a34 

Hagedorn,  John 305 

Hahn.H.  W 476 

Hahn,  J.  A 336 

Haines,  W.  A 611 

Hall,  W.  B 840 

Hamilton,  A.  P 514 

Hamilton,  J.  B 259 

Hamilton,  J.  M 179 

Hamni,  Frank 843 

Hammack,  Judge  Lewis 584 

Hammel,  Nicholas 280 

Hammer.  Louis 785 

Hanson,  E.  M 502 

Hanson,  H.  H 586 

Hardy,  Campbell 565 

Hardy.  Isaac 555 

Harmon,  B.P 779 

Harmsen ,  Frederick 524 

Harral,  W.  J.,  M.  D 229 

Harris,  Francis 414 

Harris,  Samuel 778 

Harris,  W.  D 686 

Harrison,  Benjamin 107 

Harrison,  William  Henry 51 

Harriss,  Jordan 603 

Harriss,  Rev.  J.  C 569 

Harry,  L.  C 526 


Harvey,  J.  H 626 

Havill,  Orra 561 

Hajes,  Ed 702 

Hayes,  Rutherford  B 91 

Hays,  J.  D 724 

Heberer,  John 305 

Heck,  Melart 839 

Heidger,  John 787 

Heinbokel,  John 847 

Heinecke,  H.  J 646 

Heitkamp,  C.  L 405 

Heitraan ,  Lou  is .504 

Helber,  J.J 279 

Henry,  John 818 

Henson ,  John 714 

Herbert.  J.  M.,  A.  M 572 

Hesse,  Charles 551 

Higgins,  Hon.  J.J 816 

Hill,  Hon.  G.  W 599 

Hindman,  B.  W 376 

Hitzsmann,  Henry 2W 

Holbrook,  Maj  J.  C 250 

Holeomb,  Prof.  S.  G 681 

Holloman,E.J 830 

Holt,  J.  M 682 

Homrighausen.  George 310 

Homrighausen,  J.  H 871 

Hood,  A  lexander 544 

Horn,  Henr.v 6.54 

Horschmann,  Casper 281 

Houston,  Robert 3.35 

Hoy,  J.  G 291 

Hrabik,  F.  J 331 

Hubbard,  W.  H 362 

Huch,  Henry 817 

Huch,  William 444 

Hudson,  D.  L 545 

Hughes,  Felix 853 

Hull,  W.  H 590 

Hunter,  E.  B 804 

Huntsinger,  H.P.,M.  D 662 

Huthmacher,  C.  C 665 

Huthmacher,  George 6.53 


Imhoir,  Henry 789 

Ingram,  W.T.,M.  D 767 

Irose,  Paul 364 

Ismert,  Joseph 656 


Jackson,  Andrew 43 

Jackson,  William 625 

Jaeuke,  J.  H 219 

James,  W.  A.,  M.  D 684 

Jany,  Stephen .552 

Jefferson.  Thomas 27 

Jenkel,  FriU 229 

Jenkins,  Jeffei-son 601 

Jobb.G.  J 374 


Johnson,  Andrew. 

Johnson,  W.  F 

Jones,  G.  S 

Joplin,  D.C 


Ealmer,  Mathes 402 

Kane,  J.  R 632 

Keiner.G.  K 756 

Keller,  Jacob,  M.  D 383 

Kellermann,  John 712 

Kelly,  N.W 208 

Kennedy,  George,  Jr 788 

Kennedy,  George,  Sr .583 

Keown,  Rev.  ile.xander 485 

Kern,  Valentine 366 

Kerr,  E.  C.  &  Brothers 692 

Kessel ,  Frederick 205 

Kimball,  W.  W 489 

Kimmel,  J.  Q.  A 542 

Kimmel,  Philip,  Sr 734 

Kimmel,  W.  D 775 

King,  J.  J 609 

Kirk.S.S 752 

Klein,  Daniel 425 

Klinkhardt,  Joseph 29D 

Klocke,  Rev.  Charles 844 

Koch,  A.  H 272 

Koch,  Frederick,  Sr 359 

Ej-ueger,  Henry 800 

Kuehle,  F.  A.  C 623 

Kuehn,Otto,  M.  D 753 

Kuhrtz,  F.  W 702 

Kunz,  J.  M 829 


Langsdorf,  Anton 233 

lawder,  James 790 

Lawder,  William 790 

Leavitt,  G.  W . .  205 

Lee,  A.  M.,  M.  D 703 

Lehnherr,  Isaac 211 

Lemen,  Le\vis 353 

Lemen,  William 776 

LePere,  Fred 658 

Lewis,  J.  W 559 

Lickiss,  Thomas 370 

Lickiss,  John 346 

Liddy ,  Timothy 311 

Liebe,  Rev.  C.  F &52 

Limacher,  Rev.  Paul 509 

Lincoln.  Abraham 79 

Lindenberg,  H.  C 861 

Lindsay,  Joseph 282 

Lochhead,  Alexander 333 

Logan,  Cien.  J .  A 203 

Logan,  Hon.T.  M 648 

Lohrberg,  W.  E 306 

Lonergan.J.B 329 

Lounsbury,  Capt.  J.  C 867 


INDEX. 


881 


LucbsiDger,  Henry. 

Lucier,  J.  L 

Lybarger,  E.  S 


M 


MacKenzie,  VV.  R.,  M.  D. . 

Maclin,  W.  T.,  M.  D 

Madison,  James 

Mae3's,  Jacob 

Maeys,  William 

Maloiie,  W.P 

Mann.C.  A.,M.D 

Mann,  Capt.  J.  A 

Mann,  K.  H 

Mansker,  H.  C 

Mansker,  N.  C 

Marlow,  A.  S 

Marlow,  Basdal 

Marshall,  Johnson 

Marshall,  S.  W  ,M.D 

Martin,  J.  H 

Matlack,  W.  H 

Matney,  Frank 

Matteson,  Joel  A 

McAtee,  f.  R 

McBride,  Capt.  J.  T 

McClinton,  John 

McClurken,  J.  P 

McConachie,  David 

McConachie,  David 

McConkey ,  Robert 

McCormick,  W.  C 

McCoy,  David 

McDonald,  L.O 

McElhiney,  Charles 

McElvain,K.  J 

McGuire,  E.  B 

Mclntyre,  Thomas 

McKelvey,S.  W 

McLau^^hlin,  Andrew 

3IcLaughlin,  James 

McLaughlin,  W.P 

JIcMenomy,  John,  M.  D. . 
McNeil,  Capt.  William.. . , 

McNerney ,  J.  A 

McQuillan,  J.  B 

McQuillan,  John 

Mehr^r,  Frank 

Meineke,  Fritz 

3Ielly ,  Jacob 

Meredith,  Isaac 

IMergele,  Lawrence 

Middendorf,  H.  F 

Miller,  C.  R 

Miller,  J.  J 

Miller,  John 

Milligan,  W.  A 

Minner,  L.  A 

Minton,  A.  B  

Moffat,  Thomas 

Monroe,  James 

Montgomery,  Isaac 

Moore,  E.  W 

Moore,  Francis . . . . 

Moreland,  J.  H 


Morris,  Isaac 

Morrison,  Hon.  John. ... 

Morrison ,  Samuel 

Morrison.  Hon.  W.  R 

MouUc,  William 

Mudd,  John 

Mudd,T.  L 

Mueller,  Rev.  J.  A.  F.  W. 

Murphy,  H.  O 

Murphy,  John 

Murphy,  L.  S 

Murphysboro  Public 

Schools ,, 

Musselman,  Edward 


Nash,  Stephen 

Nausley ,  Austin 

Neal,  A.  M 

Neill,E.R 

Nettleton,  F.  V 

Neuliaus,  H.  W.  F 

Neville,  George 

Neville,  Capt.  Harvey. 

Nicholls,  H.  W 

Niehaus,  Gottfried 

Nisbet,  J.  Q.  A 

Nixon,  M.  G.,  M.  D 


Oglesby,  Richard  J 163 

Ohlwine,  David 424 

Orland,B.  A B45 

Osterloh,  J.  H .530 

Overstreet,  Hugh 7i>5 

Ozburn,  J.  L 728 


Palmer,  John  M 167 

Palmier,  Eusade 274 

Pape,  Gustavus 783 

Park,  James 624 

Parkinson,  D.  B.,  A.  M 472 

Parrish,  B.  M 549 

Parrott,  Frederick 319 

Parrott,  G.  W 473 

Pate,  Anthony .554 

Pate,  Mrs.  S.J 717 

Patton,  Joseph ?M 

Pelzer,  L.  W 636 

Pen  warden,  Thomas 613 

Peterson,  Clans 515 

Pfelter,  J.  A 411 

Picon, T.E 758 

Pierce,  Franklin 71 


Pillers,  J.  M 341 

Pinkerton,  I.  R 515 

Plater,  C.  W 716 

Polk,  James  K 59 

Pope,  Hon.  B.  W  596 

Pope,  P.  N 615 

Porter,  H.  P 869 

Porter,  L.  A 832 

Postal,  Capt.  W.  C 445 

Preston,  J.  R 271 


Rahn,  Peter 513 

Rathert,  F.  A 512 

Rausch,  J.  F 647 

Reid,  Hon.  William 655 

Reiman,  Andrew 849 

Reiman,  Edwin 795 

Reiman,  John 799 

Reiman,  Josiah 794 

Reiman ,  Thomas 871 

Rendell,  E.  C 779 

Reubelt,  A.  O.,  A.  M 838 

Reynolds,  John 123 

Reynolds,  J.  H 862 

Rhodes,  O.  H.,M.  D 833 

Rice,  Hon.T.  J 520 

Richardson,  George,  M.  D.  ..561 

Rickenberg,  Dietrich 824 

Rickert,  J.  W 735 

Rieckenberg,  F.  W 492 

Riess,G.  L 484 

Ritchey,  E.  H 254 

Ritchie,J.C 301 

Roberts,  Hon.  A.  H 419 

Roberts,  W.  S 808 

Robertson,  Robert 463 

Robertson,  Thomas,  M.  D.  ...797 

Robinson,  Hon.  T.  T 460 

Rodrique,  Louis 76S 

Roe,C.  H 863 

Romann,  John 854 

Rosborough,  William 451 

Ross,  Hon.  M.  A 605 

Rosson,  J.  B.,M.  D 616 

Rowold,  E.  C 495 

Rucknagel.  William 516 

Kury ,  William 695 

Rushing,  R.J 727 

Russell,  Adam 445 


Sasse,  H.  C 8ft'j 

Sauer,  Nicholas 798 

Saupert,  Rev.  T.  A 693 

Saxenmeyer,  George 316 

Schauerte,  Rev.  K 4-25 

Schein,  David 372 

Scheltgen,  John 483 


Schieferatein,  Anton 361 

Schifferdecker,  Francis 391 

Schlotmann,  Rev.  J.  B 277 

Schneider,  Daniel 421 

Schneider,  Rev.  Joseph 674 

Schneider,  Valentine 533 

Schrader,E.  E 432 

Schrieber,  Charles 482 

Schrieber,  Frederick 496 

Schrieber,F.  W 510 

Schroeder,  J.  M .330 

Schuchert,  William 277 

Schulze,  Henry 310 

Schulze,  H.  R 657 

Schuwerk,  W.  M 283 

Schwartz,  Edward 519 

Schwartz,  SamueL 522 

Schwartz,  William 843 

Seely ,  W.  J. ,  M.  D 512 

Sellew.R.H 751 

Seymour,  G.  D 429 

Shaner,  L.  M 594 

Shea,  Michael 4.?6 

Short,  A.  A 74B 

Silvey.A.  R.,M.  D 666 

Singer,  Joseph 726 

Smith,  C.  C 860 

Smith,  J.  A 410 

Smith, J.D 363 

Smith,  W.  H 780 

Snider, M.J 491 

Sparta  Plam  Dealer 435 

Spence,  J.  C 473 

Spence,  William 756 

Sprigg,  R.  E 541 

Springer,  J.  S.  &  J.  E 827 

Stahlberg,  CD 4.53 

Staley ,  G.  W 688 

Stallmann,  Christian 530 

St.  Augustine's  Roman 

Catholic  Church 444 

Steele,  John 299 

Stelnle.  Joseph 234 

Stephenson,  T.  B 273 

Stewart,  T.  R 470 

Stoehr,  John 439 

Stoelzle,  John 580 

Stout,  N.  W 592 

.Streicher,  Amand 393 

Stumpf,  Fritz :fil 

Stumpf ,  Michael 573 

Sundmacher,  C.  H 777 

Swortzcope,  Judge  M.  F 866 

Sympson,  J.  G 731 


Taggart,  T.  W 799 

Talbott,  W.  E 651 

Taylor,  Hon.  J.  F 339 

Taylor,  Zachary 03 

Tegtmeyer,  George 826 

Temple, J. M 384 

The  City  National  Bank 524 

Thielen,  William 480 

Thiemann,  Charles 748 


882 


INDEX. 


Thies,  J.  H 453 

Thomas,  Judge  D.  B 619 

Thomas,  T.  B 864 

Thompson,  J.  C 409 

Thompson,  J.  H 743 

Thompson, R.P 738 

Thompson,  S.  R 416 

Thornton,  C.  M.,  M.  D S46 

Thorp,  Capt.  J.  B 449 

Thorp,  Joshua 539 

Tindall,  J.  M 395 

Todd,  James 633 

Toennies,  Father  Gerhard... 371 

Toler,J.  W 413 

Toler,  W.  E R)3 

Townsend,  J.  T 431 

TrelTtzs,  Lewis 551 

Trefftzs,  W.  F 5>; 

Tudor,  John 207 

Tudor,  Thomas S07 

Tyler,  John .t5 

Tyler,  Joshua 406 


Van  Buren,  Martin  47 

Van  Meter,H.  M 747 


Varnum,  B.  B 701 

Vesper,  Charles 376 

Voges,  Conrad 280 

Vogt,  Louis 461 

Voss,  Henry 284 


w 


Wagner,  J.  A 494 

Walker,  A.  P 244 

VValiier,  Capl.  Simeon 531 

Walker,  W.  J 469 

Wall,  Hon.  G.  W 674 

Waller,  Mrs.  M.  A 744 

Ward,  F.  M.,  M.  D 849 

Ward,  J.  H 249 

Ward,S.  W 582 

W^amock,  Lafayette 401 

Washington,  George 19 

Watson,  E.  W 715 

Wehrheim,  George 486 

Webrheim,  Louis 422 

Wehrheim,  Valentine 533 

Weinberg,  Charles 7!M 


Weinel,  A.  F 4.33 

Weir,  J.  W.,  M.  D 553 

Welge,  Conrad 742 

Welge,  Henry 8;!5 

Welge,  Julius 325 

Wells,  Col.  E.  A 6«7 

VVelsch,  J.  J 450 

Welsch,  Nicholas 209 

Werner,  J.  A .,. .  .63.i 

Werre,  W.C 823 

Wheatley,  R.  W.  S 667 

Wheeler,  CM 433 

Whitehouse,  Joseph 711 

Wiebusch.G.  F 861 

Wiebusch,  H.  F 287 

Wiedeman,  Charles 571 

Wilde,  A.  W.  F 850 

Wiley,  Col.  B.  L 356 

Wilhelms,  August .386 

Wilkinson,  T.J aw 

Will,  B.  F 845 

Will.G.  G 536 

Williams,  J.  M 389 

Wilson,  Alexander 288 

Wilson,  A.  L 475 

Wilson,  D.  J 696 

Wilson,  Hugh.  Sr 396 

Wilson,  J.  H 267 

Wilson,  M.  H 722 


Wilson,  W.  M 381 

Wilson,  W.  S 670 

Winthrop,  H.  R 575 

Welter,  Con  rad 809 

Wood,  John 155 

Wood,  W.  A 310 

Woodside,  J.  J 120 

Worthen,  Edward 446 

Wright,  J.  M 486 

Wright, J.M 3.<« 


Yates,  Richard 159 

Youngblood ,  Hon .  F.  M 4  52 

Younger,  F.  O .t63 


Zang,  Jacob 836 

Ziebold,  Gottlieb 430 

Ziebold,  G.  W 526 

Zuber,  H 825 


'i^m- 


Adams,  John 22 

Adams,  John  Q 38 

Allen,  Hon.  W.J 226 

Altgeld,John  P 186 

Arthur,  Chester  A 99 

Barber,  J.  C,  M.  D 628 

Beveridge,  John  L 170 

Bissell.  William  H 150 

Blanchard,  Alvah 498 

Bodeker,  Hon.  G.  H.  C 678 

Bond ,  Shadrach 1 10 

Booth,  D.S.,  M.  D 378 

Brands.  A.  L.,  M.  D 518 

Buchanan,  James H 

Carlin,  Thomas 1.14 

Cbadwick,  Capt.  T.  G 478 

Childs,  C.  J.,  M.  D 308 

Cleary,  John 740 

Cleveland,  S.  Grover 102 

Coles,  Edward 114 

Crawford,  Bryce 256 

Cullom,  Shelby  M 174 

Dudenbostel,  August 458 


Duncan,  Joseph 130 

Edwards,  Ninian 118 

Essick,  W.  W.,  M.  D 3.98 

Ewing,  W.  L.  D 126 

Fifer,  Joseph  W 182 

Fillmore,  Millard 66 

Ford,  Thomas 138 

French,  A.  C 142 

Frew,  P.  N 528 

Garfield,  James  A 94 

Gilbert,  Ira 690 

Gill, Hon.  J.B 236 

Grant,  U.S 86 

Hamilton.  John  M 178 

Harrison,  Benjamm 106 

Harrison,  W.  H 50 

Harriss,  Rev.  J.  C 568 

Hayes,  Rutherford  B 90 

Hill,  Hon.  G.  W 598 

Holcomb,  S.  G 680 

Jackson,  Andrew 42 

Jefferson,  Thomas 26 

Johnson,  Andrew 82 


Kimball,  W.  W 488 

Koch,  Frederick,  Sr 3.58 

Klocke,  Rev.  Charles 720 

Lewis,  J.  W 558 

Limacher,  Rev.  Paul 508 

Logan,  Gen.  J.  A 202 

Lincoln .  Abraham 78 

MacKenzie,  W.  E.,  M.  D 246 

Madison,  James 30 

Matteson,  Joel  A 146 

McCormick,  Mrs.  M.  E 639 

McCormick,  W.  C 638 

McCoy,  David 782 

McCoy,  Mrs.  M.  M 762 

McQuillan,  John 348 

Minton.A.B 660 

Monroe,  James 34 

Oglesby .  Richard  J 162 

Palmer.Jobn  M 166 

Pape,  Gustavus 782 

Parrott,  Frederick 318 

Pierce,  Franklin 70 

Polk,  J.  K 58 


Reynolds,  John 122 

Roberts,  Hon.  A.  H 418 

Schuchert,  William 276 

Steele,  John 296 

Steele,  Mrs.  Jane 297 

Stoehr,  John 438 

Sympson,  J.  G 730 

Talbott,  W.  E 650 

Taylor,  Hon.  J.  F 338 

Taylor,  Zachary 62 

Thomas,  Judge  D.  B 618 

Thompson,  J.  C 408 

Thorp,  Capt.  J .  B 448 

Thorp,  Joshua 538 

Tyler,  John ;  64 

Van  Buren,  Martin 46 

Varnum,  B.  B 700 

Washington,  George 18 

Whitehouse,  Joseph 710 

Wiebusch,  H.  F 286 

Wilson,  J.  H 266 

Wood,  John 1.54 

Yates,  Richard 168 


=++++++++^ 


"V^IE-W^S. 


Barber,  Alexander 669 

Bean,T.  L 607 

Bost,  A.  H 467 

Brinkman,r.  W 607 

Brinkman,  Sigmund 607 

Brown,  Charles 669 

Brown,  H.C 669 

Buatte,  W.  B 771 


Buettner,  Henry. ..." 427 

Burch,  J.  G 811 

Clyde,  Andrew 749 

Corey,  G.  B 327 

Doza,  William 771 

Doza,  W.  H 771 

Eaton,  S.  B 547 

Grizzell,  C.  C,  M.  D 811 


Hanson,  H.  H 587 

Henry,  John 547 

Hunter,  E.  B .587 

Kern,  Valentine 367 

Krueger,  Henry 801 

Lawder,  James 791 

Lawder,  William 791 

Matney,  Frank 387 


Neville,  Capt.  Harvey 327 

Nicholls,  H.  W 801 

Seymour,  G.  D 427 

Thiemann ,  Charles 749 

Walker,  W.  J 467 

Wilhelms,  August 387 

Williams,  J.  M 3«7 


■mmmmm 


