UNIVERSITY 
OF  PITTSBURGH 


'78-1 

LIBRARY 


ft/.^.    -^^^^^^^^^^-^ — 


l^kocie.  Jela-vii  C^Uv^y) 

RECORDS 


COLONY  OF  RHODE  ISLAND 


P  R  0  V I D  E  N  C  E    P  L  A  I  T  A  T  1  0  N  S 


NEW    ENGLAND. 


fEINTED  BY  ORDER  OF  THE  GENERAL  ASSEMBLY. 

EDITED    BY 

JOHN  RUSSELL  BARTLETT, 

SECRETARY  OF  STATE. 

VOL.  VII. 


1770  TO  1776. 


PRO  VIDEN  CE: 

A.    CRAWFORD    GREENE,    STATE    PRINTER. 

1862. 


V.  7 


? 


PREFACE 


The  present  volume  includes  but  seven  years  of  the  Colonial 
Records.  It  begins  with  the  year  1770  and  ends  with  the  ses- 
sion of  September,  1776.  So  voluminous  are  the  proceedings 
of  the  General  Assembly  of  the  latter  year  (that  of  the  Declara- 
tion of  Independence),  that  it  was  found  impossible  to  include 
them  all  in  this  volume,  without  increasing  its  size  much  beyond 
that  of  the  previous  volumes. 

The  events  which  took  place  in  the  colony  immediately  pre- 
ceding the  Declaration  of  Independence,  are  of  deep  interest, 
and  are  given  at  length  in  the  volume,  accompanied  by  the 
letters  and  documents  connected  therewith.  The  most  impor- 
tant of  these,  is  the  destruction  of  His  Britannic  Majesty's 
schooner  Gaspee,  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  in  Narragansett  Bay, 
on  the  night  of  the  9th  of  June,  1772.  The  history  of  this  in- 
teresting event,  accompanied  by  the  correspondence  which 
grew  out  of  it,  the  action  of  the  General  Assembly  thereon,  and 
the  of&cial  journal  of  the  proceedings  of  the  commission  of  in- 
s^quiry,  appointed  by  King  George  the  Third,  upon  the  same, 
are  given  at  length.  The  documentary  portion  of  this  history, 
is  more  complete  than  any  before  published.  For  several  of 
these,  the  Secretary  is  indebted  to  the  kindness   of  the  Hon. 


IV.  PREFACE. 

George  Bancroft,  who  furnished  him  copies  from  those  in  his 
possession,  which  are  transcripts  from  the  originals  in  Her 
Majesty's  State  Paper  office,  in  London.  These  copies,  to- 
gether with  the  original  documents  referred  to,  are  bound  to- 
gether among  the  public  archives  in  the  Secretary  of  State's 
oflQce,  Providence.  j^  ^    j^ 

Providence,  January,  1862. 


RHODE  ISLAND  RECORDS. 


RHODE   ISLAND   RECOUDS. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kings- 
town, on  the  last  Monday  in  February,  1770. 

The  lion.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 


ASSISTANTS. 


Mr.  Peleg  Thurston, 
Mr.  Job  Bennett, 
Mr.  Solomon  Drown, 
Mr.  David  Harris, 
Mr.  Weston  Hix, 


Mr.  Thomas  Wickes, 
Mr.  Jonathan  Randall, 
Mr.  John  Congdon, 
Mr.  Joseph  Hazard, 
Mr.  William  Richmond,  Jr. 


DEPUTIES. 


Newport. 
Mr.  Nicholas  Easton, 
Mr.  John  Wanton, 
Mr.  George  Hazard, 
Capt.  Samuel  Carr, 
Capt.  William  Read, 
Mr.  Thomas  Freebody. 


Providence. 
Mr.  Daniel  Jenckes, 
Mr.  Moses  Brown, 
Mr.  Benoni  Pearce, 
Mr.  Job  Smith. 


RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND 


[1770. 


Portsmouth. 
Mr.  Metcalfe  Bowler, 
Mr,  Benjamin  Hall, 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Lawton, 
Mr.  John  Almy. 

Warwick. 
Mr.  Philip  Greene, 
Col.  James  Arnold, 
Mr.  Stephen  Arnold, 
Mr.  Thomas  Rice. 
Westerly. 
Capt.  Edward  Saunders, 
Mr.  Joseph  Clarke,  Jr. 

New  Shoreham. 
Mr.  Paul  Niles. 

North  Kingstown. 
Mr.  Ezekiel  Gardner, 
Mr.  John  Northup. 

South  Kingstoivn. 
Mr.  William  Potter, 
Mr.  Stephen  Hazard. 
East  Greenvnch. 
Maj.  Preserved  Pierce, 
Mr.  William  Pierce. 

Jamestown. 
Mr.  Oliver  Haszard, 
Capt.  William  Haszard. 

Smithfield. 
Mr.  Caleb  Aldrich, 
Mr.  Daniel  Mowrey,  Jr. 

Scituate, 
Mr.  Job  Randall, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Slack. 


DEPUTIES. 

Glocester. 
Mr.  Thomas  Owen, 
Maj.  Rufus  Smith. 
Charlestoiun. 
Mr.  Gideon  Hoxie, 
Mr.  Job  Taylor. 

West  Greenwich- 
Mr.  Benjamin  Tillinghast, 
Mr.  Isaac  Johnston. 

Coventry. 
Mr.  Stephen  Potter, 
Mr.  John  Rice. 
•  Exeter. 

Mr.  Daniel  Barber, 
Mr.  Daniel  Sunderlin. 
Middletown. 
,   Mr.  John  Barker, 
Mr.  Thomas  Coggeshall. 

Bristol. 
Col.  Simeon  Potter, 
Mr.  William  Bradford. 

Tiverton. 
Mr.  Samuel  Durfee, 
Mr.  WiUiam  Cooke. 
Little  Compton. 
Mr.  Thomas  Church, 
Mr.  Nathaniel  Searle,  Jr. 

Warreii. 
Mr.  Cromel  Child, 
Maj.  Samuel  Allen. 
Cumberland. 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Whipple, 
Mr.  David  Brown. 


1770.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


DEPUTIES. 

Richmond.  Johnston. 

Mr.  Edward  Perry,  Mr.  Henry  Harris, 

Mr.  Joshua  Clarke.  Mr.  Abraham  Belknap. 

Cranston.  North  Providence. 

Mr.  Gideon  Comstock,  Mr.  Thomas  Olney, 

Capt.  Richard  Searle.  Mr.  Job  Olney. 

Hopkinton. 
Mr.  Thomas  Wells,  Jr., 
Mr.  Abel  Tanner. 

The  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  speaker;  Mr.  Wm.  Ellery,  clerk. 
Mr.  Henry  Ward,  secretary. 
Mr.  Oliver  Arnold,  attorney  general. 
Mr.  Joseph  Clarke,  general  treasurer. 

James  Helme,  Esq.,  chief  justice  of  the  superior  court  of 
judicature,  court  of  assize  and  general  jail  delivery. 

SHERIFFS    OF    THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

Newport  county — Mr.  Walter  Chaloner.  Providence  county 
— Mr.  Paul  Tew.  Kings  county — Mr.  Beriah  Brown.  Bris- 
tol county— Mr.  Richard  Smith.  Kent  county — Mr.  Henry 
Rice. 

FIELD    OFFICERS    OF    THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

Newport  county — Benjamin  Sherburne,  Esq.,  colonel;  Wm. 
Cooke,  Esq.,  of  Portsmouth,  lieutenant  colonel;  Isaac  Dayton, 
Esq.,  major. 

Providence  county — Knight  Dexter,  Esq. ,  colonel  ;  Abra- 
ham Winsor,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel;  Chad  Brown,  Esq., 
major. 

Kings  county — John  Crandall,  Esq.,  colonel  ;  Moses  Bar- 
ber, Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  ;  Sylvester  Gardner,  Esq., 
major. 


6  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1770. 

Bristol  county — Simeon  Potter,  Esq.,  colonel  ;  Samuel 
Allen,  2d,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   John  Waldron,  Esq.,  major. 

Kent  county — John  Waterman,  Esq.,  colonel ;  James  Ar- 
nold, son  of  Elisha,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  ;  William  Matte- 
son,  Esq.,  major. 

Whereas,     Messrs.    John   Jenckes,    Moses    Brown,    John 
Brown,  David  Harris,  William   Smith,  John  Updike,  Knight 
Dexter,   Ebenezer   Thompson,  Joseph    Lawrence,   Zephaniah 
Andrews,  Elijah   Bacon,  Noah  Mason,  John  Smith,  Jonathan 
Ellis,  Jonathan  Hamman,  Thomas   Greene  and  James  Lovett, 
in  behalf  of  themselves  and  their  associates,  preferred  a  peti- 
tion, and  represented  unto   this  Assembly,  that  from  a  regard 
to  the  instruction    of  youth,  in  the  most  necessary  parts  of 
learning,  they,  with  the  town  of  Providence,  have  caused  to  be 
built  within  the  said  town,  a  commodious  brick  school  house,  two 
stories  high  ;   the  upper  part  of  which,  containing  two  rooms, 
belongs  to  them  and  their  associates  ;   that,  for  the  better  car- 
rying their  design  in  building  the  said  rooms  into  execution, 
they  have   formed  themselves   into  a    society,   known   by  the 
name    of  the    Proprietors  in  the    Town   School  House  ;   and 
thereupon,  for  the  well  ordering  and  governing  the  said  school, 
in  the  upper  part  of  said  house,  and  for  the  better  establishing 
the  rules  and  orders  already  made  ;   and  also  all  future  regu- 
lations respecting  the  same,  they  pray  this  Assembly  to  grant 
and   extend  to   the  said  society,  their  heirs  and  assigns,  a  full 
and  ample  power,  at  all  times  hereafter,  to  order,  ordain  and 
enact  all  such  rules  and  regulations,  as  may  from  time  to  time, 
appear  to  them  necessary  for  the  well  ordering  all  prudential  af- 
fairs of  the  said  society;   and  that  all  rules,  acts,  orders  and  reg- 
ulations so  made,  as  may  (not  repugnant  or  disagreeable  to  the 
1  iws  of  this  colony,  or  the  acts  and  orders  of  the  said  town  of 
Providence),  be,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  valid  and  binding 
upon  the  said  society,  and  each  individual  thereof;   on  consider- 
ation whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 


1770.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  7 

thority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  prayer  of  the  petitioners, 
in  the  foregoing  petition  contained,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby, 
granted. 

At  the  special  request  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of 
Providence,  made  by  their  representatives, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  said 
town  of  Providence,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  permitted  and 
authorized  to  sell  all  kinds  of  spirituous  liquors,  in  any  quanti- 
ties not  less  than  one  quart ;  provided,  that  the  same  be  not 
drank  in  the  house  of  the  retailer  ;  any  law  of  this  colony  to 
the  contrary,  in  any  wise,  notwithstanding. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  petition  preferred  to  this 
Assembly,  praying  that  all  that  part  of  the  town  of  Provi- 
dence, lying  westward  of  Weybosset  Bridge,  and  the  harbor  or 
bay,  may  be  set  off  and  incorporated  into  a  new  township,  be 
referred  to  the  next  session  ;  and  that,  in  the  mean  time,  the 
town  of  Providence  be  cited  to  appear  and  show  cause  (if  any 
they  have),  why  the  same  should  not  be  granted. 

Whereas,  Mr.  John  Greene  and  others,  preferred  a  petition, 
and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  Nathaniel  Greene  and 
Company,  John  Greene  and  Company,  Griffin  Greene  and  Chris- 
topher Greene,  have  been  at  a  very  great  expense  in  erecting  and 
building  dams,  forges,  anchor  works  and  saw  mills  upon  the  south 
branch  of  Pawtuxet  river,  in  providing  a  very  considerable  stock, 
and  employing  a  great  number  of  hands,  to  prosecute  the 
business  ;  the  emolument  arising  from  which,  is  the  principal 
support  of  themselves  and  their  dependants,  amounting  to  up- 
wards of  one  hundred  in  number  ;  that  there  is  a  law  of  this 
colony,  directing  that  suitable  fish-ways  be  made  and  kept 
open  on  the  said  south  branch  of  said  river,  from  the  21st 
of  April  to  the  1st  of  June,  annually  ;  that  if  the  said  law  be 
carried  into  execution,  it  wall  render  it  almost  impossible  for 
them  to  pursue  their  business  ;  that  the  number  of  fish  coming 
up  to  those  dams,  is  so  small  and  contemptible,  that  the  bene- 
fit arising  from  them,  is  by  no  means  to  be  compared  with  the 
great  advantages  derived  to  the  public  from  their  works  ;   and 


8  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1770. 

thereupon,  they  prayed  this  Assembly,  that  the  dams  above 
enumerated,  standing  on  the  said  south  branch  of  Pawtuxet 
river,  may  be  established  by  act  of  government,  and  totally  ex- 
empted from  preparing  and  providing  fish-ways,  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  dams  on  the  north  branch  of  the  same  river  are 
now  established,  and  exempted  from  preparing  and  providing 
fish- ways  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  prayer  of  the  petition- 
ers, in  the  foregoing  petition  contained,  be,  and  the  same  is 
hereby,  granted. 

Whereas,  Moses  Brown,  presented  the  following  memorial 
unto  this  Assembly,  to  wit : 

Memorial  of  Moses  Brown,  relative  to  the  Northern  Boundary 
Line  of  Rhode  Island. 

To  the  Honorable  the  General  Assembly  : 

Gentlemen  : — Agreeably  to  the  vote  of  this  Assembly,  at  their  last  session,  I  re- 
ceived and  have  taken  copies  of  the  plats  and  papers  respecting  the  northern  boun- 
dary line  of  this  colony  ;  by  which  papers,  it  appears  that  the  colony  had  made  ap- 
plication in  conjunction  with  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  to  Mr.  Partridge,  then 
agent  for  both  colonies,  to  pursue  the  settlement  of  the  said  line  ;  and  it  appears 
that  this  colony,  in  the  month  of  April,  1753,  formed  a  petition  to  His  Majesty,  upon 
this  subject ;  whether  it  was  forwarded  or  not,  or  what  further  was  done,  does  not  ap- 
pear by  the  papers  I  have  yet  been  able  to  collect ;  but  am  informed  by  one  of  the 
commissioners,  who  conferred  with  the  commissioners  of  the  colony  of  Connecticut, 
upon  this  matter,  in  April,  1752,  that  the  two  colonies  agreed  to  prosecute  the  case 
jointly  ;  and  as  this  government  had  expended  a  considerable  sum  in  running  the 
line,procuring  evidence,  and  fitting  the  case  to  go  home,  Connecticut  was  to  pur- 
sue it  at  home  until  they  had  laid  out  the  same  sum  that  we  had  ;  after  which,  the  ex- 
pense for  any  more,  should  be  necessary,  was  to  be  paid  by  both  governments 
equally. 

This  being  the  case,  and  it  appearing  clear  to  me,  that  the  colony  had  a  just  right 
to  a  strip  of  four  miles  and  fifty-six  rods ;  the  width  of  the  colony  being  about 
twenty-two  miles,  I  propose  and  desire  this  Assembly  to  appoint  some  proper  per- 
son or  persons  to  make  application  to  the  Governor  or  secretary  of  the  colony  of 
Connecticut,  and  procure  information  how  the  case  was  left ;  and  if  they  are  unable 
to  inform  us,  to  write  to  the  agent  of  this  colony,  who,  about  the  time  this  matter 
was  in  agitation  in  England,  lived  with  Mr.  Partridge,  and  without  doubt,  hath  the 
papers  respecting  this  matter,  that  belong  to  the  colony,  and  request  him  to  exam- 
ine the  papers,  and   inform  us  of  the   circumstances  this   affair  was  under  at  the 


1770.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  9 

commenccmeut  of  llio  late  war  ;  which  I  suppose  was  the  occasion  of  its  uot  being 
determiued. 

As  Joseph  Harrison,  Esq.,  one  of  this  colony's  committee  to  run  the  line  ;  and 
Col.  Lyman,  who  was  one  of  Connecticut's  comoaittee,  are  both  in  London,  and  are 
acquainted  with  all  the  circumstances  of  this  case,  I  apprehend  a  more  favorable 
opportunity  for  the  colony  to  get  information  in  this  matter,  could  not  liappen. 

I  am  obliged  to  the  General  Assembly  for  their  confidence  in  depositing  the  pa- 
pers in  iny  hands,  and  herewith  return  them. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  &c.,  &c., 

MOSES   BROWN. 

On  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  memorial  be  ac- 
cepted ;  that  Moses  Brown,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  appointed  to 
make  the  inquiry  therein  mentioned  ;  and  when  he  shall  have 
obtained  the  best  information  he  can  procure,  that  he  make  re- 
port thereon,  to  the  General  Assembly. 

Whereas,  Esther  Sachem  (calling  herself  queen  of  the  tribe 
of  Indians  in  this  colony),  Thomas  Sachem,  her  husband,  and 
Henry  Harry,  with  others,  as  her  council,  who  preferred  a  pe- 
tition unto  this  Assembly,  praying  that  she,  with  her  husband 
and  council,  and  James  Helme,  Joseph  Ilaszard  and  Sylvester 
Eobinson,  Esqs.,  (who  were  a  committee  appointed  by  this  As- 
sembly, to  dispose  of  the  estate  of  Thomas  Ninegret,  deceased, 
late  sachem  of  said  tribe,  for  the  payment  of  his  debts,)  may 
make  a  deed  or  deeds  of  the  estate  of  the  said  Thomas  Nine- 
gret, for  the  payment  of  his  just  debts  in  the  same  manner  as 
the  said  Thomas  Ninegret,  in  his  life  time,  with  his  council, 
and  the  said  committee,  by.  act  of  Assembly,  might  have  done  ; 
and  whereas,  Samuel  Niles  and  others  (calling  themselves  a 
council,  appointed  by  said  tribe,  for  transacting  their  public 
affiiirs),  did  appear  before  this  Assembly,  and  for  the  settle- 
ment of  the  disputes  and  differences  subsisting  in  said  tribe, 
did  mutually  agree  that  the  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  the 
Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.  and  Joseph  Haszard,  Esq.,  or  any 
two  of  them  (by  their  consent,  and  by  order  of  this  Assembly), 
should  be  empowered  to  inquire  into  the  subject  matter  of 
their  disputes,  and  in  particular  to  ascertain  and  to  set  off 
all  the  lands  which  shall,  upon  inquiry  and  exainination, 
appear  to  them  to  have   been  the  lands  or  estates  of  the  said 

VOL.  VII.  2 


10  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1770. 

Thomas  Ninogret,  deceased,  for  the  payment  and  satisfaction 
of  the  debts  dae  to  his  creditors  and  to  his  heirs,  after  such  debts 
as  are  paid  and  satisfied  ;  that  the  expense  of  such  inquiry  and 
examination  be  equally  paid  by  the  said  two  parties  ;  and  that 
that  the  said  report  be  made  to  this  Assembly  at  the  next  ses- 
sion ;   and  the  premises  being  duly  considered, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  t'^e  above  recited  agreement 
be,  and  hereby  is,  approved  ;  and  that  the  said  Joseph  Wan- 
ton, Stephen  Hopkins  and  Joseph  Haszard,  or  any  two  of  them, 
be  empowered  to  do,  and  transact  every  thing  submitted  to 
them,  by  said  agreement. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  above  named  James  Helme,  Joseph  Haszard  and  Sylvester 
Robinson,  or  any  two  of  them,  be  empowered  to  take  into  their 
care  and  possession,  all  such  lands  as  shall  be  set  off  as  the  es- 
tate of  the  said  Thomas  Ninegret,  deceased,  and  the  same  to 
improve,  in  such  manner  as  they  shall  think  most  for  the  inter- 
est of  his  heirs  and  creditors,  until  so  much  of  them  shall  be 
disposed  of,  as  will  be  sufiQcient  to  satisfy  and  pay  his  just 
debts. 

God  save  the  Kino;. 


The  Earl  of  Hillshorovgh  to   the    Governor  and  Company  of 
Rhode  Island. 

No.  20.]  Whitehall,  February  IT,  1770. 

Gentlemen  : — As  it  is  necessary  that  the  King  should  be  duly  informed  of  all  acts 
and  proceedings  of  government  in  all  His  Majesty's  colonies  in  America,  I  am  com- 
manded to  desire  you  will  punctually  transmit  to  me,  to  be  laid  before  His  Majesty^ 
as  well  the  journals  and  proceedings  of  every  meeting  of  the  General  Assembly  of 
the  colony  of  llhode  Island,  as  copies  of  the  laws  enacted  by  such  Assembly  ;  and  I 
am  to  acquaint  you,  that  those  which  have  been  already  sent,  are  not  continued 
down  lower  than  the  seventh  year  of  His  Majesty's  reign. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  &c.,  &c., 

HILLSBOROUGH. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 


1770.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS. 


11 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  JSeivport,  the 
first  Wednesday  of  May,  1770. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

The  following  officers,  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged  : 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Dt^puty  Governor. 


ASSISTANTS. 


Mr.  Nicholas  Easton, 

Mr. 

Thomas  Wickes, 

Mr.  Samuel  Dyre, 

Mr. 

Jonathan  Randall,* 

Mr.  Solomon  Drown, 

Mr. 

John  Congdon, 

Mr.  David  Harris, 

Mr. 

Joseph  Haszard, 

Mr.  Weston  Hix, 

Mr. 

DEPUTIES. 

William  Richmond, 

Newport. 

Portsmouth. 

Mr.  Thomas  Cranston^ 

Mr. 

Metcalfe  Bowler, 

Mr.  John  Wanton, 

Mr. 

Thomas  Brownell, 

Mr.  George  Hazard, 

Mr.  Jonathan  Freeborn, 

Capt.  Samuel  Carr, 

I\lr. 

John  Almy. 

Capt.  William  Read, 

Warwick. 

Mr.  Thomas  Freebody. 

Mr. 

Philip  Greene, 

Providence. 

Mr. 

Benjamin  Greene, 

Mr.  Daniel  Jenckes, 

Mr. 

Stephen  Arnold, 

Mr.  Moses  Brown, 

Mr. 

Paul  Greene. 

Mr.  Benjamin  Man, 

Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins. 

12 


RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND 


[1770. 


Westerly. 
Mr.  James  Rhodes, 
Mr.  Oliver  Babcock. 
New  Shoreham. 
Mr.  Paul  Niles. 

North  Kingstown. 
Mr.  Ezekiel  Gardner, 
Mr.  John  Northup. 

South  Kingstown. 
Mr.  Rowland  RoLinson, 
Mr.  Samuel  Rodman. 
East  Greenvnch. 
Maj.  Preserved  Pierce, 
Mr.  William  Pierce. 

Jamestown. 
Mr.  John  Eldred, 
Capt.  William  Haszard. 

Smithfield. 
Mr.  Caleb  Aldrich, 
Mr.  Daniel  Mowrey,  Jr 

Scituate, 
Mr.  William  West, 
Mr.  Job  Randall. 

Glocester. 
Maj.  Rufus  Smith, 
Mr.  Moses  Cooper. 
Charlestown. 
Mr.  Gideon  Hoxie, 
Capt.  Joseph  Stanton. 
West  Greenwich- 
Mr.  William  Nichols, 
Mr.  Thomas  Rogers. 

Coventry. 
Mr.  Stephen  Potter, 
Mr.  Nathaniel  Greene. 


DEPUTIES. 

Exeter. 
Mr.  Daniel  Barber, 
Mr.  George  Pearce. 
Middletown. 
Mr.  Thomas  Coggeshall, 
Mr.  Thomas  Peckham. 

Bristol. 
Mr.  Christopher  Ellery, 
Mr.  William  Pearce. 

Tiverton. 
Mr.  Samuel  Durfee, 
Mr.  William  Cooke. 

Little  Compton. 
Mr.  Thomas  Church, 
Mr.  Nathaniel  Searle,  Jr. 

Warren. 
Mr.  Ebenezer  Cole, 
Maj.  Samuel  Allen. 
Cumberkmd. 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Whipple, 
Mr.  John  Dexter. 

Richmond. 
Mr.  Robert  Stanton. 

Cranston. 
Mr.  Caleb  Potter, 
Capt.  Matthew  Manchester. 

Hopkinton. 
Mr.  Thomas  Wells,  Jr., 
Capt.  Abel  Tanner. 

Johnston. 
Col.  John  AVaterman, 
Mr.  John  Beverly. 

North  Providence. 
j\Ir.  Elisha  Brown, 
Capt.  Joseph  Olney. 


1870.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  13 

The  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  speaker  ;  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 

Mr.  Henry  Ward,  secretary. 

Mr.  Oliver  Arnold,  attorney  general. 

Mr.  Joseph  Clarke,  general  treasurer. 

Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  chief  justice  of  the  superior  court 
of  judicature,  court  of  assize  and  general  jail  delivery. 

SHERIFFS    OP    THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

Newport  county — Mr.  Walter  Chaloner.  Providence  county 
— Mr.  Paul  Tew.  Kings  county — Mr.  Beriah  Brown.  Bris- 
tol county — Mr.  Simeon  Munro.  Kent  county — Mr.  Henry 
Rice. 

FIELD    OFFICERS    OF    THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

Newport  county — Daniel  Dunham,  Esq.,  colonel  ;  Joseph 
Belcher,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  ;  John  Forrester,  Esq., 
major. 

Providence  county — Knight  Dexter,  Esq.,  colonel  ;  Abra- 
ham Winsor,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  ;  Chad  Brown,  Esq., 
major. 

Kings  county — John  Crandall,  Esq.,  colonel  ;  Moses  Bar- 
ber, Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  ;  Sylvester  Gardner,  Esq., 
major. 

Bristol  county — Simeon  Potter,  Esq.,  colonel;  Nathaniel 
Martin,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  ;    Thomas  Gray,  Esq.,  major. 

Kent  county — John  Waterman,  Esq.,  colonel ;  Isaac  Greene, 
Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   Benjamin  Vaughan,  Esq.,  major. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  petition  for  dividing  the 
town  of  Warren  into  two  towns,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby, 
referred  to  the  next  session  ;  and  that  the  inhabitants  of  the 
said  town  be  served  with  a  copy  of  the  said  petition,  and  cited 
to  appear  then  (if  they  shall  think  fit),  to  answer  the  same. 

[No  business  of  a  public  nature,  except  the  election,  was 
done  at  this  session.] 

God  save  the  King. 


14  EECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1770* 


Proceedings  (f  the  General  Assembli/,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  on 
the  second  Monday  in  June,  1770. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Moses  Brown,  be,  and  he 
is  hereby,  requested  to  import  from  England,  for  the  use  of  this 
colony,  seven  boxes  of  Bristol  or  Newcastle  crown  sash  glass, 
to  wit : 

Three  boxes,  of  twelve  by  sixteen  ;  three,  of  eleven  by  fif- 
teen ;  and  one,  of  twelve  by  seventeen  ;  to  contain  seven  hun- 
dred feet  in  the  whole  :  that  the  same  be  shipped  as  soon  as 
conveniently  maybe,  after  the  duty  upon  glass  ceases,  and  the 
other  governments  generally  import  that  article  ;  and  that  the 
general  treasurer  pay  for  the  same,  according  to  the  common 
advance  upon  such  goods. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  such  sum  and  sums  of 
money,  as  remain  unpaid  of  the  rates  assessed  by  this  colony, 
be  paid  into  the  general  treasury  within  forty  days,  from  and 
after  the  rising  of  this  Assembly  ;  that  the  general  treasurer 
be,  and  he  is  hereby,  directed  to  issue  an  execution  for  princi- 
pal and  interest,  against  every  collector  of  rates  who  shall  be 
delinquent,  returnable  in  ten  days  after  the  expiration  of  the 
said  forty  days;  excepting  the  collector  of  rates  for  the  town  of 
South  Kingstown  ;  against  whom,  no  execution  shall  be  issued 
until  after  the  next  session  of  this  Asssembly. 

Whereas,  Esther  Sachem,  and  Thomas  Sachem,  preferred 
the  following  petition  unto  this  Assembly,  to  wit : 


1770.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  15 

Petition  of  Esther  Sachem,  and  her  husband,  to  the  General  As- 
seinbly,  relative  to  Thomas  Ni?iegret,  late  Sachem  of  the  Nar- 
ragansett  tribe  of  Indians. 

To  the  Honorable  General  Assembly,  to  be  holden   at  Newport,  in  the  county  of 

Newport,  on  the  second  Monday  of  June,  A.  D.  1770  : 

Humbly  show,  Esther  Sachem,  of  Charlestown.  in  Kinoes  county,  who  is  heir  at 
law  to  Thomas  Ninegret,  sachem  of  the  Narragansett  tribe  of  Indians,  together  with 
her  husband,  Thomas  Sachem,  that  the  General  Assembly  did  take  the  affairs  of  her 
decased  brother  into  their  care,  long  before  his  death,  and  appointed  a  committee 
to  take  an  account  of  his  debts,  and  dispose  of  so  much  of  his  lands,  as  v/ould  dis- 
charge the  debts  against  him  ;  who  proceeded  so  fap  as  to  take  an  account  of  his 
debts,  and  to  dispose  of  a  small  part  of  his  lands  ;  when  the  General  Assembly  inter- 
posed, and  appointed  a  new  committtee,  to  set  off  what  did  belong  to  the  sachem, 
that  should  be  sold  to  discharge  the  debts  against  the  estate  ;  which  said  committee 
have  done  nothing  ;  that,  as  the  affair  hath  been  several  years  in  this  situation,  the 
creditors  to  said  estate  are  uneasy,  and  the  principal  part  of  said  estate  is  under  a 
heavy  mortgage,  and  unless  the  General  Assembly  orders  something  to  be  immedi- 
ately done,  all  the  creditors  will  sue  at  the  August  court ;  and  that  the  mortgage  is 
now  in  suit,  and  hath  been  continued  two  terms,  and  must  be  yielded  up  at  the  rising 
of  the  August  court,  unless  the  affair  can  be  settled  before;  besides,  the  debts  are 
upon  interest,  and  increase  fast,  which,  with  the  charges  of  two  law  suits,  will  swal- 
low up  the  whole  estate,  if  speedy  remedy  be  not  taken. 

Therefore,  they  humbly  pray  the  General  Assembly  to  take  their  distressed  cir^ 
cumstauces  into  consideration,  and  order  the  last  appointed  committee  to  proceed 
immediately,  and  set  off  what  lands  shall  be  sold  ;  and  upon  their  setting  off  said 
land,  that  the  former  committee  immediately  proceed  to  dispose  of  the  lands,  and 
pay  the  demands  against  the  estate,  so  far  as  the  General  Assembly  have  ordered 
them  to  be  paid. 

And  they,  as  in  duty  bound,  will  ever  pray. 

ESTHER  SACHEM,  her  ^  mark, 

July  11,  1770.  THOMAS  SACHEM,  his  y^  mark. 

On  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  foregoing  petition  be,  and 
hereby  is,  granted. 

An  Act  for  incorporating  the  west  part  of  the  town  of  Warren, 
into  a  township,  to  be  distinguished  and  known  by  the  name 
of  Barrington. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  town  of  Warren  be,  and 
the  same  is  hereby,  divided  into  two  distinct  and  separate 
towns ;   that  the  bounds  between  them,  be  as  the  river  between 


16  RECORbS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1770. 

Bristol  ;md  Riimstick  extends  itself  northerl_^  to  Miles's  Bridge  ; 
that  all  the  lands  on  the  westerly  side  of  the  said  river,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby,  erected  and  made  into  a  township,  to  be  dis- 
tinguished, called  and  known  by  the  name  of  Barrington  ;  and 
that  the  mhabitants  thereof  shall  choose  two  deputies  to  repre- 
sent them  in  the  General  Assembly  ;  and  shall  have,  hold  and 
enjoy  all  and  singular  the  liberties,  privileges  and  immunities 
which  the  other  towns  in  this  colony  have,  enjoy  and  are  en- 
titled to. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
all  debts  due,  and  money  belonging  to  the  town  of  Warren,  be- 
fore the  division  thereof,  by  this  act  made,  shall  be  divided  ac- 
cording to  the  last  tax  ;  that  all  debts  due  from  the  said  town, 
bef  )re  the  division,  shall  be  settled  and  made  in  the  same  man- 
ner ;  and  that  the  poor  of  the  said  town  be  divided  between 
the  said  two  towns  in  proportion  to  their  taxes  and  debts. 

AnI  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
all  and  every  of  the  justices  of  the  peace,  and  military  officers, 
who  were  chosen  and  appointed  for  the  town  of  Warren,  and 
live  in  that  part  thereof  which  is  now  made  Barrington,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby,  continued  in  their  respective  offices,  with 
as  fall  power  and  ample  authority,  in  every  particular,  as  they 
had  in  consequence  of  their  being  chosen  into,  and  commis- 
sionated  for,  the  offices  by  them  respectively  sustained  ;  and 
that  James  Brown,  Esq.,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  authorized  and 
fully  empowered,  to  issue  a  warrant  and  call  the  freemen  of 
the  town  of  Barrington,  to  meet  together  at  such  time  and 
place,  within  said  town,  as  he  shall  think  fit,  on  or  before  the 
8th  day  of  July  next,  in  order  to  choose  and  appoint  all  officers 
necessary  for  managing  and  conducting  the  prudential  affairs 
of  said  town,  agreeably  to  the  laws  of  this  colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  l)y  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  said  town  of  Barrington  shall  send  three  grand  and  two 
petit  jurors  to  each  of  the  su[)erior  and  inferior  courts,  which 
shall  be  holden  in  the  county  of  Bristol  ;  and  that  the  town  of 
Warren  shall  send  three  grand  and  four  petit  jurors  to  each  of 
the  said  courts. 


1770.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  17 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
Nathaniel  Fales,  Thomas  Throop  and  Daniel  Bradford,  Esqs., 
all  of  Bristol,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee, 
to  settle  and  proportion  the  debts  and  poor  of  said  town,  agree- 
ably to  the  last  tax  of  said  town. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly^  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  East  Green- 
wich, on  the  second  Monday  in  September,  1770. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.  and  Joseph  Has- 
zard,  Esq.,  presented  unto  this  Assembly,  the  following  report, 
to  wit : 

Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly,  re- 
lative to  the  affairs  of  the  Narragansett  tribe  of  Indians. 

We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  a  committee,  by  the  General  Assembly,  to 
n  quire  into  some  disputes  subsisting  among  the  Narragansett  tribe  of  Indians,  and 
to  endeavor  to  settle  the  same,  do  report : 

That  we  repaired  into  the  Indian  country,  convened  all  the  principal  Indians  therC^ 
before  us,  and  prevailed  with  them  all  to  agree,  that  as  much  of  tlieir  land  may  be 
sold  as  will  pay  the  late  Sachem  Thomas's  debts  ;  provided,  that  no  land  be  sold  for 
that  purpose,  but  such  as  the  tribe  shall  appoint;  and  that  the  General  Assembly 
pass  an  act,  that  no  more  of  the  Indian  lands  may  be  sold  afterwards,  upon  any  pre- 
tence, whatsoever. 

The  Indians  requested  that  the  committee,  appointed  to  adjust  the  Sachem 
Thomas's  debts,  may  be  empowered  to  examine  for  what  the  debts  became  due,  not- 
withstanding they  may  now  be  reduced  to  mortgages,  bonds,  notes,  &.C.,  suggesting 
great  impositions  therein. 

The  Indians  further  requested,  that  the  General  Assembly  would  appoint  two  of 
them  to  be  justices  of  the  peace,  for  punishing  drunkenness,  breach  of  the  peace, 
and  other  offences  amongst  themselves. 

Then  the  Indians  pointed  out  the  following  parcels  of  land  to  be  sold  : 
VOL.  VII.  3 


18  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1770. 

1.  The  large  house,  the  late  Sachem  Thomas  lived  iu,  with  twenty-six  acres  of 
land  adjacent  to  it. 

2.  The  house  the  late  Sachem  George  tlwelt  in,  with  about  sixty  acres  of 
and  about  it. 

3.  A  tract  of  land,  heretofore  sold  at  vendue,  to  Isaac  Xye,  but  not  yet  mea" 
sured,  nor  any  deed  given. 

4.  A  small  piece  of  land,  in  possession  of  James  Perry. 
6.     A  small  piece  of  land,  iu  possession  of  Joseph  Hoxsie. 

6.     Nine  acres  and  an  half  of  land  lying  by  a  place  called  Welshare. 

And  lastly,  as  much  of  the  Cedar  Swamp,  as  will  complete  the  payment  of 
Thomas's  debts. 

Finally,  the  Indians  did  agree  and  promise  to  provide  as  good  a  support  for  the 
remaining  branches  of  the  royal  family,  as  the  small  remains  of  their  public  lands' 
and  the  loyal  affections  of  a  poor  people  can  admit. 

All  which  agreements  and  requisitions  we  promised  the  Indians  to  recommend  to 
the  General  Assembly,  as  fit  to  be  confirmed  and  granted.  And  we  do  accordingly 
recommend  them  as  worthy  the  notice  and  approbation  of  the  General  Assembly, 
and  presume  to  subscribe  ourselves.  Their  faithful  servants, 

STEPHEN  HOPKINS, 

East  Greenwich,  Sept.  10,  1770.  JOSEPH  HASZARD. 

And  the  said  report  being  duly  considered, — 
It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the    same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
accepted  and  approved  ;   excepting  that  part  thereof,  recom- 
mending it  to  the  General  Assembly  to  appoint  Indian  justices 
of  the  peace,  which  is  disapproved  by  this  Assembly. 

It  is  farther  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  several  pieces  and 
parcels  of  land  and  estates,  mentioned  in  the  said  report,  be 
sold  for  paying  the  late  Sachem  Thomas's  debts  ;  and  that  no 
other  of  the  Indian  lands  be  thereafter  sold  on  any  pretence, 
whatever. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committeB  appoint- 
ed to  adjust  the  said  Sachem  Thomas's  debts,  and  to  sell  the 
lands  for  payment  thereof,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  empow- 
ered to  examine  how  the  debts  became  due,  notwithstanding 
they  may  now  be  reduced  to  mortgages,  bonds,  notes  or  judg- 
ments of  court  which  have  been  obtained  by  default  ;  that  no 
more  of  said  debts  be  paid,  than  shall  appear  to  be  justly  due  ; 
and  that  the  said  committee  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  empow- 
ered to  defend  against  all  actions  that  have  been,  or  shall  be, 
brought  against  the  late  Sachem  Thomas's  estate  ;   and  that  all 


1770.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  19 

expenses  and  costs,  attending  the  defending  in  any  action, 
brouglit,  or  that  may  be  brought  against  the  said  estate,  shall 
be  defrayed  out  of  the  said  estate. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Hon.  Stephen 
Hopkins,  Esq.,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  added  to  the  committee 
appointed  to  adjust  the  debts  of  the  said  Thomas,  to  examine 
how  they  became  due,  and  to  sell  and  dispose  of  the  lands  for 
the  payment  thereof. 

Whereas,  the  deputies  of  the  town  of  Newport,  by  order  and 
in  behalf  of  said  town,  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that 
Job  Bennett,  Esq.  and  Mr.  John  Wanton,  son  of  Gideon,  pre- 
sented a  remonstrance  to  said  town,  in  town  meeting  assenir 
bled,  praying  the  town  to  pay  them  the  money  due  to  them, 
for  carrying  on  the  building  of  the  market  house  and  granary 
in  said  town,  so  far  as  the  same  is  done  ;  and  thereupon,  the 
said  deputies  prayed  this  Assembly  to  appoint  Joseph  Wan- 
ton, Jr.,  Esq.,  Mr.  Samuel  Lyndon,  Jr.,  Joseph  Wanton, 
Esq.,  son  of  Gideon  ;  Mr.  Thomas  Freebody,  Daniel  Dun- 
ham, Esq.  and  Charles  Spooner,  Esq.,  directors,  to  carry  on  a 
lottery  or  lotteries,  to  finish  said  building ;  and  also,  to  pay  the 
said  Job  Bennett  and  John  Wanton,  the  money  due  to  them, 
out  of  the  first  money  that  shall  be  raised  by  said  lottery  or 
lotteries  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  Joseph  Wanton,  Jr., 
Samuel  Lyndon,  Jr.,  Joseph  Wanton,  son  of  Gideon  ;  Thomas 
Freebody,  Daniel  Dunham  and  Charles  Spooner,  be,  and  they 
are  hereby,  appointed  directors  of  the  said  market  house  and 
granary  lotteries,  to  be  carried  on  for  raising  money  to  pay 
the  late  committee  appointed  to  build  the  said  market  house 
and  granary,  and  for  finishing  and  completing  the  same  ;  and 
that  the  same  be  done  without  any  expense  to  the  colony, 
God  save  the  King. 


20  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1770. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  on 
the  last  Monday  in  October,  1770. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

An  Act  to  incorporate  certain  persons  by  the  name  of  the  Be- 
nevolent Congregational  Society,  in  the  town  of  Providence, 
in  this  colony. 

Whereas,  clivers  persons  have  petitioned  this  Assembly,  for 
an  act  of  incorporation,  whereby  they  may  be  enabled  to  pro- 
mote certain  purposes  set  forth  in  their  petition,  and  hereinaf- 
ter mentioned  ;  — 

Therefore,  be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  Darius  Sessions, 
Ephraim  Bowen,  Sam'l  Nightingale,  Benj.  Bowen,  Jabez  Bow- 
en,  Jacob  Wightman,  Jona.  Badger,  John  Foster,  Jr.,  Charles 
Keen,  Nathaniel  Greene,  Eleazer  Harding,  Benjamin  West, 
Amos  Throope,  Nathaniel  Frothingham,  Samuel  Nightingale, 
Jr.,  Stephen  Dexter,  William  Dexter,  Elihu  Robinson,  Joseph 
Manning,  Levi  Hall,  Nathaniel  Metcalf,  James  Greene,  Eze- 
kiel  Burr,  Joshua  Hacker,  Nehemiah  Sweet,  Paul  Allen,  John 
Carpenter,  Jonathan  Arnold,  Amos  Atwell,  Jonathan  Russell, 
Jonathan  Ellis,  Alexander  Sampson,  Joseph  Nightingale, 
William  Bowen,  Henry  Stirling  and  Timothy  Gladding,  to- 
gether with  such  others,  as  they  shall  elect  from  time  to  time, 
shall  be,  forever  hereafter,  a  body  corporate  and  politic,  in  fact 
and  name,  by  the  name  of  the  Benevolent  Congregational  So- 
ciety, in  the  town  of  Providence,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Is- 
land and  Providence  Plantations,  in  New  England,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  raising  a  fund,  by  free  and  voluntary  subscriptions, 
contributions,  legacies  and  donations,  for  the  support  of  public 


1770.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  21 

worship  in  the  Congregational  Society,  in  the  town  of  Provi- 
dence, aforesaid,  of  which  the  Reverend  David  Shearman  Row- 
land, is  at  present  minister. 

[Here  follows  the  act  of  incorporation.] 

Whereas,  Jeremiah  Whipple  and  John  Dexter,  Esqs.,  depu- 
ties for  the  town  of  Cumberland,  preferred  a  petition,  and  rep- 
resented unto  this  Assembly,  that  the  great  bridge  built  over 
Pawtucket  river,  between  the  towns  of  Smithfield  and  Cum- 
berland, called  Whipple's  Bridge,  is  so  out  of  repair,  that  it  is 
almost  impassable,  and  if  not  soon  repaired,  will  be  entirely 
useless  ;  and  thereupon  pray,  that  a  lottery  may  be  granted, 
to  raise  the  sum  of  $400,  in  one  or  more  classes,  as  the  direc- 
tors shall  think  best,  to  be  applied  for  repairing  said  great 
bridge;  and  that  Jeremiah  Whipple,  Esq.,  Capt.  Benjamin 
Tower,  Mr.  David  Dexter  and  Mr.  Elisha  Waterman,  may  be 
appointed  directors  of  said  lottery  ;  they  giving  bond  according 
to  custom  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  prayer  of  the  said  peti- 
tion be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted  ;  provided^  that  no 
expense  arises  to  the  colony  thereby. 

Whereas,  a  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Crans- 
ton, preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly, 
that  there  is  a  considerable  number  of  people  in  that,  and  the 
neighboring  towns,  who  are  religiously  inclined,  of  the  sect 
called  Baptists,  whose  principles  are  contained  in  Hebrews, 
chapter  six,  and  first  and  second  verses,  who  are  willing  to  de- 
vote a  part  of  their  time  to  the  public  worship  of  God  ;  that 
there  being  no  meeting  house  within  a  convenient  distance  of 
the  place  where  the  greatest  part  of  that  church  or  society 
live  ;  meetings  have  been  kept  up  in  said  place,  for  upwards 
of  thirty  years,  at  private  houses,  until  about  two  years  past, 
they  have  hired  a  house  at  the  corner  where  two  roads  meet, 
near  the  Reverend  Elisha  Greene's,  in  said  Cranston,  for  a 
place  of  public  worship  ;  that  the  said  house  and  lot  are  now  to 
be  sold,  and  it  being  a  very  convenient  and  commodious  place 
for  a  meeting  house,  they  are  inclined   to  purchase  it  for  that 


90. 


RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1770. 


purpose,  for  the  church  that  is  uuder  the  care  and  direction  of 
the  said  Elisha  Greene  ;  but  that  the  said  society  is  not  able  to 
purchase  the  same  by  subscription,  and  repair  it ;  and  there- 
fore, they  prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  them  a  lottery,  to 
raise  the  sum  of  $300,  to  be  applied  towards  purchasing  and 
repairing  the  said  house  and  lot  ;  and  that  Messrs.  Joseph 
Stone,  Elisha  Greene,  Jr.,  Zerobabel  Westcot  and  Nehemiah 
Knight,  all  of  Cranston,  aforesaid,  may  be  appointed  directors 
or  managers  of  said  lottery  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  prayer  of  the  foregoing 
petition  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted  ;  that  the  direc- 
tors give  bond  to  the  general  treasurer,  and  be  engaged  for  the 
faithful  performance  of  their  trust  ;  and  that  the  said  lottery 
be  divided  into  such  and  ho  many  classes  as  they  shall  think 
proper. 

Whereas,  this  Assembly  is  informed  that  His  Majesty's  jail, 
in  the  county  of  Kings  county,  was,  in  the  night  of  the  3d  day 
of  this  instant  November,  broken  open  by  a  number  of  people 
in  disguise,  and  several  of  the  prisoners,  to  wit :  William  Rey- 
nolds, Thomas  Clarke,  Elisha  Reynolds  and  Samuel  Casey 
(the  said  Casey  being  under  sentence  of  death),  were  set  at 
liberty  ;  — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  Ilis  Honor  the  Gov- 
ernor be,  and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  issue  a  proclamation 
immediately  for  apprehending  the  perpetrators  of  that  atrocious 
crime,  and  therein  promise  a  reward  of  £-50,  lawful  money,  and 
an  indemnification  to  any  person  or  persons  who  shall  discover 
any  one  or  more  of  the  persons  who  were  aiding  or  assisting  in 
breaking  open  said  jail  (excepting  those  already  discovered), 
so  that  such  person  or  persons  be  convicted  ;  and  also  £50, 
lawful  money,  to  any  person  or  persons,  who  shall  apprehend 
and  bring  the  said  Samuel  Casey  before  legal  authority,  in  this 
colony,  so  that  he  may  be  committed. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  send  home  all  the  acts  of  the 
General  Assembly,  that  have  not  yet  been  sent,  agreeably  to 


1770.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  23 

His  Majesty's  requisition,  signified  to  the  colony,  by  a  letter 
from  the  Right  Honorable  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  town  of  Providence  be, 
and  they  are  hereby,  empowered  and  directed  to  tax  the  sev- 
eral owners  or  possessors  of  the  lands  westward  of  the  eastern 
banks  of  the  river  or  bay,  from  the  boundary  of  the  colony  on 
Bullock's  Neck,  northward,  to  the  line  of  North  Providence  ; 
and  that  in  defeult  of  payment  of  such  tax,  so  assessed,  the 
salt  grass  sedge  or  thatch,  growing  thereon,  be  annually  sold 
for  the  payment  thereof. 

It  is  also  resolved,  that  the  town  of  North  Providence  tax 
the  owners  or  possessors  of  the  lands,  tenements  and  other  es- 
tate, lying  westward  of  the  colony's  boundary,  near  the  east 
butment  of  Pawtucket  Bridge,  and  from  thence  southerly,  as 
far  as  the  range  of  the  north  line  of  Providence  ;  and  that  the 
assessors  and  collectors  have  the  same  power  over  such  estates, 
as  they  have  over  the  estates  on  the  west  side  of  Seekonk 
river  ;  the  said  eastern  shore  being  clearly  comprehended  with- 
in the  charter  of  this  colony. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  monies  arising 
from  the  estates,  herein  ordered  to  be  taxed,  be  lodged  in  the 
general  treasury,  to  be  applied  towards  keeping  up  and  sup- 
porting Pawtucket  Bridge. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  petition  for  dividing  the 
town  of  Westerly,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  referred  to  the 
next  session;  and  that  the  said  town  be  served  with  a  copy  there- 
of, and  cited  to  appear  at  the  next  session,  to  answer  the  same. 

Whereas,  this  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  October,  1767, 
passed  an  act,  appointing  Matthew  Robinson,  Esq.,  to  draw  a 
deed,  to  be  executed  by  Thomas  Ninegret,  late  sachem  of  the 
Narragansett  tribe  of  Indians  in  this  colony,  and  five  of  his 
council,  to  the  secretary,  of  an  island  in  Charlestown,  for  the 
use  of  a  school,  for  the  said  tribe  of  Indians,  and  to  see  the 
same  executed,  &c.,  as  by  the  said  act  will  appear  ;  and 
whereas,  the  said  Thomas  Ninegret  hath  since  deceased,  with- 
out having  executed  the  said  deed, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  act  be  re- 
vived, and  that  the  present  queen   of  said   tribe,    with   five 


24  RECORDS    OP    THE    COLOI^Y    OP    RHODE   ISLAND  [1770. 

of  her  council,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  fully  empowered  to 
make,  execute  and  give  such  a  deed,  as  in  the  said  act  is 
mentioned. 

God  save  the  King. 

Public  Acts  passed  during  the  year  1770. 

[The  following  laws  will  be  fouud  at  length  in  the  printed  "  Schedules,"  or  actg 
and  resolves  of  the  General  Assembly,  for  the  year  1770.] 

An  Act  for  the  breaking  up  disorderly  houses,  kept  by  negroes  and  mulattoes  ;  and 

for  putting  out  such  negroes  and  mulattos  to  service.     (February.) 
An  Act  to  prevent  the  introduction  of  contagious  diseases  among  the  cattle  in  this 

colony.     (February.) 
An  Act  for  the  more  equal  distribution  of  intestate  e?tates.     (February.) 
An  Act  in  addition  to  the  acts  now  in  force,  regulating  elections,  and  the  adraisssion 

of  freemen  into  this  colony.     (June.) 
An  Act  for  calling  in   and  sinking  all  the  old  tenor  bills  of  public  credit,  that  are 

outstanding,  and  now  passing  in  this  colony.     (September.) 
An  Act  to  prevent  frauds  in  the  tare  of  butter-firkins  and  tubs.     (September.) 
An  Act  for  the  more  effectual  governing  of  Indian,  mulatto  and  negro  servants  and 

slaves,  in  the  town  of  Newport,  and  further  regulating  the  manumission  of  slaves 

in  that  town.     (September.) 
An  Act  for  assessing,  upon  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  a  rate  or  tax  of  £12,000, 

lawful  money.     (September.) 

The  Earl  of  Hillsborough  to   the   Governor   and    Company  of 
Rhode  Island. 

Whitehall,  llth  December,  1770. 
Gentlemen :— The  House  of  Commons  having  voted  an  augmentation  to  the 
King's  forces,  consisting  (among  other  particulars)  of  an  additional  light  company 
to  every  battallion,  and  of  twenty  men  to  every  company  on  the  British  establish- 
ment, and  it  being  of  great  importance  in  the  present  situation,  that  the  several  bat- 
tallions  now  serving  in  America,  should  be  completed  as  soon  as  possible,  I  am  com- 
manded to  signify  to  you  His  Majesty's  pleasure,  that  you  should  exert  your  utmost 
endeavors  to  give  efficacy  and  dispatch  to  this  plan  ol"  augmentation,  by  assisting 
His  Majesty's  officers  to  raise  such  a  number  of  recruits  as  shall  be  sufficient  for  that 
purpose,  giving  every  encouragement  in  your  power,  that  may  induce  His  Majesty's 
faithful  subjects  to  engage  in  a  service  so  essential  to  their  security  and  defence  ;  and 
I  think  fit  to  press  this  matter  with  the  greater  urgency,  as  nothing  has  happened 
since  my  secret  and  confidential  letter  of  the  28th  of  September,  to  strengthen  the 
hopes  1  then  expressed,  that  the  peace  might  still  be  preserved  ;  and  consequently 
every  motive  for  a  vigilant  attention  to  the  security  of  every  part  of  His  Majesty's 
dominions  still  exists  in  its  full  force.  I  am,  etc., 

HILLSBOROUGH. 
To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 


1771.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


25 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  hland  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the 
first  Wednesday  of  May,  1771. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

The  following  officers,  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged  : 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 


ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Nicholas  Easton, 

Mr. 

Thomas  Wickes, 

Mr.  Samuel  Dyre, 

Mr. 

Jonathan  Randall, 

Mr.  Solomon  Drown, 

Mr. 

John  Congdon, 

Mr.  David  Harris, 

Mr. 

Joseph  Haszard, 

Mr.  John  Almy, 

Mr. 

DEPUTIES. 

William  Richmond. 

Newport. 

Portsmouth. 

Mr.  Thomas  Cranston, 

Mr. 

Metcalfe  Bowler, 

Mr.  John  Wanton, 

Mr. 

John  Almy, 

Mr.  George  Hazard, 

Mr. 

Jonathan  Freeborn, 

Mr.  Joseph  Wanton,  Jr 

Mr. 

Thomas  Brownell. 

Capt.  William  Read, 

Warwick. 

Mr.  Thomas  Freebody. 

Mr. 

Benjamin  Greene, 

Providence. 

Col 

.  James  Arnold, 

Mr.  Daniel  Jenckes, 

Mr. 

Jacob  Greene, 

Mr.  Moses  Brown, 

Mr. 

Christopher  Greene, 

Mr.  Benjamin  Man, 

Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins.  . 

VOL.  VII.            4 

26 


RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND 


[ITTL 


DEPUTIES. 

Westerly. 

Middletown. 

Mr.  James  Rhodes, 

Mr.  Thomas  Coggeshall, 

Mr.  Phineas  Clark. 

Mr.  John  Holmes. 

North  Kingstown. 

Bristol. 

Mr.  Ezekiel  Gardner, 

Mr.  Christopher  Ellery, 

Mr.  John  Northap. 

Mr.  William  Pearce. 

South  Kingstown. 

Tiverton. 

Mr.  William  Potter, 

Mr.  Edward  Gray, 

Mr.  Rowland  RoLinson. 

Mr.  Oliver  Cook. 

East  Greenvnch. 

Little  Comptoni 

Mr.  Sylvester  Sweet, 

Mr.  Philip  Taylor, 

Mr.  Joseph  Fry. 

Mr.  John  Peckham. 

Jamestown. 

Warren. 

Mr.  George  Tew, 

Mr.  Cromel  Child, 

Mr.  John  Gardner. 

Mr.  Daniel  Cole. 

SmithfieU. 

Cumberland. 

Mr.  Caleb  Aldrich, 

Mr.  Jeremiah  Whipple, 

Mr.  Daniel  Mowrey,  Jr. 

Mr.  John  Dexter. 

Scituate, 

Richmond. 

Mr.  William  West, 

Mr.  Stephen  Hoxsie, 

Mr.  Charles  Harris. 

Mr.  Edward  Perry. 

Glocester. 

Cranston. 

Mr.  Timothy  Wilmarth, 

Mr.  James  Harris, 

Mr.  Zebedee  Hopkins,  Jr. 

Mr.  Gideon  Comstock. 

Charlestoion. 

Hopkinton. 

Mr.  John  Congdon, 

Mr.  Thomas  Wells,  Jr.^ 

Mr.  Sylvester  Robinson. 

Capt.  Abel  Tanner. 

West  Greenwich. 

Johnston. 

Mr.  William  Nichols, 

Col.  John  Waterman, 

Mr.  Samuel  Hopkins,  Jr. 

Mr.  Daniel  Manton. 

Coventry. 

North  Providence^ 

Mr.  Nathaniel  Greene,  Jr., 

Capt.  Eseck  Hopkins, 

Mr.  Ichabod  Borden. 

Mr.  Thomas  Whipple. 

Exeter. 

Barrington. 

Mr.  George  Pearce, 

Mr.  Josiah  Humphrey, 

Mr.  Hopson  Wilcox. 

Mr.  Samuel  Allen,  2d. 

1771.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  27 

The  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  speaker  ;  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 

Mr.  Henry  AVard,  secretary. 

Mr.  Henry  Marchant,  attorney  general. 

Mr.  Joseph  Clarke,  general  treasurer. 

Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  chief  justice  of  the  superior  court 
of  judicature,  court  of  assize  and  general  jail  delivery. 

SHERIFFS    OF    THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

Newport  county — Mr.  Walter  Chaloner.  Providence  county 
— Mr.  Paul  Tew.  Kings  county — Mr.  Beriah  Brown.  Bris- 
tol county — Mr.  John  Brown.  Kent  county — Mr.  Henry 
Rice. 

FIELD    OFFICERS    OF    THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

Newport  county — Mr.  Daniel  Dunham,  colonel  ;  Mr.  Isaac 
Dayton,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  John  Forrester,  major. 

Providence  county — Mr.  Knight  Dexter,  colonel  ;  Mr. 
Abraham  Winsor,  lieutenant  colonel ;  Mr.  Chad  Brown, 
major. 

Kings  county — Mr.  John  Crandall,  colonel  ;  Mr.  Moses 
Barber,  lieutenant  colonel  ;  Mr.  John  Allen,  son  of  Jonathan, 
major. 

Bristol  county — Mr.  Simeon  Potter,  colonel ;  Mr.  Nathaniel 
Martin,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  Thomas  Gray,  major. 

Kent  county — Mr.  John  Waterman,  colonel ;  Mr.  Aaron 
Bowen,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  Benjamin  Vaughan,  major. 

Whereas,  Henry  Marchant,  Esq.,  designs  in  a  short  time  to 
proceed  to  London, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  George  Hazard,  Esq. 
and  William  Potter,  Esq.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed 
a  committee,  to  prepare  a  bill,  requesting  and  fully  empower- 
ing him  to  join  with  Joseph  Sherwood,  Esq.,  our  present 
agent,  in  applying  for  the  money  due  from  the  crown  to  this 


28  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1771. 

colony,  and  in  every  other  affair  that  may  concern  the  colony, 
daring  his  residence  in  Great  Britain  ;  and  that  they  lay  the 
same  before  this  Assembly  as  soon  as  may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  petition,  preferred  to  this 
Assembly,  by  divers  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Barrington, 
praying  that  they  may  be  set  off  to  the  town  of  Warren,  be, 
and  the  same  is  hereby,  referred  to  the  next  session  ;  and 
that,  in  the  mean  time,  the  said  town  of  Barrington  be  notified 
to  appear  at  the  next  session,  if  they  shall  think  fit,  to  answer 
the  same. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  time  for  paying  in  the  last 
colony  rate,  be  lengthened  to  the  next  session  of  this  Assem- 
bly ;  and  that  the  rate  gatherers  collect  the  interest  until 
that  time,  as  well  as  the  principal,  and  pay  the  same  into  the 
general  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  §85,  be  allowed  to  the  chief 
justice  of  the  superior  court  of  judicature,  &c.  ;  and  $75,  to 
each  of  the  other  justices  of  the  said  court  (including  the  allow- 
ance already  made),  for  their  extraordinary  time  and  trouble 
at  the  terms  of  the  said  court,  held  in  Kings  county,  in  October 
and  April  last,  in  trying  the  criminals  for  counterfeiting  gold 
and  silver  coins,  and  for  breaking  open  His  Majesty's  jail  in 
said  county,  and  releasing  the  prisoners  ;  and  that  the  addi- 
tional sum  now  allowed,  being  "foS,  to  the  chief  justice,  and 
$37,  to  each  of  the  assistant  justices,  be  paid  out  of  the  fines 
of  the  said  criminals,  when  a  sufficient  sum  shall  be  collected, 
and  paid  into  the  general  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  consideration  of  the  letter 
from  General  Gage,  to  His  Honor  the  Governor,  requesting 
that  quarters,  &c.,  may  be  provided  for  His  Majesty's  64th 
regiment,  in  this  colony,  be  referred  for  the  present  ;  that,  if 
the  said  regiment  shall  arrive  before  the  next  session,  and  re- 
quire any  supplies  from  the  colony.  His  Honor  the  Governor, 
be,  and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  call  the  General  Assembly, 
if  he  shall  find  it  necessary. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly  did  heretofore  appoint  the 
Hon.    Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  James   Ilelme,  Esq.,  Joseph 


1771.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  29 

Hazard,  Esq.  and  Sylvester  Robinson,  Esq.,  a  committee,  they, 
or  the  major  part  of  them,  to  settle  and  adjust  the  accounts  and 
demands  of  the  creditors  of  Thomas  Ninegret,  late  sachem  of 
the  Narragansett  tribe  of  Indians,  in  this  colony,  and  to  assist 
in  the  sale  of  so  much  of  his  lands  as  would  discharge  his 
debts,  and  the  necessary  expenses  attending  said  affair  ;  and 
whereas,  the  said  sachem  is  since  deceased,  and  proper  deeds 
of  sundry  tracts  of  land  bargained  and  sold  for  that  purpose, 
were  not  in  the  life  time  of  said  sachem,  duly  made  and  exe- 
cuted to  the  purchasers  of  said  lands, — 

Beit  therefore  enacted  by  this  Generar  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  of  the  same  it  is  enacted,  that  the  aforesaid  com- 
mittee, or  the  major  part  of  them,  together  with  the  council  of 
the  said  late  sachem,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  make  and  ex- 
ecute deeds  of  so  much  of  the  lands  of  said  sachem,  as  will  be 
sufficient  for  the  purpose  aforesaid. 

An  Act  appointing  Henry  Marchant,  Esq.,  joint  agent  with 

Joseph   Sherwood,    Esq.,  for   this  colony,  at  the  court  of 

Great  Britain. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority of  the  same  it  is  enacted,  that  Henry  Marchant,  Esq., 
be,  and  he  is  hereby,  appointed  joint  agent  with  Joseph  Sher- 
wood, Esq.,  for  this  colony,  at  the  court  of  Great  Britain,  to 
act  in  all  matters  and  things,  which  are  now  pending,  or  that 
may  hereafter  arise,  in  which  this  colony  is,  or  may  be  inter- 
ested, during  his  residence  in  Great  Britain,  or  until  furlher 
orders  from  this  Assembly  ;  and  in  a  more  special  manner,  to 
apply  for,  if  they  shall  apprehend  it  fit  and  necessary,  and 
procure  payment  of  the  monies  reported,  by  the  secretaries  at 
war  and  paymaster  genera^,  in  Great  Britain,  to  be  due  to  this 
colony,  for  the  provisions,  artillery  stores,  &c.,  supplied  to  His 
Majesty's  troops,  in  the  year  1766. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
His|HonorJhe  Governor  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to 
cause  copies  of  all  such  letters  and  papers,  as  are  in  his  pos- 
session, respecting  the  said  matters,  to  be  delivered  to  the  said 


30  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1771. 

Henry  Marchant  ;  that  the  secretary  also  furnish  him  with 
copies  of  all  such  papers  and  records,  as  are  in  his  office,  respect- 
ing the  same  ;  and  that  the  secretary  be,  and  hereby  is,  ap- 
pointed to  prepare  a  draught  of  a  letter  of  agency  to  the  said 
Henry  Marchant,  for  the  purposes  aforesaid,  and  lay  the  same 
before  this  Assembly,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

Whereas,  the  secretary  presented  unto  this  Assembly,  the 
following  draught  of  a  letter  of  agency  to  Henry  Marchant, 
Es(|.,  which  was  approved,  to  wit : 

Letter  of  Agency,  by  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island,  to  Henry 
Marchant,  appointing  him  Joint  Agent  for  tJie  Colony,  in 
London. 

By  the  Honorable  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Governor,  Captain  General  and  Com- 
mander in  Chief,  of  and  over  the  English  Colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Provi- 
dence Plantations,  in  New  England,  in  America. 

To  all  unto  whom  these  presents  shall  come ;  greeting  : 

Whereas,  the  Governor  and  Company  of  the  colony,  aforesaid,  in  General  Assem- 
bly, convened  at  Newport,  in  the  said  Colony,  on  the  first  Wednesday  in  this  instant 
May,  did  pass  an  act,  choosing  and  appointing  Henry  xMarchant,  of  Newport,  afore, 
said,  Esq.,  jointly  with  Joseph  Sherwood,  of  the  city  of  London,  in  the  kingdom  of 
Great  Britain,  Esq.,  agent  and  attorney  for  the  said  Governor  and  Company,  in 
Great  Britain,  aforesaid,  with  full  power  and  authority,  with  the  said  Joseph  Sher- 
wood, to  act,  transact,  accomplish  and  finish,  all  matters  and  things  whatsoever^ 
pending,  or  that  may  be  pendent,  in  Great  Britain,  for  or  against  the  said  Govern, 
or  and  Company,  during  his  residence  there  ;  more  especially  to  obtain  the  monies 
claimed  by  the  said  Governor  and  Company  from  the  crown,  for  provisions,  artillery 
stores,  &c.,  supplied  for  His  JVIajesty's  service,  for  the  expedition  against  Crown 
Point,  in  the  year  1756,  or  upon  any  other  account,  whatever  ;  and  requested  me, 
for  the  purposes  aforesaid,  to  make  and  execute  a  fall  and  ample  letter  of  agency 
and  attorney  to  him,  the  said  Henry  Marchant,  under  my  hand,  and  the  seal  of  this 
colony. 

Now  know  ye,  that  I,  the  Governor  above  mentioned,  by  force  and  virtue  of  the 
afore  recited  act,  in  behalf  of  the  said  Governor  and  Company,  have  constituted, 
ordained  and  appointed,  and  by  these  presents,  do  constitute,  ordain  and  appoint 
him,  the  said  Henry  Marchant,  during  his  residence  in  Great  Britain,  jointly  with 
the  said  Joseph  Sherwood,  absolute  and  lawful  agent  and  attorney,  for  the  said 
Governor  and  Company  in  Great  Britain  ;  and  in  their  names  and  stead  to  appear 
before  His  Majesty  in  Council,  and  either  or  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  or  any 
court  or  courts,  judge  or  judges,  minister  or  ministers  of  justice,  as  shall  have  juris- 
diction, cognizance  or  power  to  hear,  adjudge,  determine,  sentence  or  decree,  in,  or 
upon,  any  cause  or  causes,  moved  or  pending,  or  to  be  moved  or  pendent,  in  Groat 
Britain,  by,  for,  or  against,  the  said  Governor  and  Company,  whether  by  memorial, 
petition,  claim,  demand,  appeal,  complaint,  or  otherwise ;  and  there,  in  the  name, 


1771.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  31 

stead  and  behalf,  of  the  said  Governor  and  Company,  jointly  with  the  said  Joseph 
Sherwood,  to  say,  do,  act,  transact,  accomplish  and  finish,  all  and  every  matter  and 
matters,  thing  and  things,  needful,  requisite  and  expedient,  for  obtaining  right  and 
justice,  in  behalf  of  the  said  Governor  and  Company  ;  more  especially  by  petition, 
memorial,  or  by  any  other  lawful  ways  and  means  whatsoever,  in  their  name  and 
stead,  and  to  their  use,  to  obtain  and  receive  all  such  sums  of  money  as  the  said 
Governor  and  Company  claim  from  the  crown,  for  provisions,  artillery  stores,  &c., 
supplied  for  His  Majesty's  service,  for  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point,  in  the 
year  of  our  Lord  1756,  or  upon  any  other  account,  whatever  ;  and  upon  receipt  of 
the  same,  or  any  part  thereof,  jointly  with  the  said  Joseph  Sherwood,  to  give  proper 
acquittances  and  lawful  discharges. 

And  I  do  hereby,  for  the  said  Governor  and  Company,  covenant,  promise  and 
en"-age  to  ratify  and  confirm,  and  to  hold  for  ratified  and  confirmed,  all  and  whatso-' 
ever  the  said  Henry  Marchant,  jointly  with  the  said  Joseph  Sherwood,  shall  lawfully 
do  or  cause  to  be  done,  in  or  about  the  i^remises,  by  virtue  of  these  presents. 

In  testimony  whereof,  I  have  hereunto  set  my  hand  and  the  seal  of  the  said 

colony,  at  Newport,  aforesaid,  this day  of  May,  in  the  eleventh  year  of 

the  reign  of  His  Most  Sacred  Majesty  George  the  Third,  by  the  grace  of 
God,  King  of  Great  Britain,  &c.,  Anno  Domini  1771. 

JOSEPH  WANTON. 
By  His  Honor's  command. 
HENRY  WARD,  Secretary. 


Whereas,  the  town  of  Warwick  preferred  a  petition  unto  this 
Assembly,  and  represented  that  the  large  bridge,  commonly 
called  Capt.  Green's  Bridge,  over  Pawtuxet  river,  about  six 
miles  above  the  falls,  was,  in  March  last,  carried  away  by  a  large 
flood  ;  that  the  said  bridge  stood  upon  a  road  very  much  fre-- 
quented  ;  and  the  loss  of  it  is  a  very  great  damage  to  the  pub- 
lic ;  and  that  the  said  town  of  Warwick  is  greatly  burthened 
with  bridges,  having  many  other  large  ones  to  maintain  ;  and 
thereupon,  they  prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  a  lottery,  for 
re-building  the  said  bridge,  agreeably  to  the  scheme  that  fol- 
lows ;  and  that  Messrs.  Benjamin  Arnold  and  Thomas  Holden, 
both  of  said  Warwick  ;  and  Elisha  Greene,  Jr.  and  Nehemiah 
Knight,  both  of  Cranston,  may  be  appointed  directors  of  the 
said  lottery  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the  foregoing 
petition  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  petition  for  erecting  a  new 
town,  to  be   called  Pawtuxet,  to  be  taken  off  from  Warwick 


32  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLxiND  [1771. 

and  Cranston,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  referred  to  the  next 
session  ;  and  that,  in  the  mean  time,  the  said  towns  of  War- 
wick and  Cranston,  be  notified  to  appear  at  the  next  session, 
if  they  shall  think  proper,  to  answer  the  same. 

Whereas,  a  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  towns  of  War- 
wick and  Cranston,  preferred  a  petition  unto  this  Assembly, 
and  represented  that  the  bridge,  called  Pawtuxet  Bridge,  was 
carried  away  by  a  great  flood,  in  March  last,  and  wholly  de- 
stroyed ;  and  thereupon,  prayed  that  a  sufficient  sum  may  be 
granted  them,  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  re-build  the  said 
bridge  ;   which  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  $200,  and  no  more, 
be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the   general  treasury,  towards  re 
pairing  the  said  bridge. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  uf  the  General  Assembly^  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  on. 
the  second  Monday  in  June,  1771. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  lion.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolverl,  that  George  Hazard,  Esq.,  William 
Brooks  Simpson,  Esq.,  Mr.  William  EUery  and  the  secretary, 
be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  hereby,  appoint- 
ed a  committee,  to  prepare  a  bill  for  the  relief  of  insolvent 
debtors  ;  and  that  they  present  the  same  to  this  Assembly,  at 
the  next  session. 

Whereas,  the  church  and  congregation,  worshipping  in 
Clarke  street,  [known  as  the  Second  Congregational  Church], 
in  Newport,  preferred  a  petition  unto  this  Assembly,  praying 
that  a  bill,  by  them  presented,  with  the  said  petition,  for  the 


1771.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  33 

incorpomtion  of  the  said  church,  may  be  passed  into  an  act  of 
this  Assembly  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  prayer  of  the  said  peti- 
tion be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  no  person  or  persons,  whatso- 
ever, shall  hereafter  be  allowed  or  permitted  to  appeal  to  His 
Majesty  in  Council,  in  Great  Britain,  from  the  judgment  of 
the  superior  court  of  judicature,  in  this  colony,  for  any  matter 
or  thing  whatsover,  unless  the  matter  or  thing  in  controversy, 
be  of  the  value  of  £300,  lawful  money,  to  be  valued  by  the 
court,  where  the  appeal  shall  be  prayed  ;  any  law,  custom  or 
usage  to  the  contrary,  hereof,  in  any  wise,  notwithstanding. 

Whereas,  there  is  a  sentence  or  judgment,  in  favor  of  the 
colony,  against  William  Reynolds,  on  the  records  of  the  supe- 
rior court  of  judicature,  court  of  assize  and  general  jail  de- 
livery, in  the  county  of  Kings  county,  for  the  sum  of  $1,000, 
and  cost,  as  a  fine  for  counterfeiting  the  public  coin, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  upon  the  payment  of 
$300,  immediately,  and  $300,  on  or  before  the  25th  day  of 
December  next,  and  the  remainder  of  said  judgment  on  or  be- 
fore the  25th  day  of  December,  A.  D.  1772,  into  the  general 
treasury,  the  colony  shall,  and  will,  release,  and  quit  all  their 
right,  title,  interest,  claim  and  demand  of,  in  and  to,  all  the 
real  estate  of  the  said  William  Reynolds. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  persons  who  are  possessed 
of  any  of  the  lawful  money  bills,  emitted  in  the  year  1760,  or 
any  of  the  notes  given  by  the  general  treasurer  for  such  bills, 
bring  all  such  bills  and  notes  into  the  general  treasury,  within 
six  weeks  from  and  after  the  rising  of  this  Assembly,  in  order 
to  l»e  exchanged  for  silver  and  gold;  and  that  after  the  ex- 
piration of  said  time,  no  interest  be  allowed  thereon  ;  and  that 
the  general  treasurer  give  public  notice  of  this  vote,  by  an  ad- 
vertisement in  the  Newport  and  Providence  newspapers. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  thf^t  no  seine  be  drawn,  or  net  be 
cast,  for  the  catching  the  fish  between  ihe  1st  day  of  March 

VOL.  VII.  5 


34  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1771. 

and  last  day  of  May,  annually,  in  Barrington  River,  between 
the  water-lot  of  Daniel  Kinnicut,  and  the  Meeting  House 
Point,  under  the  penalty  of  d£lO,  lawful  money  ;  one  half  to 
the  informer,  and  the  other  half  to  and  for  the  use  of  the  said 
town  of  Barrington. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Esq.,  John  Dexter,  Esq.,  Mr.  Moses  Brown  and  Matthew 
Robinson,  Esq.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  commit- 
tee, to  draw  a  state  of  the  case  of  the  northern  boundary  line 
of  this  colony,  and  deliver  the  same  to  Henry  Marchant,  Esq., 
to  carry  with  him  to  Great  Britain  ;  who,  in  concurrence  with 
Joseph  Sherwood,  Esq.,  is  to  take  such  counsel  and  advice 
thereon,  as  they  may  Ihink  proper,  respecting  the  obtaining  an 
order  from  His  Majesty,  for  commissioners  to  settle  the  line, 
agreeably  to  the  charters  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay  and  this 
colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  general  treasurer  be,  and 
be  is  hereby,  directed  not  to  put  forth  the  colony's  executions 
against  the  town  of  South  Kingstown,  till  after  the  next  ses- 
sion of  this  Assembly  ;  and  that  the  treasurer  empower  said 
town  to  collect  the  sums  due  upon  said  executions,  by  issuing 
his  warrants  therefor,  when  said  town  shall  have  assessed  said 
sums,  so  due,  upon  the  inhabitants  of  said  town. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  forty  days  longer  be  allowed 
to  the  several  delinquent  towns  to  pay  in  their  respective 
rates,  they  paying  interest  for  the  same,  up  to  the  time  of 
payment ;  and  that,  at  the  expiration  of  said  time,  the  general 
treasurer  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  directed  and  fully  empow- 
ered, to  issue  his  warrants  against  all  those  that  shall  be  then 
deficient. 

God  save  the  King. 

The  Earl  of  Hillsborough  to   the   Governor   and    Company  of 
Rhode  Island. 

No.  2 1 .]  Whitehall,  July  1 9th,  1771. 

Gentlepaen : — The  lords  commissioners  of  His  ]\Iajesty's  treasury  have  communi- 
cated to  me,  several  papers  received  from  the  commissioners  of  the  customs,  in 
America,  relative  to  certain  outrages  committed  on  their  officers,  and  the  neglect  of 


1771.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  35 

the  governors  and  civil  magistrates,  in  giving  them  assistance  and  protection  ;  and 
tlieir  lordships  have  desired  that  I  would  take  such  measures  as  I  shall  judge  most 
expedient,  to  prevent  in  such  governors  and  civil  magistrates,  the  like  neglect  of 
their  duty,  for  the  future. 

From  these  papers,  it  appears,  that  some  of  the  most  violent  of  these  outrages  have 
been  committed  at  Newport,  in  Rhode  Island  ;  particularly,  in  April  last,  when  the 
collector  of  His  Majesty's  customs  at  that  port,  was,  in  the  execution  of  his  duty, 
assaulted,  and  grossly  ill-treated,  even  to  the  danger  of  his  life,  by  a  number  of  the 
inhabitants,  without  any  protection  being  given  him ;  that  in  general,  the  officers  of 
the  customs  have  received  no  support  or  countenance  from  that  government,  and 
have  in  vain  applied  to  the  superior  court  for  writs  of  assistance  in  cases  wliere  such 
writs  were  judged  necessary. 

It  has  given  me  great  concern,  to  receive  complaints,  of  such  a  nature,  against  a  colo- 
ny for  which  I  have  a  great  regai'd,  and  fi-om  which,  1  have  received  such  strong  pro- 
fessions of  loyalt}-  and  duty  to  the  King  ;  but,  after  the  repeated  signification  of  the 
King's  pleasure  to  the  governors  of  all  His  Majesty's  colonies,  that  they  should  use  their 
most  strenuous  efforts,  and  exert  themselves  in  the  most  effectual  manner,  for  the  sup- 
jiort  of  the-  commissioners  of  the  customs,  and  their  officers,  and  for  enabling  them  to 
carry  the  laws  of  trade  into  due  execution  ;  any  further  exhortation  on  that  subject 
would  be  useless  ;  and  it  must  remain  with  those,  to  whom  the  powers  of  government 
in  Rhode  Island,  arc  entrusted,  to  consider  what  must  be  the  consequences,  if,  after 
such  repeated  admonition,  the  laws  of  this  kingdom  are  suffered  to  be  trampled 
upon,  and  violences  and  outrages  of  so  reprehensible  a  nature,  are  committed  with 
impunity.  I  have  the  honor  to  be,  &c.,  &c., 

HILLSBOROUGH. 

To  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations ^  at  East  Greenwich j 
on  the  third  Monday  in  August,  1771. 

The  Hon.  Joseph.  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  a  rate  or  tax,  of  ^12,000, 
lawful  money,  be  assessed  and  levied  upon  the  inhabitants  of 
the  several  towns  in  this  colony  ;  £10,000,  thereof,  to  be  ap- 
propriated towards  sinking  the  outstanding  lawful  money  bills, 
emitted  in  the  year  1762,  and  such  treasurer's  notes  as  have 
been  given  for  said  bills  ;   and  the  other  £2,000,  for  the  sup- 


36  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1771. 

ply  of  the  treasury  ;  and  that  Rowse  J.  Helme  and  Joseph 
Aplin,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee 
to  prepare  a  bill  for  that  purpose  ;  and  that  they  lay  the  same 
before  this  Assembly,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  if  the  town  of  Westerly  shall 
pay  one  half  of  what  remains  unpaid  of  the  said  town's  propor- 
tion of  the  last  colony  tax,  the  general  treasurer  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  directed  to  receive  the  same,  and  issue  out  an  alias  ex- 
ecution for  the  remainder,  returnable  in  six  weeks,  with  the 
interest  accruing  thereon. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  no  part  of  the  bills  of  public 
credit  of  the  old  tenor,  now  in  the  general  treasury,  be  burnt, 
until  further  orders  from  this  Assembly. 

Whereas,  divers  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Providence,  pre- 
ferred a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  the 
street  leading  from  the  court  house  to  the  Main  street,  hath 
been,  by  the  late  heavy  rains,  so  gullied  and  worn,  as  to  ren- 
der it  almost  impassable,  and  endanger  the  foundation  of  the 
court  house,  so  that  unless  it  be  repaired,  it  must  inevitably 
fall  to  the  ground  ;  and  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  said  town, 
as  well  as  those  of  the  adjacent  country,  suffer  many  inconven- 
iences for  the  want  of  a  market  house  ;  provisions  being  often 
almost  spoiled  by  being  carried  about  the  streets  through  wet 
and  heat ;  and  fish  rendered  more  scarce  than  it  would  other- 
wise be,  if  they  had  a  proper  place  to  expose  them  for  sale  ; 
and  therefore  prayed,  that  they  may  have  liberty  to  raise  a  suf- 
ficient sum  of  money,  by  way  of  lottery,  to  pave  and  secure 
the  said  Court  House  street  ;  and  also  to  build  a  public  mar- 
ket on  the  town's  land,  near  the  bridge  ;  on  consideration 
whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  foregoing  petition  be,  and 
the  same  is  hereby,  granted  ;  and  that  Messrs.  Moses  Brown, 
William  Russell,  Amos  Atwell,  James  Lovet  and  Benjamin 
Gushing,  Jr.,  be  appointed  directors  of  the  said  lottery  ;  they 
giving  bonds  in  the  usual  manner,  as  soon  as  the  sum  to  be 
raised,  shall  be  ascertained  ;  provided,  that  no  expense  accrue 
to  the  colony,  thereby. 


1771.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  S7 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  if  the  town  of  Portsmouth  shall 
pay  into  the  general  treasury  the  sum  of  £420,  lawful  money, 
of  what  remains  due  of  the  said  town's  proportion  of  the  last 
colony  rate  ;  and  the  town  of  North  Kingstown  shall  pay 
£100,  lawful  money,  the  said  towns  shall  be  allowed  one 
month  to  pay  the  remainder ;  and  that  the  town  of  Jamestown 
be  allowed  the  same  time,  to  pay  in  the  remainder  of  their 
proportion  of  their  said  rate  ;  the  said  towns  paying  interest 
for  the  same. 

God  save  the  King. 

From  Governor  Hutchinson  of  Massachusetts.,  to  the  Governor 
of  Rhode  Island. 

Boston,  2d  St'jJtember,  1771. 
Sir : — Having  lately  received  His  Majesty's  instructions  for  my  conduct  in  the 
administration  of  government,  it  is  incumbent  on  me,  to  transmit  an  exti-act  from 
them,  to  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  which  I  shall  enclose  to  you ;  and  being,  as  I 
suppose,  nothing  diiferent  from  what  hath  been  transmitted  by  my  predecessors, 
since  the  royal  charter,  I  have  no  occasion  to  make  any  remarks.  I  have  only  to 
add,  that  I  am,  witli  very  great  regard,  &e.,  &c., 

THO.  HUTCHINSON. 
To  the  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Extracts  from  the  King's  Instructions  to  Thomas  Hutchinson, 
Esq.,  Governor  of  Massachusetts  Bay. 

"  Whereas,  we  have  thought  fit,  by  our  commission,  under  our  great  seal,  of  Great 
Britain,  bearing  date  the day  of ,  to  constitute  and  appoint  you,  our  cap- 
tain general  and  governor  in  chief  in  and  over  our  province,  of  the  Massachusetts 
Bay ;  and  likewise  captain  general  and  commander  in  chief  of  the  militia,  and  of 
all  our  forces  by  sea  and  land,  within  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence 
Plantations,  and  the  Narragansett  Country,  or  Iviug's  Province,  in  New  England, 
and  of  the  forts  and  places  of  strength,  within  the  same ;  you  are,  therefore,  duly  to 
observe  the  following  instructions,  viz. : 

You  are  to  cause  notification  to  be  given,  if  not  already  done,  to  our  colonies  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  and  the  Narragansett  Country,  of  the 
powers  wherewith  you  are  entrusted,  concerning  the  militia  forces  and  forts  within 
the  said  colonies  and  country,  as  aforesaid." 

A  true  copy :     THO.  HUTCHINSON. 


RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  1771. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kings- 
town, on  the  last  Wednesday  i?i  October,  1771. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  Jerehiiah  Y/hipple^  Benjamin  Tower,  Da- 
vid Dexter  and  Elisha  Waterman,  preferred  a  petition,  and 
represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  at  the  session  of  this  As- 
sembly, held  in  October,  A.  D.  1770,  they  were  appointed 
directors  of  a  lottery,  to  raise  a  sum  of  money,  to  re-build  the 
bridge  over  Pawtucket  River,  between  the  towns  of  Smithfield 
and  Cumberland,  called  Whipple's  Bridge ;  that  they  did 
raise  the  sum  of  $400,  with  which,  and  an  additional  sum  by 
them  advanced,  they  have  made  the  said  bridge  passable  at 
present  ;  and  that  one  half  of  said  bridge  is  covered  with 
plank  almost  worn  out,  so  that  they  can  last  only  a  few 
months  ;  and  therefore,  they  prayed  this  Assembly,  to  em- 
power them  to  raise  $100  more,  by  way  of  lottery,  to  com- 
plete said  bridge,  and  reimburse  them  the  money  ihey  have 
advanced,  and  to  appoint  a  committee  to  audit  their  accounts; 
and  that  in  case  there  should  be  a  small  sum  remaining,  after 
the  raising  the  said  sum  of  $100,  that  it  may  be  appropriated 
to  the  use  of  said  bridge  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the  foregoing 
petition  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual 
restrictions  of  giving  bond,  &c. 

Whereas,  divers  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  North 
Providence,  preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  As- 
sembly, that  the  road  or  highway  from  Providence  to  Smith- 
field,  leading  by  the  dwelling  houses  of  Capt.  Eseck  Hopkins 
and  Isaiah  Hawkins,  Esq.  ;  and  a  branch  of  the  road  to  the 
eastward   of  the   dwelling  house  of  Mr.  Jonathan  Whipple,  is. 


177 J.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  39 

by  reason  of  the  wetness  of  the  land,  for  about  one  hundred 
and  fifty  rods,  so  muddy  and  miry,  that  at  some  seasons  of  the 
year  it  is  ahiiost  impassable  ;  that  the  said  road  is  much 
wanted  to  be  used  in  passing  through  the  colony  ;  and  that 
the  inhabitants  in  that  district  are  but  few,  which  renders  it 
very  difficult  to  keep  said  road  in  repair ;  and  therefore,  they 
prayed  the  Assembly  to  grant  a  lottery,  for  raisiiig  the  sum  of 
£60,  lawful  money,  to  be  laid  out  in  repairing  the  said  road, 
under  the  direction  of  Thomas  Whipple,  Esq.,  Capt,  Enoch 
Ang'ell,  Mr.  Daniel  Clark  and  Mr.  Hope  Angell ;  on  consid- 
eration whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the  foregoing  pe- 
tition be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  re- 
strictions of  giving  bond,  &c. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  John  Smith  and  John  Innis  Clark,  war- 
dens of  the  Episcopalian  Church,  in  Providence,  preferred  a 
petition,  and  represented  to  this  Assembly,  that  the  congrega- 
tion hath  been  at  a  very  great  expense  in  repairing  the  church, 
so  that  they  are  unable  to  build  a  steeple  and  procure  a 
clock,  which  are  much  wanted,  and  will  prove  ornamental  and 
serviceable  to  the  town  ;  and  therefore,  they  prayed  this  As- 
sembly to  grant  them  liberty  to  raise  the  sum  of  $600,  by  a 
lottery,  for  the  purpose,  aforesaid  ;  and  that  the  said  John  In- 
nis Clark,  John  Smith,  and  Messrs.  Ebenezer  Thompson  and 
Joseph  Nash,  may  be  appointed  directors,  to  carry  on  the 
same  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the  foregoing  pe- 
tition be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  gnnited,  under  the  usual  re- 
strictions ;  and  that  in  case  either  or  any  of  the  directors 
shall  refuse  to  serve,  that  another  or  others  shall  be  appointed 
in  his  or  their  room,  by  the  society  of  the  church,  he  or  they, 
w^ho  shall  be  so  appointed,  giving  bond,  as  usual. 

Whereas,  the  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Esq.,  Ephraim  Bo  wen, 
Esq.,  Samuel  Nightingale,  Esq.,  Mr.  Jacob  Whitman  and  Mr. 
James  Greene,  the  committee  of  the  Presbyterian  or  Congre- 
gational Society,  in  Providence,  preferred  a  petition,  and  rep- 
resented unto  this  Assembly,  that  at  the  session  of  this  Assem- 


40  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE    ISLAND  [1771. 

bly,  held  in  February,  A.  D.  1763,  a  lottery  was  granted,  for 
raising  the  sum  of  £560,  lawful  money,  to  be  applied  to  pur- 
chasing a  parsonage  for  the  use  of  said  society,  necessary 
charges  for  carrying  the  same  into  CKecation,  being  first  deduct- 
ed ;  that  the  said  lottery,  by  reason  of  many  unforseen  difficul- 
ties, hath  hitherto  been  delayed  ;  that  almost  all  the  managers 
have  declined'proceeding  therein  ;  and  that  the  scheme  of  said 
lottery  is  not  thought  so  eligible  as  some  other  ;  and  thereup- 
on, prayed  this  Assembly  to  give  liberty  to  adopt  a  new 
scheme  for  raising  the  said  sum  of  .£560,  lawful  money,  for 
the  purpose,  aforesaid  ;  that  Jabez  Bowen,  Esq.,  Messrs.  Na- 
thaniel Greene,  Samuel  Nightingale,  Jr.,  Charles  Keen  and 
Paul  Allen,  may  be  appointed  managers  or  directors  thereof; 
and  that  the  whole  may  be  under  the  same  regulations  and  re- 
strictions, as  in  the  aforesaid  grant ;  on  consideration  where- 
of- 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the  foregoing  pe- 
tition, be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual 
restrictions  ;  and  that  in  case  either,  or  any  of  the  directors 
shall  refuse  to  serve,  that  another,  or  others,  shall  be  appointed 
in  his  or  their  room,  by  the  said  society  ;  he,  or  they,  who 
shall  be  so  appointed,  giving  bond,  as  usual. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  a  new  jail  be  built  in  the  town 
of  Newport. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  new  prison  house,  to  be 
built  in  Newport,  be  thirty-six  feet  wide,  and  not  exceeding 
forty-five  feet  in  length  ;  that  Mr.  Oliver  Ring  Warner,  Mr. 
Thomas  Freebody,  Walter  Chaloner,  Esq.,  Job  Bennett,  Esq. 
and  Mr.  John  Wanton,  son  of  Gideon,  be  a  committee,  to 
procure  materials  for  building  the  same,  at  cash  price  ;  that 
nothing  be  purchased  but  by  agreement  of  the  major  part  of 
the  committee  ;  that  they  be  empowered  to  draw  money  out  of 
the  general  treasury,  for  that  purpose  ;  and  that  the  said  com- 
mittee inquire  into  the  value  of  the  old  prison  house,  and  en- 
deavor to  find  the  best  place  in  Newport  to  erect  the  new  one 
upon. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Benjamin   Man,  be,  and 


1771.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  41 

he  is  hereby,  appointed  to  finish  the  court  house  in  Provi- 
dence ;  and  to  draw  a  suC&cient  sura  of  money  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury,  for  that  purpose. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  William  Greene  and  Thomas 
Aldrich,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  to  finish  the 
court  house  in  East  Greenwich  ;  and  to  draw  a  sufficient  sum 
of  money  out  of  the  general  treasury,  for  that  purpose. 

Whereas,  the  deputies  of  the  towns  of  Warwick,  North 
Kingstown  and  East  Greenwich,  preferred  a  petition  unto  this 
Assembly,  praying  that  a  lottery  may  be  granted,  for  raising 
$150,  to  build  the  abutments  of  the  bridge,  ordered  to  be  built 
over  Hunt's  River,  (the  overplus,  if  any,  to  be  appropriated  as 
this  Assembly  shall  think  fit)  ;  and  that  said  lottery  may  be 
managed  by  William  Greene,  William  Hall,  John  Northup  and 
Sylvester  Sweet,  Esqs.,  or  any  three  of  them  ;  on  considera- 
tion whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the  foregoing 
petition  be  granted,  under  the  usual  restrictions  of  giving 
bond,  &c. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  cause  two  fair  copies  of  the 
draught  of  the  letter  to  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough,  now  lying 
before  this  Assembly,  to  be  made,  and  transmit  them  to  His 
Lordship  ;  and  also  to  transmit  two  copies,  thereof,  to  the 
agent. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  act  for  the  more  effectual 
repairing  the  highways  in  this  colony,  be  immediately  pub- 
lished in  the  Newport  Mercury  and  Providence  Gazette. 

God  save  the  King. 

Public  Ads  passed  during  the  year  1771. 

[The  following  laws  will  be  found  at  length  in  the  printed  "  Schedules,"  or  acts 
and  resolves  of  the  General  Assembly,  for  the  year  1771.] 

An  Act  incorporating  the  Second  Congi-egational  Church,  in  Newport.     (June.) 
An  Act  to  prevent  hogs  going  at  large  in  the  compact  part  of  the  towns  of  East 

Greemvich  and  Warwick,  adjoining.     (August.) 
An  Act  for  the  relief  of  insolvent  debtors.     (August.) 
An  Act  for  assessing  a  rate  or  tax,  of  £12,000.     (August.) 
An  Act  for  the  more  effectual  repairing  of  the  highAvays  in  this  colony.     (October.) 

VOL.  VII.  6 


42  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1771. 


The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough. 

J^o.  36.1  Rhode  Island,  November  2,  1771. 

My  Lord :— Your  Lordship's  letter,  dated  at  AVhitehall,  the  19th  day  of  July  last,  I 
have  received,  and  communicated  to  the  General  Assembly,  of  this  colony,  who  have 
directed  me  to  return  a  particular  answer  to  the  several  charges  against  the  colony, 
and  its  officers,  therein  contained. 

Your  Lordship  observes,  that  bj'  the  papers  "received  from  the  commissioners  of 
the  customs,  in  America,  it  appears  that  some  of  the  most  violent  of  these  outrages 
have  been  committed  at  Newport,  on  Rhode  Island  ;  particularly  in  April  last,  when 
the  collector  of  His  ]\Iajesty's  customs  at  that  jiort,  was  in  the  execution  of  his  duty, 
assaulted,  and  grossly  ill-treated,  even  to  the  danger  of  his  life,  by  a  number  of  the 
inhabitants,  without  any  protection  being  given  him ;  that  in  general,  the  officers  of 
the  customs  have  received  no  support  or  countenance  from  that  government ;  and 
have  in  vain  apphed  to  the  superior  court,  for  writs  of  assistance  in  cases  when  such 
writs  were  judged  necessary." 

To  this,  I  answer,  that  Mr.  Dudley,  collector  of  the  customs  at  Newport,  in  Api-il 
last,  in  the  dead  time  of  the  night,  singly  and  alone,  went  on  board  a  vessel  lying  at 
one  of  the  wharves  in  Newport,  where  he  met  with  a  number  of  persons,  supposed 
to  be  drunken  sailors,  and  was  cruelly  and  scandulously  abused  h\  them ;  that  Mr. 
Dudley  never  applied  to  any  civil  authority  for  protection  or  assistance,  until  after 
the  abuse  had  happened.  Then  application  was  made  to  me,  by  the  officers  of  the 
customs ;  and  what  ensued  upon  that  application,  will  best  appear  by  the  letters  that 
passed  between  these  officers  and  myself,  at  that  time;  copies  of  which,  are  here- 
with '  ]  ansmitted,  for  Your  Lordship's  satisfaction. 

Th.it  Mr.  Dudley,  or  any  other  persons,  never  afterwards  made  any  application 
to  a  y  of  the  authority  in  this  colony,  for  apprehending  those  persons  that  had  thus 
abu:^;  d  him ;  which,  had  he  done,  the  government  would  have  exerted  itself  in  the 
most  vigorous  manner  for  bringing  to  justice  and  punisliing  those  atrocious  offend- 
ers ;  that  it  does  not  evidently  appear,  that  any  one  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  colony 
were  concerned  in  or  privy  to  thej  abuse  offered  to  Mr.  Dudley ;  but  it  is  appre- 
hended, it  was  wholly  perpetrated  by  a  company  of  lawless  seamen. 

As  to  that  part  of  the  complaint  against  the  superior  court,  for  refusing  writs  of 
assistance,  the  General  Assembly,  Avilling  to  know,  the  truth  of  that  matter,  called 
the  justices  of  the  superior  court  before  them,  to  give  an  account  of  what  applica- 
tion had  been  made  to  them  for  writs  of  assistance,  and  what  was  the  occasion  they 
refused  to  give  the  officers  of  the  customs  that  protection  the  law  required  them  to 
give  ;  that  all  the  justices  of  the  superior  court  declared  upon  their  honors,  to  the 
Assembly,  that  no  kind  of  application  Avhatsoever,  had  been  made  to  them,  or  any 
of  them,  by  any  officers  of  the  customs,  for  any  writ  of  assistance  or  other  protection, 
of  any  kind,  for  several  years  last  past ;  and  the  justices  of  the  superior  court,  further 
said,  that  when  any  application  should  be  made  to  them,  by  the  custom  house  offi- 
cers, tor  writs  of  assistance  or  other  protection,  that  they  would  readily  and  cheer- 
fully give  them  every  assistance  in  the  execution  of  their  duty,  Avhich  the  laAv  puts 
in  the  power  of  the  superior  court  to  give. 

And  now  My  Lord,  permit  me,  in  my  turn,  to  complain  of  the  officers  of  His 
Majesty's  customs  in  America,  for  their  abusing  and  misrejjresenting  the  colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  its  officers ;  for  how  unkind  and  ungentlemanly-like,  is  it  for  offi- 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  43 

cers,  sent  abroad  by  the  crown,  to  reside  in  the  colonies,  by  every  means  in  their 
power,  to  traduce  and  even  falsely  accuse  His  Majesty's  faithful  subjects  of  this 
colony,  to  their  sovereign  and  his  ministers  of  state. 

I  am  now  to  thank  Your  Lordship  for  the  kind  concern  you  are  pleased  to  ex- 
press for  this  colony  and  its  safety,  and  hope  that  Your  Lordship  will  transfer  your 
reprehensions  from  the  innocent  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  to  those  guilty  officers  who 
have  so  shamefully  misinformed  you  in  all  those  matters  contained  in  Your  Lord- 
ship's letter.  I  am,  &c.,  &c.,  JOSEPH  WANTON. 

To  the  Right  Honorable  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the 
first  Wednesday  of  May,  1772. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

The  following  officers,  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged  : 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Samuel  Dyre,  Mr.  Thomas  Wickes, 

Mr.  James  Barker,  Mr.  Jonathan  Randall, 

Mr.  Solomon  Drown,  Mr.  John  Congdon, 

Mr.  David  Harris,  Mr.  Rowland  Robinson. 

Mr.  John  Almy,  Mr.  William  Richmond, 

DEPUTIES. 

Newport.  Providence. 

Mr.  Thomas  Cranston,  Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins. 

Mr.  John  Wanton,  Mr.  Thomas  Greene, 

Mr.  George  Hazard,  Mr.  Benjamin  JMan, 

Mr.  Joseph  Wanton,  Jr.,  Mr.  John  Jenckes, 
Mr.  Oliver  R.  Warner, 
Mr.  Thomas  Freebody. 


44 


KECORBS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    HHODE   ISLAND 


[177: 


DEPUTIES. 


Portsmouth. 
Mr.  Metcalfe  Bowler, 
Mr.  John  Jepson, 
Mr.  Joseph  Cundall, 
Mr.  Jonathan  Brownell. 

Warwick. 
Mr.  Benjamin  Greene, 
Mr.  Samuel  Aborn, 
Mr.  Jacob  Greene, 
Mr.  Christopher  Greene. 

Westerly. 
Mr.  James  Rhodes, 
Mr.  Phineas  Clark. 

North  Kingstown. 
Mr.  Peter  Phillips, 
Mr.  John  Northup. 

South  Kingstown. 
Mr.  John  Rose, 
Mr.  Samuel  Babcock. 
East  Greenvnch. 
Mr.  Sylvester  Sweet, 
Mr.  Thomas  Tillinghast. 

Jamestown. 
Mr.  John  Gardner, 
Capt.  Samuel  Slocum. 

Smithfield. 
Mr.  Welcome  Arnold. 

Scituate, 
Mr.  Ezekiel  Cornell, 
Mr.  Rufus  Hopkins. 

Glocester. 
Mr.  Abraham  Waterman, 
Mr.  Thomas  Wood. 
Charlestown. 
Mr.  Samuel  Kinyon, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Hoxsie,  Jr. 


West  Greenwich. 
Mr.  William  Nichols, 
Mr.  Thomas  Gorton. 

Coventry. 
Mr.  Natlianiel  Greene,  Jr., 
Mr.  Ichabod  Bowen. 

Exeter. 
Mr.  George  Pearce, 
Mr.  Jeffrey  W^ilcox. 
Middletovm. 
Mr.  Joshua  Barker, 
Mr.  Isaac  Smith. 
Bristol, 
Col.  Simeon  Potter, 
Mr.  William  Bradford. 

Tiverton. 
Mr.  Edward  Gray, 
Mr.  Oliver  Cook. 

Little  Compton. 
Mr.  Thomas  Church, 
Mr.  George  Pearce. 

Warren. 
Mr.  Sylvester  Child, 
Mr.  Nathan  Miller. 
Cumberland. 
Mr.  John  Dexter, 
Mr.  Joseph  Brown. 
Richmond. 
Mr.  Edward  Perry, 
Mr.  Robert  Stanton. 

Cranston. 
Mr.  John  Andrevrs, 
Mr.  William  Dexter. 

Hopkinton. 
Mr.  Thomas  Wells,  Jr., 
Capt.  Abel  Tanner. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  45 

DEPUTIES. 

Johnston.  Barrington. 

Mr.  Peleg  Williams.  Mr.  Nathaniel  Martin. 

North  Providence. 
Capt.  Eseck  Hopkins, 
Mr.  Jonathan  Jenckes,  Jr. 

The  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  speaker  ;  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 

Mr.  Henry  Ward,  secretary. 

Mr.  Henry  Marchant,  attorney  general. 

Mr.  Joseph  Clarke,  general  treasurer. 

Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  chief  justice  of  the  superior  court 
of  judicature,  court  of  assize  and  general  jail  delivery. 

SHERIFFS    OF    THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

Newport  county — Mr.  Walter  Chaloner.  Providence  county 
— Mr.  Paul  Tew.  Kings  county — Mr.  Beriah  Brown.  Bris- 
tol county — Mr.  John  Brown.     Kent  county — Mr.  Henry  Rice. 

FIELD    OFFICERS    OF    THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

Newport  county — Mr.  Daniel  Dunham,  colonel ;  Mr.  Isaac 
Dayton,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  John  Forrester,  major. 

Providence  county — Mr.  Knight  Dexter,  colonel  ;  Mr. 
Abraham  Winsor,  lieutenant  colonel  ;  Mr.  Chad  Brown, 
major. 

Kings  county — Mr.  Thomas  Gardner,  colonel  ;  Mr.  Moses 
Barber,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  Jonathan  Vaughan,  major. 

Bristol  county — Mr.  Simeon  Potter,  colonel ;  Mr.  Nathaniel 
Martin,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  Thomas  Gray,  major. 

Kent  county — Mr.  John  Waterman,  colonel ;  Mr.  Aaron 
Bowen,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  Benjamin  Vaughan,  major. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  appointed  to 
•build  the  new  jail,  in  Newport,  proceed  to  build   the   same, 


46  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1772. 

agreeably  to  the  plan  presented  to  this  Assembly,  excepting 
that  the  front  be  made  two  feet  longer  than  was  before  ordered, 
and  the  entry  be  ten  feet  wide  ;  and  that  no  money  be  drawn 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  without  the  consent  of  the  major 
part  of  the  committee. 

Whereas,  Henry  Harry,  Christopher  Harry,  James  Daniel, 
Samuel  Niles,  James  Niles,  Ephraim  Coheas,  Thos.  Lewis,  John 
Shattock  and  Joseph  Tucky,  the  council  for  the  tribe  ofNarragan- 
sett  Indians,  in  this  colony,  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that 
they  are  all  of  opinion,  it  will  be  best  to  sell  the  little  house, 
and  the  two  acre  lot,  and  the  wood  lot,  (the  exact  quantity  not 
being  ascertained),  and  as  much  of  Fort  Neck,  as  will  pay  all 
Thomas  Ninegret's  just  debts  ;  and  that  they  are  all  of  one 
mind,  to  sell  so  much  of  Fort  Neck,  as  will  pay  those  debts, 
and  to  reserve  the  lands  which  will  be  left,  to  support  all  their 
poor  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  appointed  to 
sell  a  part  of  the  real  estate  of  Thomas  Ninegret,  the  late  sa- 
chem, for  the  payment  of  his  debts,  proceed  to  do  the  same, 
agreeably  to  the  above  mentioned  proposal. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £90,  lawful 
money,  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to- 
wards re-building  Pawtucket  Bridge  ;  provided,  the  inhabit- 
ants of  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  raise  money,  and 
build  one  of  the  abutments  ;  and  that  Messrs.  Eseck  Hopkins 
and  Stephen  Jenckes,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a 
committee,  and  empowered  to  draw  the  said  sum  out  of  the 
general  treasury,  and  to  lay  out  the  same,  for  the  purposes, 
aforesaid  ;   and  that  they  procure  the  materials  at  cash  price. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority of  the  same  it  is  enacted,  that  the  act  passed  by  this 
Assembly,  at  the  session  held  at  East  Greenwich,  on  the  third 
Monday  in  August,  A.  B.  1771,  entitled  "  An  act  for  the  re- 
lief of  insolvent  debtors,"  be,  and  it  is  hereby,  repealed,  and 
rendered  null  and  void  for  the  future. 

Whereas,  Mrs.  Catharine  Earl,  exhibited  unto  this  Assem- 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  47 

bly,  an  account  by  her  charged  against  the  colony,  for  billet- 
ing a  party  of  His  Majesty's  troops,  passing  through  this  colo- 
ny ;   and  the  said  account  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  £0  Qs.,  lawful  money,  being  the  amount 
thereof,  be  paid  the  said  Catharine  Earl,  out  of  the  general 
treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  draught  of  a  letter  to 
Admiral  Montagu,  be  approved  ;  that  His  Honor  the  Gov- 
ernor, be,  and  hereby  is,  requested  to  transmit  the  same  to  the 
admiral  ;  and  also,  to  transmit  to  the  secretary  of  state,  as 
soon  as  may  be,  a  narrative  containing  all  the  proceedings  re- 
ferred to  in  the  said  letter,  together  with  a  copy  of  the  Ad- 
miral's letter,  and  the  said  answer ;  and  to  lay  a  copy  thereof, 
before  this  Assembly,  at  the  next  session.* 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  several  collectors  of  taxes 
within  this  colony,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  empowered  to  col- 
lect interest  for  all  the  taxes  now  unpaid,  from  the  individuals 
who  have  not  paid  the  same. 

Whereas,  complaint  hath  frequently  been  made  to  this  As- 
sembly, that,  through  the  combination  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
island  of  New"  Shoreham,  no  writ  of  mesne  process  or  execu- 
tion, can  be  served  upon  any  of  the  said  inhabitants  ;  who  do, 
thereby,  in  a  great  measure,  evade  justice. 

For  remedy,  whereof,  this  Assembly  have  thought  proper 
that  some  more  effectual  laws,  than  are  now  in  force,  be  made, 
particularly  for  the  inhabitants  of  said  island  ;  and  that  the 
said  town  may  have  a  full  hearing,  before  any  such  laws  be 
made, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  clerk  of  the  lower  house, 
be,  and  he  is  hereby,  directed  to  issue  forth  a  notification  to 
the  inhabitants  of  the  said  island  of  New  Shoreham,  to  appear 
before  this  Assembly,  at  the  next  session,  to  be  held  by  ad- 
journment, at  Newport,  on  the  third  Monday  in  August  next, 
to  show  cause,   if  any  they  have,  why  more  effectual  laws 

*  This  relates  to  events  which  led  to  the  destruction  of  the  Gaspeo ;  all  the  particulars 
and  documents  relative  to  which,  are  inserted  at  the  close  of  the  following  August  session. 


48  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

should  not  be   made,  particularly  for  the   inhabitants  of  New 
Shoreham,  for  bringing  them  to  justice. 
God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  cf  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport^  on 
the  third  Monday  in  August,  1772, 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  lion.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  divers  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Newport,  pre- 
ferred a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  at 
the  session  of  this  Assembly,  held  in  February,  A.  D.  1768,  a 
lottery  was  granted,  to  raise  the  sum  of  $500,  to  be  applied 
towards  the  paving  of  King  street,  in  Newport,  aforesaid  ; 
that  the  directors  have  accordingly  raised  the  said  sum,  but  find 
it  insufficient  for  that  purpose,  owing  to  the  situation  of  the 
street,  which  rendered  the  making  a  large  common  sewer  ne- 
cessary ;  the  charge,  whereof,  was  much  greater  than  it  was 
estimated  at ;  and  that  the  finishing  the  said  street,  upon  the 
plan  proposed,  will  not  only  make  it  very  elegant,  but  ex- 
tremely useful  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  said  town,  in  general  ; 
and  thereupon,  prayed  this  Assembly  to  enable  them  to  raise 
a  further  sum  of  money,  sufficient  to  complete  the  paving  and 
other  necessary  repairs  of  the  said  street,  by  a  lottery,  to  con- 
sist of  one  or  more  classes,  as  the  directors  shall  think  most 
prudent ;  that  the  present  directors  may  be  continued,  and 
empowered  to  perform  the  said  business  ;  and  that  if  any  of 
them  shaH  refuse,  the  town  of  Newport  may  appoint  one  or 
more  directors  in  his  or  their  stead,  refusing  ;  the  person  or 
persons  so  to  be  appointed,  giving  bond  in  the  usual  manner  ; 
on  consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it   enacted   by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority   thereof,    it   is    enacted,  that   the    aforesaid    petition 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  49 

be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  restric- 
tions ;  provided,  that  the  colony  incur  no  expense  in  con- 
sequence thereof. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  John  Dexter,  Esq.,  Mr.  Oliver 
Ring  Warner  and  Mr.  Rufus  Hopkins,  be,  and  they  are  here- 
by, appointed  a  committee,  to  prepare  a  bill  to  empower  the 
several  town  councils,  in  this  colony,  to  lay  out  drift  ways,  as 
well  as  highways. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  John  Jepson,  Esq.  and  Mr. 
John  Jenckes,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  commit- 
tee to  prepare  a  bill  for  destroying  barberry  bushes,  throughout 
this  colony. 

Whereas,  John  Dexter  and  Joseph  Brown,  Esqs.,  deputies 
from  the  town  of  Cumberland,  preferred  a  petition,  and  repre- 
sented unto  this  Assembly,  that  the  bridge  built  over  Paw- 
tucket  River,  between  the  towns  of  Smithfield  and  Cumberland, 
aforesaid,  near  the  Furnace  Unity,  so  called,  which  was  first 
built  by  lottery,  hath,  by  length  of  time,  and  the  great  floods 
in  the  said  river,  during  the  last  winter,  become  almost  impas- 
sable, and  unless  repaired,  will  very  soon  become  useless  ;  and 
thereupon,  prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  them  another  lottery, 
to  raise  the  sum  of  £40,  lawful  money,  to  repair  the  said 
bridge  ;  and  that  Abner  Lapham,  Esq.  and  Capt.  John  Fisk, 
of  said  Cumberland,  may  be  appointed  managers,  thereof; 
on  consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority of  the  same  it  is  enacted,  that  the  aforesaid  petition 
be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  restric- 
tions ;  provided,  that  no  expense  be  incurred  by  the  colony,  in 
consequence  thereof. 

Whereas,  divers  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Barring- 
ton,  preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly, 
that  the  Congregational  meeting  house  in  said  town,  is  very 
much  out  of  repair ;  that  the  laying  out  three  roads,  one  to 
the  southward,  and  two  to  the  westward  of  the  said  meeting 
house,  will  greatly  accomnjodate  the  inhabitants  and  trav-; 
elers  towards  Fuller's  Ferry,  and  the  meeting  house  ;    and 

VOL.  VII.  7 


50  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1772. 

that  their  circumstances  are  such,  they  cannot  effect  the  same, 
without  the  interposition  of  this  Assembly  ;  and  therefore 
prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  them  a  lottery,  upon  such 
scheme  as  the  managers  shall  think  proper,  to  raise  the  sum  of 
£165,  lawful  money  ;  £110,  thereof,  to  be  appropriated 
towards  repairing  the  said  meeting  house,  and  the  remainder 
towards  opening  or  laying  out  the  said  highways  ;  and  that 
James  Brown,  Josiah  Humphrey,  Nathaniel  Martin,  Samuel 
Allen  and  Edward  Bos  worth,  Esqs.,  may  be  appointed  man- 
agers of  the  said  lottery  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  aforesaid  petition  be, 
and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  restric- 
tions ;  provided,  that  no  expense  be  brought  upon  the  colony 
thereby. 

Whereas,  the  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Esq.,  exhibited  unto 
this  Assembly  an  account,  by  him  charged  against  the  colony, 
for  the  expenses  he  was  at,  in  going  to  Pawtuxet,  and  taking 
evidences  respecting  the  loss  of  His  Majesty's  schooner 
Gaspee  ;  for  cash  paid  for  victualling  while  on  shore,  and 
carrying  on  board  the  Beaver,  the  people  belonging  to  said 
schooner,  and  provisions  during  their  passage  ;  for  cash  paid 
for  the  hire  and  expenses  of  an  express  sent  to  Newport,  to 
His  Honor  the  Governor,  with  an  account  of  the  said  affair, 
and  copies  of  the  depositions  ;  and  for  cash  paid  for  defraying 
the  charge  of  taking  up,  and  securing  sundry  stores  belonging 
to  the  said  schooner  ;  and  the  said  account  being  duly  ex- 
amined,— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  £9  Is.  9d.,  lawful  money,  being  the  amount 
thereof,  be  paid  the  said  Darius  Sessions,  out  of  the  general 
treasury. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Samuel  Aborn,  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly, 
an  account  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  the  ex- 
penses of  taking  up,  and  securing  the  anchors,  guns  and  other 
stores,  of  His  Majesty's  schooner,  the  Gaspee,  &c.  ;  and  the 
said  accouut  being  duly  examined, — 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  51 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed;  and  that  £11  I85.  2d.,  lawful  money,  being  the 
balance  thereof,  be  paid  the  said  Samuel  Aborn,  out  of  the 
general  treasury. 

Whereas,  His  Honor  the  Governor,  hath  laid  before  this  As- 
sembly, a  full  and  particular  narrativ^e  of  the  measures  he  hath 
pursued,  in  consequence  of  the  burning  of  His  Majesty's 
schooner,  the  Gaspee  ;  and  of  the  steps  he  hath  taken  to  dis- 
cover the  perpetrators  of  that  atrocious  piece  of  villainy  ;  upon 
due  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  whole  of  His  Honor's  pro- 
ceedings be  approved  ;  and  that  His  Honor  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  requested  to  transmit  a  copy  thereof,  to  the  agent  of 
the  colony,  in  Great  Britain  ;  and  to  pursue  such  further  mea- 
sures respecting  the  said  affair,  during  the  recess  of  the 
General  Assembly,  as  shall  appear  necessary. 

And  whereas.  His  Honor  issued  a  proclamation,  promising  a 
reward  of  i^lOO,  sterling,  to  any  person  or  persons  who  shall 
discover  the  persons  guilty  of  the  said  crime  ;  — 

It  is  therefore  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  this  Assembly 
will  make  provision  for  paying  the  above  mentioned  reward, 
in  case  any  person  or  persons  shall  be  entitled  thereto. 

And  it  is  farther  voted  and  resolved,  that  no  copies  of  letters, 
or  other  proceedings,  relating  to  the  above  mentioned  affair, 
be  delivered  out  by  the  secretary,  to  any  person  or  persons, 
whomsoever. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  letter  from  His  Honor  the 
Governor,  to  the  Right  Honorable  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough,  of 
the  20th  of  May  last,  containing  a  narrative  of  the  procedings 
respecting  His  Honor's  calling  Lieutenant  Dudingston  before 
him,  &c.,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  approved. 

Whereas,  Joseph  Rhodes,  of  Cranston,  cooper,  hath  in  his 
hand^  the  sum  of  $79,  belonging  to  Lieutenant  Dudingston, 
which  he  refuseth  to  deliver, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the 
Deputy  Governor,  and  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby,  requested  and  empowered  to  make  in- 


52  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

quiry  into  that  affair,  and  to  settle  all  differences  between  the 
parties  ;  and  that  if  the  said  Rhodes  will  not  comply  there- 
with, they  advise  the  said  Dudingston  to  [take]  the  proper 
method  for  obtaining  his  right. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  John  Greene  and  Company,  and  Griffin 
Greene,  all  of  Coventry  ;  and  Nathanial  Greene  and  Company, 
preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that 
on  the  night  of  the  17th  instant,  the  buildings  of  the  forge,  in 
said  Coventry,  of  which  they  were  owners,  were  entirely  con- 
sumed by  fire  ;  that  the  loss  is  so  great  that  they  cannot  repair 
it  without  assistance  ;  that  some  of  them  are  considerably 
indebted,  have  increasing  families  to  maintain,  and  by  the 
said  misfortune  are  deprived  of  their  principal  dependance  ; 
that,  although  they,  the  petitioners,  are  the  immediate  sufferers, 
yet  many  others  must  consequently  share  in  the  calamity,  as  a 
considerable  part  of  the  country  adjacent,  were  employed  by 
means  of  said  forge  ;  which  also  furnished  a  very  material 
and  expensive  article  for  shipping ;  and  that,  if  the  said  forge 
be  not  repaired,  the  anchor  works,  which  still  remain,  will  be 
in  a  manner  useless  ;  and  thereupon,  prayed  this  Assembly  to 
grant  them  a  lottery,  to  raise  the  sum  of  $2,500,  under  the 
direction  of  Messrs.  William  Greene,  Christopher  Greene  and 
Charles  Holden,  they  giving  bond  for  the  faithful  performance 
of  the  said  trust ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  aforesaid  petition  be, 
and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted. 

Whereas,  INIessrs.  Nicholas  Goddard,  Samuel  Gorton,  Caleb 
Hill,  Hopkins  Cooke  and  William  Arnold,  in  behalf  of  them- 
selves and  others,  of  the  denomination  of  Baptists,  in  and 
about  the  town  of  East  Greenwich,  in  the  county  of  Kent,  pre- 
ferred a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  the 
Baptist  meeting  house,  in  said  town,  is  very  much  decayed, 
and  cannot  be  repaired  to  advantage  ;  that  the  number  of  peo- 
ple who  attend  religious  worship  in  said  house,  is  increased  to 
such  a  degree,  as  to  make  a  larger  meeting  house  necessary  ; 
and  that  the  poverty  of  the  members  renders  it  impracticable 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  53 

toi^build]  a  new  one,  without  assistance  ;  and  thereupon,  they 
prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  them  the  liberty  of  raising  the 
sum  of  $1,500,  by  lottery,  to  be  applied  towards  erecting  a 
Baptist  meeting  house  in  the  said  town  ;  and  that  they,  the 
petitioners,|may  be  appointed  directors  of  the  said  lottery,  giv- 
ing bond,  as  usual,  for  the  faithful  discharge  of  said  trust  ;  on 
consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  foregoing  petition  be, 
and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  restrictions. 

Whereas,  divers  freemen,  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  War- 
wick, preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assem- 
bly, that  the  town  wharf,  in  Warwick  harbor,  is  so  far  gone  to 
decay,  that  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  land  upon  said  wharf, 
or  take  off  any  kind  of  goods  or  merchandise,  whatever  ;  and 
therefore  prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  them  a  lottery,  to  raise 
the  sum  of  $500,  to  be  appropriated  to  the  building  a  wharf 
on  the  highway  laid  out  to  said  Warwick  harbor,  for  that  pur- 
pose ;  which  wharf  may  be  freely  made  use  of,  by  any  of  the 
inhabitants  of  this  colony,  wharfage  free  ;  and  that  Capt.  Ben- 
jamin Gorton,  Capt.  Thomas  Greene  and  Capt.  John  Lippitt, 
may  be  appointed  managers  in  the  said  business  ;  on  consid- 
eration whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  foregoing  petition  be, 
and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  restrictions. 

Whereas,  divers  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Newport,  pre- 
ferred a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  the 
street  called  Pelham  street,  in  Newport,  aforesaid,  is  so  sit- 
uated that  it  cannot  be  kept  in  repair  without  very  great  ex- 
pense, unless  the  same  be  paved  ;  and  thereupon,  prayed  this 
Assembly  to  grant  them  a  lottery,  for  paving  the  said  street, 
to  be  divided  into  classes,  at  the  discretion  of  the  directors,  so 
that  a  sum  sufficient  for  carrying  the  said  design  into  execu- 
tion, may  be  raised  ;  and  that  Messrs.  Simon  Pease,  Robert 
Stoddard,  Charles  Handy,  John  Bannister,  Thomas  Gordon 
Stelle  and  Samuel  Bours,  may  be  appointed  directors  of  the 


54  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

said  lottery,  they  giving  bond  for  the  faithful  execution  of  the 
said  trust  ;   oa  consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  aforesaid  petition  be, 
and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted. 

God  save  the  King. 


Public  Acts  passed  during  the  year  1772. 

[The  following  laws  will  be  found  at  length  in  the  printed  "  Sc-hedules,"  or  acts 
and  resolves  of  the  General  Assembly,  for  the  year  1772.] 

An  Act  incorporating  Field's  Fountain  Society.     (May.) 

An  additional  Act  empowering  justices  of  the  inferior  court  of  common  pleas,  or  any 

three  of  them,  to  constitute  and  hold  special  courts  of  common  pleas,  on  certain 

occasions.     (TVIay.) 
An  Act  for  assessing  a  rate  or  tax  of  £12,000,  lawful  money.     (August.) 
An    Act   to   prevent   horse    stealing,    and   to   punish   the   persons  guilty  thereof. 

(August.) 
An  Act  for  destroying  barberry  bushes  throughout  this  colony.     (August.) 
An  Act  empowering  the  several  town  councils  in  this  colony,  to  lay  out  drift-ways  in 

their  respective  towns.     (August.) 

The  Earl  of  Dartmouth  to  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode- 
Island. 

Whitehall,  August  14,  1772. 

Gentlemen  : — The  King  ha-ving  been  graciously  pleased  to  appoint  me  to  be  one 
of  His  Majesty's  principal  secretaries  of  state,  and  to  commit  to  my  care,  the  dis- 
patch of  all  such  business  as  relates  to  His  Majesty's  colonies,  I  take  the  earliest  op- 
portunity of  acquainting  you  therewith. 

It  will  give  me  great  satisfaction  to  be  able  to  fulfill  His  Majesty's  gracious  inten- 
tions in  this  appointment ;  and  as  it  is  His  Majesty's  pleasure  that  your  dispatches 
should,  for  the  future,  be  addressed  to  me,  I  shall  not  fail  to  lay  them  immediately  be- 
fore the  King,  and  to  transmit  to  you  such  orders  as  His  Majesty  shall  tliink  fit  to 
give  thereujjon.  I  am,  &c.,  &c. 

DARTMOUTH. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  llhode  Island. 


A  HISTORY  OF  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY'S 
SCHOONER  GASPEE,  IN  NARRAGANSETT  BAY,  ON  THE  lOTII 
JUNE,  1772;  ACCOMPANIED  BY  THE  CORRESPONDENCE  CON- 
NECTED THEREWITH ;  THE  ACTION  OF  THE  GENERAL  ASSEM- 
BLY OF  THE  COLONY  OF  RHODE  ISLAND  THEREON,  AND  THE 
OFFICIAL  JOURNAL  OF  THE  PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  COINLVHS- 
SION  OF  INQUIRY  APPOINTED  BY  KING  GEORGE  THE  THIRD, 
ON  THE  SAI^IE. 


54  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

said  lottery,  they  giving  bond  for  the  faithful  execution  of  tlie 
said  trust  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  aforesaid  petition  be, 
and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted. 

God  save  the  King. 


Public  Ads  passed  during  the  year  1772. 

[Tlie  following  laws  vaW  be  found  at  length  in  the  printed  '•  Schedules,"  or  acts 
and  resolves  of  the  General  Assembly,  for  the  year  1772.] 

An  Act  ineorporating  Field's  Fountain  Society.     (May.) 

An  additional  Act  empowering  justices  of  the  inferior  court  of  common  pleas,  or  any 

three  of  them,  to  constitute  and  hold  special  courts  of  common  pleas,  on  certain 

occasions.     (]May.) 
An  Act  for  assessing  a  rate  or  tax  of  £  1 2,000,  lawful  money.     (August.) 
An    Act   to   prevent   horse   stealing,    and   to   punish   the   persons  guilty  thereof. 

(August.) 
An  Act  for  destroying  barberry  bushes  tlu'oughout  this  colony.     (August.) 
An  Act  empowering  the  several  town  councils  in  this  colony,  to  lay  out  drift-ways  in 

their  respective  towns.     (August.) 

The  Earl  of  Dartmouth  to  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode- 
Island. 

AVhitehall,  August  14,  1772. 

Gentlemen  : — The  King  having  been  graciouslj-  pleased  to  appoint  me  to  be  one 
of  His  Majesty's  principal  secretaries  of  state,  and  to  commit  to  my  care,  the  dis- 
patch of  all  such  business  as  relates  to  His  Majesty's  colonies,  I  take  the  earliest  op- 
portunity of  acquainting  you  therewith. 

It  will  give  me  great  satisfaction  to  be  able  to  fulfill  His  Majesty's  gracious  inten- 
tions in  this  appointment ;  and  as  it  is  His  Majesty's  pleasure  that  your  dispatches 
should,  for  the  future,  be  addressed  to  me,  I  shall  not  fail  to  lay  them  immediately  be- 
fore the  King,  and  to  transmit  to  you  such  orders  as  His  Majesty  shall  think  lit  to 
give  thereupon.  I  am,  &c.,  &c. 

DARTMOUTH. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 


A  HISTORY  OF  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  HIS  BRITANNIC  MAJESTY'S 
SCHOONER  GASPEE,  IN  NARRAGANSETT  BAY,  ON  THE  lOTII 
JUNE,  1772;  ACCOMPANIED  BY  THE  CORRESPONDENCE  CON- 
NECTED THEREWITH ;  THE  ACTION  OF  THE  GENERAL  ASSEM- 
BLY OF  THE  COLONY  OF  RHODE  ISLAND  THEREON,  AND  THE 
OFFICIAL  JOURNAL  OF  THE  PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  COMMIS- 
SION OF  INQUIRY  APPOINTED  BY  KING  GEORGE  THE  THIRD, 
ON  THE  SAIilE. 


58  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1772. 

The  records  of  the  proceedings  and  the  correspondence 
of  the  preceding  years,  show  that  an  illicit  trade  had  long 
been  carried  on,  not  only  in  Rhode  Island,  but  in  the  other 
English  colonies.  They  show,  too,  that  efforts  had  been 
repeatedly  made  by  the  commissioners  of  customs,  to  put 
a  stop  to  this  practice,  by  placing  armed  vessels  in  Narrngan- 
sett  Bay,  and  at  other  places  along  the  coast,  from  Casco 
Bay  to  Cape  Ilenlopen,  in  1764.  Serious  riots,  too,  had, 
in  several  instances  occurred,  in  consequence  of  the  vigi- 
lance of  the  custom  house  officers,  in  their  endeavors  to 
check  this  illicit  trade. 

The  vessel  assigned  to  this  station,  in  1764,  by  the  King's 
authority,  was  the  schooner  St.  John,  Lieut.  Hill,  commander. 
This  vessel  seized  the  cargo  of  a  brig,  which  had  discharged 
near  Rowland's  Ferry,  and  following  her  at  sea,  made  a  prize 
of  her,  and  brought  her  to  Newport.  Other  diiTiculties,  which 
grew  out  of  her  presence,  at  Newport,  led  to  the  fitting  out 
of  an  armed  sloop,  with  the  intention  of  destroying  her,  which 
was  only  prevented  by  the  presence  of  the  "  Squirrel  "  man  of 
war,  in  that  harbor.  Nevertheless,  the  people  on  board  the 
sloop  landed  on  Goat  Island,  seized  the  battery,  and  discharged 
its  guns  at  the  large  ship. 

During  the  same  year,  another  event  took  place  in  the  har- 
bor of  Newport,  which  tended  greatly  to  exasperate  the  peo- 
ple. The  Maidstone,  a  vessel  belonging  to  the  British  navy, 
lay  here,  several  months,  and  gave  great  dissatisfaction,  by  im- 
pressing seamen  from  vessels  entering  the  harbor,  as  well  as 
in  taking  them  from  the  boats  and  small  craft  in  the  bay. 
Other  ships  of  the  royal  navy,  which  visited  Newport,  also  had 
difficulties  with  the  people  there,  all  of  which  tended  to  arouse 
them,  and  lead  to  some  measures  of  retaliation.  The  climax 
was  reached,  when  a  brig  from  Africa,  entering  the  port,  was 
boarded  by  the  ofiQcers  from  the  Maidstone,  and  her  entire 
crew  pressed  into  the  naval  service.  The  same  night,  a  mob 
of  about  five  hundred  men  and  boys,  exasperated  by  the  affair, 
seized  one  of  the  boats  belonging  to  the  Maidstone,  which  lay 
at  the  wharf,  pulled  her   on   shore,  and  after   dragging  her 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  59 

through  the  streets  to  the  Common,  in  front  of  the  court  house, 
burnt  her,  amid  the  shouts  of  an  immense  crowd,  which  the 
occasion  had  brought  together.  The  affair  was  so  suddenly 
concocted  and  carried  into  effect,  that  the  authorities  had  no 
time  to  interfere. 

The  next  important  event  in  order,  in  resisting  the  authority 
of  the  government  in  its  efforts  to  suppress  illicit  trade,  was 
the  affair  of  the  armed  sloop  Liberty,  Capt.  Reid,  which  the 
commissioners  of  the  customs  had  sent  to  Newport,  in  1769. 
This  officer  had  exhibited  an  extraordinary  zeal  in  executing 
the  orders  he  had  received,  and  had  greatly  annoyed  vessels 
entering  our  ports. 

On  the  17th  July,  while  cruising  in  Long  Island  Sound,  he 
took  a  brig  and  a  sloop,  belonging  to  Connecticut,  which  he 
suspected  had  been  engaged  in  illicit  trade,  and  brought  them 
to  Newport.  The  commander  of  the  brig,  Capt.  Packwood, 
it  appeared,  had  duly  reported  his  cargo  at  the  custom  house, 
before  sailing,  and  no  proof  was  exhibited  that  he  had  made 
any  attempt  to  evade  the  revenue.  On  the  19th,  as  no 
charges  had  been  made,  or  prosecution  entered  against  the 
brig,  Packwood  went  on  board  the  Liberty.  The  captain  be- 
ing absent,  some  difficulty  took  place,  which  led  to  the  firing 
of  several  musket  balls  at  Capt.  Packwood's  boat  on  her  re- 
turn to  the  shore.  Obtaining  no  redress  for  this  outrage,  the 
people  of  Newport  boarded  the  obnoxious  vessel,  cut  her  cables, 
and  suffered  her  to  drift  on  shore,  near  Long  Wharf.  They  then 
cut  away  her  masts,  threw  her  armament  overboard,  when, 
with  the  first  high  tide,  she  drifted  over  to  Goat  Island.  The 
first  night  she  lay  here,  a  party  from  Newport,  went  over  and 
burnt  her. 

His  Majesty's  armed  schooner,  the  Gaspee,  of  eight  guns, 
Lieut.  Dudingston,  accompanied  by  the  Beaver,  made  their  ap- 
pearance in  the  waters  of  Narragansett  Bay,  in  March,  1772,  on 
duties  similar  to  those  of  the  "  St.  John  "  and  "  Liberty,"  to 
which  allusion  has  been  made,  viz.:  to  prevent  breaches  of  the 
revenue  laws,  and  to  stop  the  illicit  trade,  so  long  and  so  success- 


60  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  1772. 

fully  carried  on  in  the  colony.  The  commander  of  the  Gaspee 
was  quite  as  exacting  as  Cnpt.  Reid  of  the  Liberty  had  been. 
lie  stopped  all  vessels,  including  small  market  boats,  without 
showing  his  authority  for  so  doing  ;  and  even  sent  the  property 
he  had  illegally  seized,  to  Boston,  for  trial,  contrary  to  an  act 
of  Parliament,  which  required  such  trials  to  be  held  in  the 
colonies  where  the  seizures  were  made.  In  these  acts,  Dudings- 
ton  had  clearly  transcended  his  powers.  Shortly  after  the  Gas- 
pee  had  commenced  her  illegal  proceedings,  the  complaints 
from  the  people  of  Providence  were  so  numerous  to  the  Deputy 
Governor,  Darius  Sessions,  that  he  submitted  the  question  to 
Chief  Justice  Hopkins,  who  did  not  hesitate  to  give  his  opinion, 
"  that  no  commander  of  any  vessel  has  a  right  to  use  any  au- 
thority in  the  body  of  the  colony,  without  previously  applying 
to  the  Governor,  and  showing  his  warrant  for  so  doing  ;  and 
also  being  sworn  to  a  due  exercise  of  his  office."  Upon  re- 
ceiving this  opinion,  the  Deputy  Governor,  who  then  resided 
in  Providence,  addressed  the  following  letter  to  Governor  Jo- 
seph Wanton,  at  Newport : 

The  Deputy  Governor  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Providence,  March  21,  1772. 

Sir : — The  inhabitants  of  this  town,  have,  of  late,  been  much  disquieted  in  their 
minds,  by  repeated  advices  being  brought  of  a  schooner,  which,  for  some  time  past,  hath 
cruised  in  the  Narragansett  Bay,  and  much  disturbed  our  navigation.  She  suffers 
no  vessel  to  pass,  not  even  packet  boats,  or  others  of  an  inferior  kind,  without  a 
strict  examination ;  and  where  any  sort  of  unwillingness  is  discovered,  they  are  com- 
pelled to  submit,  by  an  armed  force.  Who  he  is,  and  by  what  authority  he  as- 
sumes such  a  conduct,  it  is  thought  needs  some  inquiry  ;  and  I  am  requested  by 
a  number  of  gentlemen,  of  this  town,  on  their  behalf,  to  acquaint  Your  Honor 
therewith,  and  that  you  would  take  the  matter  into  consideration  ;  and,  if  the  com- 
mander of  that  schooner  has  not  as  yet  made  proper  application,  and  been  duly 
authorized  in  his  proceedings,  that  some  proper  measures  be  taken  to  bring  him 
to  account. 

It  is  suspected  he  has  no  legal  authority  to  justify  his  conduct ;  and  his  com- 
mission, if  he  has  any,  is  some  antiquated  paper,  more  of  a  fiction  than  anything 
else ;  and  this  seems  to  be  confirmed  by  Mr.  Thomas  Greene,  who  says  he  saw  it, 
and  beheves  it  to  be  no  other  than  the  commission  the  famous  Reid  had,  who  lost 
his  sloop  at  Newport,  or  something  else,  of  no  validity. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  61 

In  consequence  of  the  above  mentioned  application,  I  have  consulted  with  Chief 
Justice  Hopkins  thereon,  who  is  of  opinion,  that  no  commander  of  any  vessel  has 
any  right  to  use  any  authority  in  the  body  of  the  colony,  without  previously  apply 
ing  to  the  Governor,  and  showing  his  warrant  for  so  doing ;  and  also,  being  sworn 
to  a  due  exercise  of  liis  office  ;  and  this,  he  informs  me,  has  been  the  common  custom 
in  this  colony.  I  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

DARIUS  SESSIONS. 

To  Governor  Wanton. 

This  letter  led  to  the  following  correspondence  between  the 
Governor  and  the  commanding  officer  of  the  schooner  : 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  the  Commander  of  the  Gaspee. 

Newport,  Rhode  Island,  March  22,  1772. 

Sir  : — A  considerable  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony  have  complained  to 
me,  of  your  having,  in  a  most  illegal  and  unwarrantable  manner,  interrupted  their 
trade,  by  searching  and  detaining  every  little  packet  boat  pljdng  between  the  sev- 
eral towns.  As  I  know  not  by  what  authority  you  assume  this  power,  I  have  sent 
off  the  high  sheriff,  to  inform  you  of  the  complaint  exhibited  against  you,  and  ex- 
pect that  you  do,  without  delay,  produce  me  your  commission  and  instructions,  if 
any  you  have,  which  was  your  duty  to  have  done  when  you  first  came  within  the 
jurischction  of  this  colon)-.  I  am  your  humble  serwint, 

J.  WANTON. 

To  the  commanding  officer  of  a  schooner  near  Brenton's  Point. 

Lieut.  Dudingston  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Schooner  Gaspee,  Rhode  Island, 
March  23,  1772. 

Sir : — Last  night  I  received  your  letter  informing  me,  that  a  "  number  of  the  in- 
habitants of  this  colony  had  complained  "  to  you,  of  my  having,  "  in  a  most  illegal 
and  unwarrantable  manner,  interrupted  their  trade,  by  searching  and  detaining  every 
little  packet  boat,  plj'ing  between  the  several  towns." 

In  answer  to  which,  I  have  done  nothing  but  what  was  my  duty  ;  and  their  com- 
plaint can  only  be  founded  on  their  ignorance  of  that.  When  I  waited  on  you,  on 
my  arrival,  I  acquainted  you  of  my  being  sent  to  tliis  government,  to  assist  the 
revenue.  I  had  my  commission  to  show  you,  if  required,  as  it  Avas  ever  understood 
by  all  His  Majesty's  governors  I  have  had  the  honor  to  wait  on,  that  every  officer 
conmianding  one  of  His  Majesty's  vessels,  was  properly  authorized,  and  never  did 
produce  it,  unasked  for.  The  officer  I  send,  is  equally  qualified  and  has  been  in  the 
boats  in  boarding  most  of  the  vessels,  and  can  give  any  information  relative  to  my 
proceeding.  Sir,  your  humble  servant,  W.  DUDINGSTON. 

To  Governer  Wanton. 


62  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 


The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Lieut.  Dudi?igston. 

Newport,  Illiode  Island,  March  23,  1772. 

Sir  : — Yours,  of  this  day,  I  have  received,  Avhlch  does  not  give  me  that  satisfaction 
I  had  a  right  to  expect ;  neither  was  the  bearer  of  the  letter  qualified  to  give  me  any 
authentic  information  respecting  the  legality  of  that  authority  you  have  presumed 
to  exercise  within  tliis  colony.  I  expect  that  you  do,  without  delay,  comply  with 
my  request  of  yesterday ;  and  you  may  be  assured,  that  my  utmost  exertions  shall 
not  be  wanting  to  protect  your  person  from  any  insult  or  outrage,  on  coming 
ashore.  I  am  your  humble  servant,  J.  WANTON. 

To  Mr.  W.  Dudingston,  of  the  schooner  Gaspee. 

AVith  this,  the  correspondence  between  Governor  Wanton 
and  Lieut.  Dudingston  ended.  The  lieutenant's  sense  of  pro- 
priety was  evidently  shocked  by  the  letters  from  Governor 
Wanton,  and  of  his  peremptory  demand  to  exhibit  to  him  his 
commission  and  instructions.  He  seems  to  have  believed  that  the 
authority  from  which  his  commission  emanated,  was  paramount 
to  that  of  the  colonial  governor.  He  therefore  enclosed  the 
letters  of  Governor  Wanton,  together  with  his  own,  to  Admiral 
Montagu,  at  Boston,  who  was  then  in  command  of  His  Maj- 
esty's fleet  on  this  station.  The  admiral  plainly  espoused  the 
side  of  Dudingston,  and  feeling  his  own  dignity  wounded  at  the 
demand  of  the  Governor  on  his  lieutenant,  addressed  the  inso- 
lent letter,  which  follows,  to  Governor  Wanton  : 

Admiral  Montagu  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Boston,  8th  April,  17  72. 

Sir: — Lieutenant  Dudingston,  commander  of  His  Majesty's  armed  schooner,  and 
a  pai-t  of  the  squadron  under  my  command,  has  sent  me  two  letters  he  received  from 
you,  of  such  a  nature,  I  am  at  a  loss  what  answer  to  give  them,  and  ashamed  to  find 
they  come  from  one  of  His  Majesty's  governors.  He  informs  me,  that  he  waited 
upon  you,  and  showed  }ou  the  admiralty  and  my  orders  for  his  proceedings ;  which, 
agreeably  to  his  instructions,  he  is  to  do,  that  you  ma}'  be  acquainted  that  he  is  on 
that  station  to  protect  your  province  from  jjirates,  and  to  give  the  trade  all  the  as- 
sistance he  can,  and  to  endeavor,  as  much  as  lays  in  his  power,  to  protect  the  rev- 
enue officer,  and  to  prevent  (if  jjossible,)  the  illicittrade  that  is  carrying  on  at  Rhode 
Island. 

He,  sir,  has  done  liis  duty,  and  behaved  hke  an  officer  ;  and  it  is  your  duty,  as  a 
governor,  to  give  him  your  assistance,  and  not  endeavor  to  distress  the  King's  offi- 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  63 

ccrs  for  strictly  complying  with  my  orders.  I  shall  give  them  directions,  that,  in 
case  they  receive  any  molestation  in  the  execution  of  their  duty,  they  shall  send 
every  man  so  taken  in  molesting  them,  to  me.  I  am  also  informed,  the  people  of 
Newport  talk  of  fitting  out  an  armed  vessel  to  rescue  any  vessel  the  liing's  schooner 
may  take  carrj-ing  on  an  ilUcit  trade.  Let  them  be  cautious  what  they  do  ;  for  as 
sure  as  they  attempt  it,  and  any  of  them  are  taken,  I  will  hang  them  as  pirates.  I 
shall  report  your  two  insolent  letters  to  my  officer,  to  His  Majesty's  secretaries  of 
state,  and  leave  them  to  determine  what  right  you  have  to  demand  a  sight  of  all 
orders  I  shall  give  to  all  officers  of  my  squadron  ;  and  I  would  advise  you  not  to 
send  your  sheriff  on  board  the  King's  ship  again,  on  such  ridiculous  errands.  The 
captain  and  lieutenants  have  all  my  orders,  to  give  you  assistance  whenever  you 
demand  it,  but  further,  you  have  no  business  with  them  ;  and,  be  assured,  it  is  not 
their  duty  to  show  you  any  part  of  my  orders  or  instructions  to  them. 

I  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c.,  J.  MONTAGU. 

To  Governor  Wanton. 

This  produced  the  following  dignified  and  spirited  answer: 
The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Admiral  Montagu. 

Rhode  Island,  May  8,  1772. 

Sir  : — Your  letter,  dated  April  the  8th,  at  Boston,  I  have  received.  Lieutenant 
Dudingston  has  done  well  in  transmitting  my  letters  to  you,  which  I  sent  him  ;  but 
I  am  sorry  to  be  informed  there  is  any  thing  contained  in  them  that  should  be  con- 
strued as  a  design  of  gi^^ng  offence,  when  no  such  thing  was  intended.  But  Mr. 
Dudingston  has  not  behaved  so  well,  in  asserting  to  you  "  he  waited  on  me,  and 
showed  me  the  admiralty  and  your  orders  for  his  proceedings,  which,  agreeably  to 
his  instructions,  he  is  so  to  do ;"  but  in  that  he  has  altogether  misinformed  you  ;  for 
he,  at  no  time,  ever  showed  me  any  orders  from  the  admiralty  or  from  j-ou ;  and 
positively  denied  that  he  derived  any  authority  either  from  you  or  the  commission- 
ers ;  therefore,  it  was  altogether  out  of  my  power  to  know,  whether  he  came  hither 
to  protect  us  from  pirates,  or  was  a  pirate  himself  You  say,  "  he  has  done  his  duty 
and  behaved  hke  an  officer."  In  this,  I  apprehend  you  must  be  mistaken ;  for  I 
can  never  believe  it  is  the  duty  of  any  officer,  to  give  false  information  to  his  supe- 
riors. As  to  your  attempt  to  ^loint  out  what  was  my  duty  as  Governor,  please  to  be 
informed,  that  I  do  not  receive  instructions  for  the  administration  of  my  govern- 
ment, from  the  King's  admiral,  stationed  in  America. 

You  seem  to  assert,  that  I  have  endeavored  to  distress  the  King's  officers,  for 
sti'Ictly  complying  with  your  orders.  In  this,  you  are  altogether  mistaken ;  for  I 
have  at  all  times  heretofore,  and  shall  constantly  for  time  to  come,  affiard  them  all 
the  aid  and  assistance  in  my  power,  in  the  execution  of  their  office. 

The  information  you  have  received,  "  that  the  people  of  Newport  talked  of  fitting 
out  an  armed  vessel  to  rescue  any  vessel  the  Ejng's  schooner  might  take  carrying  on 
an  illicit  trade,"  you  may  be  assured  is  without  any  foundation,  and  a  scandalous 
imposition  ;  for,  upon  inquiring  into  this  matter,  I  cannot  find  that  any  such  de- 
sign was  ever  conceived,  or  so  much  as  talked  of;  and  therefore,  I  hope  you  will 


64  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

not  hang  any  of  His  ^Majesty's  subjects  belonging  to  bis  colony,  ujion  sucb  false 
information. 

I  am  greatly  obliged  for  the  promise  of  transmitting  my  letters  to  the  secretary  of 
state.  I  am,  however,  a  little  shocked  at  your  impolite  expression,  made  use  of  upon 
that  occasion.  In  return  for  this  good  office,  I  shall  also  transmit  your  letter  to  the 
secretary  of  state,  and  leave  to  the  King  and  his  ministers  to  determine  on  which 
side  the  charge  of  insolence  hes. 

As  to  your  advice,  not  to  send  the  sheriff  on  board  any  of  your  squadron,  please 
to  know,  that  I  will  send  the  sheriff  of  this  colony  at  any  time,  and  to  any  place, 
within  the  body  of  it,  as  I  shall  think  fit. 

In  the  last  jiaragraph  of  your  letter,  you  are  pleased  flatly  to  contradict  what  you 
wrote  in  the  beginning ;  for  there  you  assert  that  Dudingston,  by  his  instructions, 
was  dii'ected  to  show  me  the  admiralty  and  your  orders  to  liim ;  and  here  you  assert, 
that  I  have  no  business  with  them ;  and  assure  me,  that  it  is  not  liis  duty  to  show 
me  them,  or  any  part  thereof.  I  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c.,  J.  WANTON. 

To  Admiral  Montagu. 

The  Governor  laid  the  preceding  letter  from  Admiral  Mon- 
tagu, before  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  May  session,  1772, 
and  the  following  resolution  passed  that  body,  in  relation  to 
the  answer  sent  to  the  admiral : 

"  Eesolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be  requested  to 
transmit  a  copy  of  the  letter  written  to  Admiral  Montagu  ; 
and  likewise,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be  requested  to 
transmit  to  the  secretary  of  state,  a  narration,  containing  the 
proceedings  referred  to  in  said  letter,  together  with  a  copy  of 
the  admiral's  letter,  as  soon  as  may  be  ;  and  that  he  present 
a  copy  thereof,  to  this  Assembly,  at  the  next  session  of  the 
same." 

The  letter  of  the  Governor,  led  to  some  further  correspond- 
ence between  the  admiral  and  the  lieutenant,  of  which  only  the 
following  letter  is  found  among  the  archives  : 

Lieut.  Dudingston  to  Admiral  Montagu. 

Schooner  Gaspee,  Rhode  Island, 
May  22,  17  72. 
Sir: — I  have  received  your  letters  of  the  14th  and  18th  instant,  and  copy  of  com- 
sioners'  to  you.  By  theirs,  I  see  plainly,  I  cannot  look  to  them  to  be  supported 
for  sending  the  sloop  and  rum  to  Boston,  notwithstanding  I  was  assured  by  their  of- 
ficers at  tliis  port,  no  seizure  could  be  safe  with  them.  There  was  only  the  alterna- 
tive to  send  her,  or  remain  in  this  harbor,  and  guard  twelve  hogsheads  of  rmn ;  a 


1 

! 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONB.  65 

bait,  the  inhabitants  of  this  government  -would  willingly  put  in  my  Avay,  if  that 
could  fix  the  schooner.  I  was  not,  at  tlie  time,  ignorant  of  the  statute  to  the  con- 
trary ;  but  never  doubted,  if  the  sloop  got  safe,  I  should  be  supported  by  them,  as  I 
informed  the  board. 

The  owner  of  the  rum  resided  in  Coventry,  which  is  but  little  further  from  Boston, 
than  Newport ;  and  of  course,  could,  at  as  little  expense,  defend  this  property  at  the  one 
as  the  other.  As  I  find  the  exigencies  not  considered,  but  law  referred  to  by  them, 
for  the  future  shall  take  care  not  to  act  repugnant  to  it,  let  what  may  be  the  con- 
sequence. If  I  should  have  any  doubt  about  that,  I  will  take  the  opinion  recom- 
mended to  their  officers,  relative  to  the  officers  in  the  navy  being  arrested  here  by 
the  attorney  general.  I  shall  also  be  on  my  guard,  not  to  put  it  in  their  power  to 
arrest  me,  or  any  officer  under  my  command  in  this  government. 

What  passed  between  the  Governor  and  me,  was,  as  near  as  I  can  recollect,  what 
follows.     The  morning  after  my  arrival  from  Boston,  was  when  I  first  saw  him. 

Lieut.  D. — Sir,  I  command  His  Majesty's  schooner  Gaspee,  and  am  ordered  into 
this  government  by  Admiral  Montagu,  to  assist  the  re%'enue. 

Governor — Is  it  the  schooner  Capt.  Allen  commanded  ?  (meaning  the  lieutenant 
I  superseded). 

Lieut. — Yes. 

Governor — We  have  had  many  different  schooners  here  lately ;  (mentioning  the 
Sultana,  St.  John  and  Halifax). 

Lieut. — Yes;  and  you  may  remember  me  here  about  two  years  ago,  when  the 
Colonels  Dalrymple  and  Robinson  came  with  me.  (I  am  not  sure  whether  he  said 
he  did  or  not.) 

Governor — What  vessel  was  that  which  seized  the  packet  ? 

I  told  him  whom  she  was  coimnanded  by  and  belonged  to,  and  my  being  there  at 
the  time,  and  said,  it  would  not  have  happened  had  the  officer  come  near  the  Gas- 
pee,  which  was  his  duty,  with  more  on  the  subject,  too  trivial  for  you  to  hear.  He 
then  related  the  conduct  of  the  collector  and  Mr.  Keid,  late  commander  of  the 
custom  house  sloop  Liberty,  and  said  it  was  in  their  power  to  have  saved  her  be- 
fore she  had  received  much  damage ;  and  said  he  would  not  mind  what  they  repre- 
sented concerning  him,  if  they  had  tqld  facts.*  I  said  I  had  heard  it  otherwise  men- 
tioned ;  but  hoped  I  should  meet  with  no  difficulty  in  the  execution  of  my  duty. 

Governor — You  may  depend  on  my  suppoi-t  and  assistance. 

I  then  observed,  it  was  not  clear  to  me,  if  I  made  a  seizure,  it  would  be  safe. 

Governor — I  will  do  all  in  my  power. 

I  then  instanced  what  had  been  the  fate  of  one  made  by  the  officers  of  the  port  a 
little  before ;  and  added,  I  did  not  think  if  I  made  one,  I  should  put  it  to  the  trial. 

Governor — I  suppose  you  will  be  much  here.     I  shall  always  be  glad  to  see  you. 

Lieut.  D, — I  shall  be  where  I  find  I  can  best  execute  the  service.  I  was  nur,?h 
obfiged  to  him. 

Governor— I  hope,  Captain,  we  shall  have  a  good  understanding. 

I  said  it  was  my  wish,  and  should  give  him  as  little  trouble  as  possible.  Much 
was  said  about  his  government  and  police ;  but  never  did  he  ask  me  to  show  my 
orders,  or  even  mention  them.  The  weather  kept  me  some  days  in  the  harbor ; 
and  I  was  in  company  with  some  of  his  friends ;  but  never  heard  my  authority 
questioned,  till  I  sent  the  sloop  to  Boston,  on  my  return  here ;  at  which  time,  I  gave 
him  my  reason  in  a  letter,  (a  copy  of  which,  I  enclose  to  you),  for  not  showing  my 
VOL.  VII.  9 


66  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1772. 

orders,  as  he.  till  then,  had  never  re(|uired  me  to  do  so ;  at  which  time  I  sent  them 
by  an  oflieer,  wliich  I  informed  you  of. 

I  must  now  beg  leave  to  observe,  if  he  had  asked  me  to  show  my  orders,  is  it  possi- 
ble I  should  behave  so  nnich  unlike  an  officer  and  gentleman,  in  telling  a  falsehood,  by 
doino-  which,  I  must  lie  ruined  as  au  officer,  and  in  reputation  forever  '?  '  The  fallacy 
is  easily  seen,  when  it  is  considered,  the  only  thing  that  makes  the  schooner  respect- 
ed, is  said  to  be  denied  by  me.  Had  such  an  assertion  come  from  a  private  char- 
acter, I  should  hope  for  reparation,  for  an  attempt  to  wound  my  repvitation  as  an 
officer.  In  my  present  sitnation,  I  have  only  to  hope  my  word  ^^^ll  be  respected  as  an 
officer,  as  much  as  his,  as  a  Governor,  who  can  make  it  appear  by  no  better  evidence 
than  an  old  woman  and  clerk  in  the  naval  office,  and  not  in  the  station  of  a  gentle- 
man ;  and  I  do  not  think  either  would  be  base  enough  to  witness  so  great  a  falsehood. 

As  to  his  letter,  it  cannot  be  looked  upon  as  his,  but  the  Assembly's,  where  it  was 
put  to  the  vote  to  answer  your  letter  or  not.  They  were  all  for  the  answer  ;  the 
Governor  alone,  for  sending  it  to  Lord  Hillsborough. 

Mr.  Greene  is  one  of  the  house,  the  owner  of  the  rum.  I  could  expect  no 
quarter  from  people  of  that  stamp.  On  the  20th,  the  sloop  was  condemned.  I 
have  taken  the  liberty  to  enclose  my  letter  to  the  commissioners  for  your  perusal, 
open  ;  as  it  was  the  intention  of  the  people  here,  to  have  the  sloop  sold  in  the  man- 
ner they  have  been  used  to,  and  which  always  falls  into  the  old  owners'  hands, 
without  opposition.  I  hope  soon  to  have  the  board's  answer,  to  determine  her  des- 
tination.     •  I  am,  sir,  &c..  &c.,  AV.  DUDINGSTOK 

To  Admiral  jMontatru. 


At  the  next  session  of  the  Assembly,  which  was  in  August 
following,  and  to  which  reference  is  made  in  the  Colonial  Re^ 
cords,  Vol.  VII,  p.  51,  Governor  Wanton  presented  a  copy  of 
his  letter  to  the  secretary  of  state,  which  was  as  follows  : 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough. 

Newport,  Rhode  Island,  May  20,  1772. 

]\Iy  Lord  : — In  conformity  to  a  vote  of  the  General  Assembly,  of  tliis  colony,  I 
herewith  transmit  Your  Lordship  a  copy  of  a  letter  I  received  from  Admiral  Mon- 
tagu, and  the  answer.  They  have  also  re(iuested  me  to  transmit  to  Your  Lordship 
a  narrative  of  all  the  proceedings  referred  to,  ii^  said  letter. 

As  Admiral  INIontagu  has  endeavored  to  fix  a  stigma  on  my  character  and  admin- 
istration as  Governor  of  this  colony,  by  charging  me  with  attempting  to  distress  the 
Iving's  officers  from  strictly  compljiug  with  his  orders.  Your  Lordship  will  in- 
dulge me  with  giving  a  short  account  of  my  proceedings,  by  which  the  ungenerous 
accusation  of  Admiral  Montagu,  will,  I  flatter  myself,  appear  not  to  have  the  least 
foundation  in  truth. 

On  the  2 1st  of  INIarch  last,  a  nmiiber  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  gentlemen 
of  established  character,  and  Avhose  loyalty  to  their  sovereign  is  not  to  be  ques- 
tioned, exhibited  to  me  a  complaiiit  in  writing,  that  a  certain  schooner  was  cruising 


1772.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  67 


in  the  Narragansett  River,  boarding  every  vessel  and  boat  that  passed,  and  other- 
wise interrupting  them  in  the  piu'suit  of  their  lawful  business  ;  and  not  knowing  by 
what  autiiority  the  persons  belonging  to  said  schooner  exercised  that  power  within 
the  body  of  the  colony,  requested  me  to  make  such  inquiry  concerning  the  same, 
as  was  consistent  with  law. 

It  therefore,  became  my  indispensable  duty,  in  order  to  satisfy  the  complaints,  to 
demand  of  the  commanding  officer  of  said  schooner,  the  reason  of  his  thus  acting, 
and  whether  he  was  vested  with  such  powers  as  would  justify  liis  proceedings,  which 
produced  my  letter  to  him  of  the  22d  of  March.  It  was  answered  hy  Wm.  Dud- 
ingston,  of  the  schooner  Gaspee  ;  but,  as  he  did  not  give  me  that  satisfaction  I 
conceived  I  had  an  indisputable  right  to  expect,  I  wrote  another  letter  ;  Avhereupon, 
he  sent  me,  by  one  of  his  officers,  an  order  from  the  lords  of  tlie  admiralty,  for  his 
commanding  the  schooner  Gaspee  ;  also,  their  letter  to  the  commissioners  at  Boston, 
recpiesting  that  board  to  give  liim  a  deputation  in  the  customs,  both  which,  I  re- 
turned to  the  officer  in  the  same  hour  he  brought  them,  without  attempting  in  the 
least,  to  distress  or  oppose  him  in  the  execution  of  his  duty. 

This,  My  Lord,  is  a  true  state  of  facts ;  and  I  believe  Your  Lordship  is  con- 
vinced that,  in  my  jjroceedings,  I  have  done  notlaing  but  what  was  my  duty  ;  and 
that  Admiral  Montagu's  accusation  is  as  groundless  as  it  is  illiberal. 

When  I  wrote  my  first  letter,  I  do,  upon  my  honor,  declare,  that  I  did  not  know 
whether  the  schooner  complained  of,  Avas  tlie  Gaspee  or  not ;  and  even  if  I  did,  in 
my  opinion,  I  am  justifiable,  as  I  was  entirely  unacquainted  with  Mr.  DucHngston's 
authorit}-,  either  as  an  officer  in  the  revenue  or  navy  ;  and  I  do  not  believe  he 
liad  any  right  to  ofliciate  as  a  custom  house  officer  within  the  body  of  this  colony, 
before  he  had  comnuniicated  to  me,  or  some  proper  authority,  his  commission  for  so 
doing. 

I  must  not  omit  mentioning,  that  the  information  which  Admiral  INIontagu  says  he 
has  received,  that  the  peojile  of  Newport  talk  of  fitting  out  an  armed  vessel  to  rescue 
any  seizures  which  may  be  made  by  the  King's  vessels,  is.  Your  Lordship  may  be 
assured,  a  malicious  representation,  calculated,  by  the  enemies  of  our  happy  con- 
stitution, to  injure  the  colony,  and  bring  upon  the  inhal)itants  his  Majesty's  dis- 
pleasure. 

I  acknowledge  it  a  singular  liappiness,  that  this  aftair  is  brought  before  Your 
Lordship  ;  and  that  your  candor  and  inflexible  integrity  will  fix  the  charge  of  insolence 
where  it  really  belongs.  I  submit  the  dispute  Avitli  pleasure,  from  a  thorough  con- 
viction^ that  Y'our  Lordship's  opinion  thereupon,  will  be  consonant  to  the  strictest 
equity 

It  is  now  my  turn  to  complain  of  Mr.  Dndingston's  illegal  proceedings,  in  carrying 
a  quantity  of  rum,  he  had  seized  on  boarc^  a  small  boat,  Ij'ing  witliin  the  county  of 
Kent,  in  this  colony,  to  Boston,  for  trial ;  notwithstanding,  by  the  8tli  of  His 
Ma,jesty,  it  is  expressly  declared,  that  all  forfeitures  of  this  kind,  shall  be  tried  in 
that  colony  where  the  offence  is  committed. 

To  recite  every  particular  of  his  unwarrantable  jn-oceedings,  would,  ~M\  Lord,  be 
too  tedious.  Let  it  then  suffice,  that  since  the  Gaspee  and  Beaver  have  been  sta- 
tioned in  tliis  colony,  the  inhabitants  have  been  insulted  without  any  just  cause,  with 
the  most  abusive  and  contimieUous  language  ;  and,  I  am  sorry  that  I  have  reason  to 
say,  that  the  principal  officers  belonging  to  said  vessels,  have  exercised  that  power 
with  which  they  are  vested,  in  a  wanton  and  arbitrary  manner,  to  the  very  great  in- 
jury and  disturl)ance  of  the  colon}-. 


68  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

I  have,  My  Lord,  constantly  afforded  the  King's  officers  all  the  assistance  in  my 
power,  in  the  legal  discharge  of  their  trust ;  but  if  any  of  them,  through  prejudice, 
ignorance  of  their  duty  or  voutliful  indiscretion,  insult  this  colony,  it  is  my  duty,  as 
His  Majesty's  Governor,  to  remonstrate  against  it. 

T  am,  &c.,  &c.,  J.  WANTOX. 

To  the  Right  Honorable   Earl  of  Hillsborough,  one   of  His  ]\Iajesty's  principal 
secretaries  of  state,  Whitehall. 

The  foregoing  letters  present  an  account  of  the  events  which 
preceded  the  memorable  night  of  the  9th  of  June,  when  the  Gas- 
pee  was  destroyed.  That  Dudingston  did  not  act  wisely,  to  say 
the  least,  in  exerting  the  authority  he  did,  w^ithout  first  exhibiting 
his  commission,  is  evident.  But  it  is  certain,  that  in  sending 
some  of  the  property  seized  by  him,  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
county  of  Kent,  in  Rhode  Island,  to  Boston,  there  to  be  adjudi- 
cated upon  by  the  court  of  vice  admiralty,  he  was  clearly  in  the 
wrong;  as  an  act  of  Parliament  expressly  declares  that  such  seiz- 
ures shall  be  adjudicated  in  the  colony  where  the  seizure  is  made. 
The  goods  here  referred  to,  consisted  of  twelve  hogsheads  of 
rum,  and  some  sugars,  which  were  on  board  a  sloop,  bound 
from  Greenwich  to  Newport,  and  were  the  property  of  Jacob 
Greene  &  Co.,  of  Warwick.* 

Dudingston  seems  to  have  been  aware  that  this  act  was  an 
illegal  one,  as  he  did  not  dare  to  go  on  shore,  having  been 
threatened  with  a  suit  at  law  by  the  owners  of  the  goods. 

Next  in  order,  is  the  destruction  of  the  Gaspee,  the  narrative 
of  the  particulars  of  which,  we  shall  give,  as  written  by  Col. 
Ephraim  Bo  wen,  the  last  survivor  of  the  party  which  de- 
stroyed this  vessel. 

Narrative  of  the  Capture  and  Burning  of  the  British  Schooner 
Gaspee. 

"In  the  year  1772,  the  British  government  had  stationed 
at  Newport,  Rhode  Island,  a  sloop  of  war,  with  her  tender,  a 
schooner,  called  the  Gaspee,  of  eight  guns,  commanded  by 
William  Dudingston,  a  lieutenant  in    the    British    navy,    for 

*  The  firm  consisted  of  Jacob,  William,  Elisha,  Christopher  and  Perry  Greene. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  69 

the  purpose  of  preventing  the  clandestine  landing  of  articles, 
subject  to  the  payment  of  duty.  The  captain  of  this  schooner 
made  it  his  practice  to  stop  and  board  all  vessels  entering  or 
leaving  the  ports  of  Rhode  Island,  or  leaving  Newport  for 
Providence. 

On  the  10th  day  of  June,  1772,  Capt.  Thomas  Lindsey  left 
Newport,  in  his  packet  for  Providence,  about  noon,  with  the 
wind  at  the  north  ;  and  soon  after,  the  Gaspee  was  under  sail, 
in  pursuit  of  Lindsey,  and  continued  the  chase  as  fjir  as  Nam- 
quit  Point,  which  runs  off  from  the  farm  in  Warwick,  about 
seven  miles  below  Providence,  now  owned  by  Mr.  John  Brown 
Francis,  our  late  Governor. 

Lindsey  was  standing  easterly,  with  the  tide  on  ebb  about 
two  hours,  when  he  hove  about,  at  the  end  of  Namquit  Point, 
and  stood  to  the  westwaird  ;  and  Dudingston,  in  close  chase, 
changed  his  course,  and  ran  on  the  Point,  near  its  end,  and 
grounded. 

Lindsey  continued  on  his  course  up  the  river,  and  arrived 
at  Providence  about  sunset,  when  he  immediately  informed 
Mr.  John  Brown,  one  of  our  first  and  most  respectable  mer- 
chants, of  the  situation  of  the  Gaspee.  He  immediately  con- 
cluded that  she  would  remain  immovable  until  after  midnight, 
and  that  now  an  opportunity  offered  of  putting  an  end  to  the 
trouble  and  vexation  she  daily  caused. 

Mr.  Brown  immediately  resolved  on  her  destruction,  and  he 
forthwith  directed  one  of  his  trusty  shipmasters  to  collect  eight 
of  the  largest  long  boats  in  the  harbor,  with  five  oars  to  each  ; 
to  have  the  oars  and  row-locks  well  muffled,  to  prevent  noise, 
and  to  place  them  at  Fenner's  Wharf,  directly  opposite  to  the 
dwelling  of  Mr.  James  Sabin,  who  kept  a  house  of  board  and 
entertainment  for  gentlemen  ;  being  the  same  house  purchased 
a  few  years  after,  by  the  late  Welcome  Arnold,  one  of  our  en- 
terprising merchants  ;  and  is  now  owned  by,  and  is  the  resi- 
dence of  Col.  Richard  J.  Arnold,  his  son.* 


*"  This  house,  then  unfinished,  was  occupied  as  an  inu.  It  was  soon  after  purchased 
and  completed  by  Welcome  Arnold,  who  resided  there,  till  his  death,  in  1798.  It  then  be- 
came the  residence  of  his  eldest  son,  Samuel  G.  Arnold,  father  of  the  writer  [the    Hon 


70  RECORDS    OP    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1772. 

About  the  time  of  the  shutting  up  of  the  shops,  soon  after 
sunset,  a  man  passed  along  the  main  street,  beating  a  drum, 
and  informing  the  inhabitants  of  the  fact  that  the  Gaspee  was 
aground  on  Namquit  Point,  and  would  not  float  off  until  three 
o'clock,  the  next  morning  ;  and  inviting  those  persons  who 
felt  a  disposition  to  go  and  destroy  that  troublesome  vessel,  to 
repair  in  the  evening  to  Mr,  James  Sabin's  house.  About 
nine  o'clock,  I  took  my  father's  gun,  and  my  powder  horn  and 
bullets,  and  went  to  Mr.  Sabin's,  and  found  the  south-east 
room  full  of  people,  where  I  loaded  my  gun,  and  all  remained 
there  till  about  ten  o'clock,  some  casting  bullets  in  the  kitchen, 
and  others  making  arrangements  for  departure,  when  orders 
were  given  to  cross  the  street  to  Fenner's  Wharf,  and  embark  ; 
which  soon  took  place,  and  a  sea  captain  acted  as  steersman 
of  each  boat ;  of  whom,  I  recollect  Capt.  Abraham  Whipple, 
Capt.  John  B.  Hopkins  (with  whom  I  embarked),  and  Capt. 
Benjamin  Dunn.  A  line,  from  right  to  left  was  soon  formed, 
with  Capt.  Whipple  on  the  right,  and  Capt.  Hopkins  on  the 
right  of  the  left  wing. 

The  party  thus  proceeded,  till  within  about  sixty  yards  of 
the  Gaspee,  when  a  sentinel  hailed,  "Who  comes  there?" 
No  answer.     He  hailed  again,  and  no  answer. 

In  about  a  minute,  Dudingston  mounted  the  starboard  gun- 
wale, in  his  shirt,  and  hailed,  "  Who  comes  there  ?"  No  an- 
swer. He  hailed  again,  when  Capt.  Whipple  answered  as 
follows  : 

"  I  am  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Kent,  G-d  d — n  you. 
I  have  got  a  warrant  to  apprehend  you,  G-d  d — n  you  ;  so 
surrender,  G-d  d — n  vou." 


Samuel  G.  Arnold],  and  subsequently  of  his  youngest  son,  Richard  J.  Arnold,  the  presen  t 
owner,  who  has  altered  and  enlarged  it  materially,  within  a  few  years.  It  is  now  the  win- 
ter residence  of  the  author  of  this  history.  The  house  is  No.  124,  on  the  east  side  of  South 
Main  Street,  on  the  north-east  corn  r  of  Planet  Street. 

This  brief  sketch  may  find  an  excuse  in  the  rich  revolutionary  associations  that  surround 
it.  The  year  before  his  death.  Col.  Ephraim  Bowen,  the  last  survivor  of  the  Gaspee 
expedition,  wrote  an  account  of  that  affair,  which  was  engrossed  by  his  daughter,  and  now 
hangs  in  the  dining  room  of  the  old  mansion ;  the  identical  room  in  which  the  plot  was 
laid."— JVbte  to  Arnold's  Hist,  of  liliode  Island,  Vol.  II.  p.  312. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  71 

I  took  my  seat  on  the  main  thwart,  near  the  huboard  row- 
lock, with  ray  gun  by  my  right  side,  facing  forwards. 

As  soon  as  Dadingston  began  to  hail,  Joseph  Bucklin,  who 
was  standing  on  the  main  thwart,  by  my  right  side,  said  to  me, 
"  Ephe,  reach  me  your  gun,  and  I  can  kill  that  fellow."  I 
reached  it  to  him,  accordingly  ;  when,  during  Capt.  Whipple's 
replying^  Bucklin  fired,  and  Dudingston  fell ;  and  Bucklin  ex- 
claimed, "  I  have  killed  the  rascal," 

In  less  than  a  minute  after  Capt.  Whipple's  answer,  the 
beats  were  alongside  of  the  Gaspee,  and  boarded  without  op- 
position. The  men  on  deck  retreated  below,  as  Dudingston 
entered  the  cabin. 

Assoon  as  it  was  discovered  that  he  was  wounded,  John  ]\Iaw- 
ney,  who  had  for  two  or  three  years  been  studying  physic  and  sur- 
gery, was  ordered  to  go  into  the  cabin,  and  dress  Dudingston's 
wound,  and  I  was  directed  to  assist  him.  On  exa-mination,  it 
was  found  the  ball  took  effect  about  five  inches  directly  below 
the  navel.  Dudingston  called  for  Mr.  Dickinson  to  produce 
bandages  and  other  necessaries,  for  the  dressing  of  the  wound, 
and  Avhen  finished,  orders  were  given  to  the  schooner's  com- 
pany to  collect  their  clothing,  and  every  thing  belonging  to 
them,  and  put  them  into  their  boats,  as  all  of  them  were  to  be 
sent  on  shore. 

All  were  soon  collected,  and  put  on  board  of  the  boats,  in- 
cluding one  of  our  boats.  They  departed,  and  landed  Dud- 
ingston at  the  old  Still-house  Wharf,  at  Pawtuxet,  and  put 
the  chief  into  the  house  of  Joseph  Rhodes. 

Soon  after,  all  the  party  were  ordered  to  depart,  leaving  one 
boat  for  the  leaders  of  the  expedition  ;  who  soon  set  the  vessel 
on  fire,  which  consumed  her  to  the  water's  edge. 

The  names  of  the  most  conspicuous  actors  in  this  remark- 
able event,  are   as  follows,  viz :  Mr.  John  Brown,*  Captains 


*  John  Brown,  aud  his  brother  Joseph  Brown,  were  (as  Admiral  Montagu  observes  in 
his  letter  to  Governor  Wanton,)  aniong  the  most  prominent  citizens  of  Providence.  This 
family,  as  is  well  known  to  the  people  of  Rhode  Island,  have  ever  been  among  its  most  dis- 
tinguished citizens. 

The  first  of  tbem,  Chad  Brown,  was  one  of  the  five  associates  of  Roger  Williams,  who 
were  tbe  earliest  founders  of  the  State.    John  Brown,  at  the  period   referred  to,  was  the 


72  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

Abraham  Whipple,*  John  B.  Hopkins,!  Benjamin  Dunn  and 
live  others,  whose  names  I  have  forgotten  ;  and  John  Maw- 
ney,J  Benjamin  Page,§  Joseph  Bucldin||  and  Turpin  Smith, 11 

leading  merchant  in  the  colony.  He  was  also  distinguished  as  an  earnest  patron  of  litera- 
ture and  science ;  being  among  the  founders  of  Brown  University,  and  otherwise  contribut- 
ing liberally  for  the  encouragement  of  science.  His  brother  Moses,  who  died  Sept.  6,  1S3G, 
in  his  9!tth  year,  was  a  distinguished  philanthropist  and  encourager  of  education.  Obadiah, 
his  cou.?iu,  was  the  founder  of  the  Friends'  Boarding  School. 

The  descendants  of  these  brothers,  have  been  equally  distinguished  in  commerce,  naviga- 
tion and  manufactures,  r.s  well  as  liberal  benefactors  of  our  literary  and  charitable 
institutions. 

■■■"  Abraham  Whipplu  was  captain  of  a  merchantman,  in  the  West  India  trade.  During  the 
French  war,  he  commanded  the  "Game  Cock,"  a  celebrated  privateer,  which,  in  one  cruise, 
took  twenty-three  prizes.  His  shrewdness  and  bravery,  led  to  his  selection  as  captain  of  the 
party  which  destroyed  the  Gaspec.  On  the  breaking  out  of  the  revolutionary  war,  he  became 
a  commander  in  the  American  navy,  and  rendered  his  country  most  important  service. 

t  John-  j5.  Hopkins,  was  a  son  of  Commodore  Esek  Hopkins,  a  distinguished  officer  of  the 
revolution,  and  nephew  of  Gov.  Stephen  Hopkins,  one  of  the  signers  of  thedeclaiation  of  In- 
dependence. He  commanded  the  ship  Cabot,  one  of  the  fleet  that  sailed  from  Rhode  Island, 
February  17,  177i").     In  au  action  that  took  place  on  this  cruise,  he  was  severely  wounded. 

i  John  M.\wnet,  was  a  descendant  of  one  of  the  Huguenot  families,  that  came  to  this 
country  about  the  year  I7i!0.  He  was  educated  to  the  profession  of  medicine;  though,  hav- 
ing inherited  an  ample  estate,  he  never  practised  it  to  a  very  great  extent.  He  was  at  one 
time,  a  colonel  in  the  Rhode  Island  militia,  and  afterwards  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Provi- 
dence. He  was  distinguished  for  his  classical  attainments,  and  to  the  close  of  his  long  life^ 
read  with  unabated  interest,  the  Greek  and  Latin  poets.  He  suffered  greatly  in  the  public 
esteem,  on  account  of  his  bold  and  unblushing  irreverence  and  infidelity. 

It  is  beliered  that  there  are  none  of  his  descendants  now  living;  it  is  certain  that  there 
are  none  in  the  male  line.  He  died  at  a  great  age,  on  his  e?tate,  in  that  part  of  Cranston, 
now  known  as  Elmwood. 

§  Benjamin  Page,  was  a  prominent  ship  master,  and  for  many  years  commander  of  a  ship 
in  the  East  India  trade. 

1  Joseph  Bocklin,  was  well  known  in  Providence,  and  kept  a  prominent  restaurant,  or 
place  of  resort,  in  South  Main  Street,  where  gentlemen  resorted  for  their  suppers.  Here, 
too,  they  assembled,  to  discuss  politics;  and  where,  possibly,  the  expedition  which  de- 
stroyed the  Gaspee,  was  discussed,  as  well  as  at  Air.  Sabins's  house,  which  was  near  it. 

"i  Tltrpin  Smith,  after  the  revolution,  became  a  prominent  shipmaster;  in  which  pursuit, 
he  accumulated  a  handsome  property.  After  his  retirement  from  maritime  life,  he  lived  in 
Providence,  greatly  respected  and  beloved,  discharging  faithfully  all  the  duties  of  a  good 
citizen.  He  attained  to  more  than  four  score  years,  and  left  to  his  posterity  the  rich  in- 
heritance of  an  unspotted  na;iie. 

Extract  from  the  Providence  Journal,  relative  to  the  Gaspee  affair,  in  the  celebration  of 
the  4th  of  July,  1826,  the  fiftieth  anniversary.  In  speaking  of  the  parties  in  the  procession, 
the  account  says: 

"After  these,  the  four  surviving  captors  of  the  King's  armed  schooner  Gaspee,  rode  in  an 
elegant  barouche,  procured  by  Mr.  Blake,  of  the  Franklin  House,  expressly  for  this  occasion. 
Mr.  Blake,  himself,  appeared  on  the  box,  and  managed  with  great  dexterity,  the  four  spirited 
horses  attached  to  the  carriage. 

It  was  a  matter  of  most  interesting  association  and  recollection,  to  witness  these  four  sur- 
viving lads,  who  burnt  the  Gaspee  (as  the  orator  so  happily  termed  them),  at  the  end  of 
fifty-four  years,  riding  in  a  splendid  equipage,  and  receiving  the  award  of  a  republican  tri- 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  73 

my  youthful  companions  ;  all  of  whom  are  dead,  1  believe, 
every  man  of  the  party,  excepting  myself;  and  my  age  is 
eighty-six  years,  this  29th  day  of  August,  1839. 

EPHRAIM  BOWEN."* 

Colonel  Bowen  is  in  error  as  to  the  day  on  which  the  Gaspee 
was  destroyed.  He  gives  it  as  the  10th  ;  whereas,  it  is  cer- 
tain that  it  was  on  the  night  of  the  9th  of  June.  Capt.  Lind- 
sey's  sloop,  called  the  Hannah,  according  to  the  Providence 
Gazette,  of  June  13,  arrived  at  Newport  on  Monday  the  8th, 
from  New  York,  where  she  reported  her  cargo  at  the  custom 
house  ;  and  on  the  following  day,  proceeded  up  the  bay,  to 
Providence,  chased  by  the  Gaspee.  The  attack  was  planned 
and  carried  into  execution  on  the  night  of  the  9th,  by  the 
burning  of  the  vessel ;  but  as  the  destruction  was  not  complete 
until  the  morning  of  the  lOth,  either  day  is-  applicable  to  the 
event.  The  proclamation  of  Governor  Wanton,  in  relation  to 
the  affair,  which  is  dated  on  the  12th,  says  the  vessel  was  de- 
stroyed on  "the  9th  instant,  in  the  night."  Col.  Bowen  is 
also  in  error,  as  to  the  name  of  the  captain,  which  was  Benja- 
min, and  not  Thomas  Lindsey.f 

Mr.  John  Mawney,  who  was  one  of  the  party  conspicuous 


umph,  for  a  deed,  the  commission  of  which,  at  that  time,  had  well  nigh  caiised  them  to  ride 
in  a  cart  to  Execution  Dock,  or  to  be  drawn  on  a  hurdle  to  Tyburn,  for  high  treason  ;  an 
event  they  anticipated  as  vastly  more  likely,  than  that  in  1826,  the  jubilee  of  American  free- 
dom, they  should  become  the  time  honored  objects  of  the  greatest  interest  to  an  immense 
concourse  of  citizens,  thronging  the  streets,  and  crowding  to  the  altar  of  freedom,  to  offer  up 
the  sacrifices  and  thanksgivings  of  a  great,  prosperous  and  free  people.  These  four  veterans, 
Col.  Ephraim  Bowen,  Capt.  Benjamin  Page,  Col.  John  Mawney  and  Capt.  Turpin  Smith,  are 
among  our  most  respected  citizens;  and  on  this  occasion,  the  spirit  that  first  animated 
them,  in  1772,  seemed  to  kindle  anew  in  their  still  vigorous  frames.  We  believe,  from  the 
present  ages  of  these  veterans,  they  were  all  not  oyer  twenty  years  of  age,  at  the  time  of  the 
attack  upon  the  Gaspee." 

*  The  compiler  of  the  present  history  of  the  Gaspee  affair,  was  well  acquainted  with 
the  venerable  Col.  Bowen,  and  often  rode  in  his  chaise  with  him,  between  Provi' 
dence  and  his  residence,  in  Pawtuxet.  On  these  occasions,  the  Colonel  liked  to  give  his 
revolutionary  remniscenes ;  among  which,  his  connexion  with  the  destruction  of  the  Gas- 
pee, was  prominent.  The  writer  also  remembers  John  Mawney  and  Turpin  Smith,  who, 
with  Col.  Bowen,  always  had  a  prominent  place  in  the  proceedings  connected  with  the  4th 
of  July  celebrations  in  Providence. — J.  R.  B. 

t  Arnold's  History  of  Rhode  Island.  Vol  II.  p.  320. 
VOL.  VII.  10 


74  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

in  the  affair,  published  in  the  Providence  Americaii  and  Ga- 
zette, in  the  year  1826,  a  statement,  in  which  some  additional 
facts  are  given. 

After  hearing  the  drum  beat,  he  hastened  to  Mr.  Sabin's, 
the  place  of  rendezvous,  where  he  learned  the  object  of  the 
meeting  ;  and  on  being  urged  by  some  of  his  acquaintances, 
was  induced  to  accompany  them,  as  surgeon. 

Statement  of  Dr.  John  Maiuney. 

*'  To  this,"  he  says,  "  I  readily  consented,  and  went  to 
Corlis'  wharf,  with  Capt.  Joseph  Tillinghast,  who  commanded 
the  barge,  it  being  the  last  boat  that  put  off  ;  and  in  going 
down,  we  stopped  at  Capt.  Cooke's  Wharf,  where  we  took  in 
staves  and  paving  stones  ;  which  done,  followed  our  com- 
mander, and  came  up  with  them  a  considerable  distance 
down  the  river  ;  after  which,  we  rowed  along  pretty  rapidly, 
till  we  came  in  sight  of  the  schooner,  when  Capt.  (the  late 
Commodore  Whipple.)  ordered  us  to  form  a  line,  which  was 
instantly  compUed  with  ;  after  Avhich,  we  rowed  gently 
along,  till  we  got  near  the  schooner ;  when  we  were  hailed 
from  on  board,  with  the  words,  '  Who  comes  there  ?' 
Capt.  Whipple  replied,  '  I  want  to  come  on  board.' 
The  reply  was,  '  Stand  off,  you  can't  come  on  board.' 
On  which  Capt.  Whipple  roared  out,  '  I  am  the  sheriff  of 
the  county  of  Kent ;  I  am  come  for  the  commander  of  this 
vessel,  and  have  him  I  will,  dead  or  alive;  men,  spring  to 
your  oars  !'   when  we  were  in  an  instant  on  her  bows. 

I  was  then  sitting  with  Capt.  Tillinghast,  in  the  stern  of  the 
barge,  and  sprang  immediately  forward  ;  and  seeing  a  rope 
hang  down  her  bows,  seized  it,  to  help  myself  in.  The  rope 
slipping,  I  fell  almost  to  my  waist  in  the  water  ;  but,  being 
active  and  nimble,  I  recovered,  and  was  the  first  of  our  crew 
on  deck ;  when  Simeon  H.  Olney  handed  me  a  stave,  with 
which,  seeing  one  that  I  took  to  be  of  the  crew  of  the  schooner, 
floundering  below  the  windlass,  I  was  in  the  attitude  of  lev- 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  75 

elling  a  stroke,  when  he  cried  out,  'John,  don't  strike." 
Being  very  intimately  acquainted  with  Capt.  Samuel  Dunn,  I 
knew  his  voice,  left  him,  and  sprang  back  of  the  windlass, 
where  there  was  commotion  and  noise,  but  which  soon  sub- 
sided ;  the  crew  jumping  down  the  hold,  I  immediately  fol- 
lowed, when  I  ordered  them  to  bring  cords  to  tie  their  hands, 
and  told  them  they  should  not  be  hurt,  but  be  sent  on  shore. 
They  brought  some  tarred  strings,  with  which  I  tied  the  hands 
of  two  behind,  when  John  Brown,  Esq.,  called  to  me,  saying  I 
was  wanted  immediately  on  deck,-  where  I  was  instantly 
helped. 

When  I  asked  Mr.  Brown  what  was  the  matter,  he  replied, 
'  Don't  call  names,  but  go  immediately  into  the  cabin,  there  is 
one  wounded,  and  will  bleed  to  death.' 

I  hastened  into  the  cabin,  and  found  Lieut.  Dudingston  in  a 
sitting  posture,  gently  reclining  to  the  left^  bleeding  profusely, 
with  a  thin,  white  woolen  blanket,  loose  about  him,  which  I 
threw  aside,  and  discovered  the  effect  of  a  musket  ball,  in  his 
left  groin  ;  and  thinking  the  femoral  artery  was  cut,  threw 
open  my  waistcoat,  and  taking  my  shirt  b}^  the  collar,  tore  it 
to  my  waistband,  when  Mr.  Dudingston  said,  '  Pray  sir, 
don't  tear  your  clothes,  there  is  linen  in  that  trunk;'  upon 
which,  I  requested  Joseph  Bucklin  to  break  open  the  trunk, 
and  tear  linen  and  scrape  lint,  which  he  immediately  attempt- 
ed ;  but  finding  the  linen  new  and  strong,  could  not  make  the 
lint. 

I  then  directed  him  to  place  his  hands  as  I  had  mine,  which 
was,  the  ball  of  my  left  hand  on  the  orifice  of  the  wound  ;  and 
gave  him  the  word  to  slip  his  hand  under  mine,  and  to  press 
hard,  to  prevent  the  effusion  of  blood  ;  which  being  done,  I 
went  to  the  linen,  and  attempted  to  scrape  it  into  lint,  but 
found  I  could  not  effect  it.  As  daylight  was  fast  coming  on, 
and  our  time  short,  I  then  tore  the  linen  into  strips,  for  com- 
presses and  the  necessary  bandages  ;  which  was  done,  by 
knotting  them  into  long  strips,  placed  the  compresses  five  or 
six  deep,  and  with  the  ligatures  by  the  lieutenant. 


76  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

All  being  prepared,  I  told  Bucklin  to  raise  his  hands,  when 
I  instantly  placed  the  compresses  on  the  orifice  ;  and  placing 
the  bandage  round  the  thigh,  over  the  wound,  and  crossing  it 
above,  drew  tight,  so  that  the  effusion  of  blood  was  stopped. 

During  the  operation,  I  was  several  times  called  upon  at 
the  door,  but  was  not  ready.  When  the  door  was  opened, 
many  rushed  in,  and  attacked  the  bottles.  I  having  boots  on, 
stamped  on  them,  and  requested  others  to  assist,  which  was 
readily  done.  During  this,  Mr.  Dudingston  was  carried  out  of 
the  room,  and  I  never  saw  him  after,  notwithstanding  I  had 
several  invitations,  through  Dr.  Henry  Sterling. 

When  I  came  on  deck,  I  saw  Capt.  Tillinghast,  and  s')me 
others.  We  got  into  the  boat,  and  rowed  up  the  river  a  cer- 
tain distance,  and  went  by  land  up  to  town  ;  when  Capt.  Til- 
linghast, who  was  then  living  with  me,  after  taking  breakfast, 
went  on  the  hill  to  view  the  smoking  ruins  of  the  vessel,  which 
was  all  in  flames  soon  after  we  left  it.* 

JOHN  MAWNEY." 

This  statement  of  Dr.  Mawney,  differs  somewhat  from  that 
of  Col.  Bowen,  though  in  nothing  that  is  material.  It  is  quite 
natural,  that  among  so  many  men,  incidents  might  take  place 
which  all  did  not  observe.  The  attention  of  the  doctor  was 
particularly  directed  to  the  wounded  officer  ;  though,  it 
would  appear  that  he  had  been  as  ready  to  inflict,  as  to  cure 
wounds. 

"  From  a  subsequent  statement  of  Dr.  Mawney,  it  appears 
that  Lieut.  Dudingston  was  not  wanting  in  gratitude  to  his 
surgeon.  After  his  wound  was  dressed,  he  offered  Dr.  Maw- 
ney a   gold  stock   buckle,  as   a  testimonial  of  his  gratitude. 

*  The  Providence  Gazette,  of  June  13,  1772,  after  giving  an  account  of  the  burning  of  the 
Gaspee,  adds  the  following : 

"  We  hear  that  one  Daggett,  belonging  to  the  Vineyard,  who  had  served  the  beforemen- 
tioned  schooner,  as  a  pilot,  but  at  the  time  of  her  being  destroyed,  was  on  board  the  Beaver 
sloop  of  war,  on  going  ashore  a  few  days  since,  at  Narragansett,  to  a  sheep-shearing,  was 
seized  by  the  company,  who  cut  oS'his  hair,  and  performed  on  him  the  operation  of  shear- 
ing, in  such  a  manner,  that  his  ears  and  nose  were  in  imminent  danger." 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  77 

This  was  refused  ;  but  a  silver  one  was  afterwards  offered  and 
accepted,  and  worn  by  Dr.  Mawney,  but  a  little  while  before 
his  death."* 

The  first  official  notice  of  the  destruction  of  the  Gaspee,  is 
a  letter  from  Deputy  Governor  Sessions,  to  Governor  Wanton, 
written  the  day  following  that  event,  after  he  had  paid  a  visit 
to  Lieut.  Dudingston,  at  Pawtuxet.  It  appears  that  the  first 
act  of  the  Deputy  Governor,  on  hearing  of  the  affair,  was  to 
see  the  wounded  officer,  and  endeavor  to  do  all  that  lay  in 
his  power  to  ameliorate  his  sufferings,  and  administer  to  his 
comforts. 

Deputy  Governor  Sessions  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Providence,  June  11,  1772. 

Sir : — A  very  disagreeable  affair  has  lately  happened  within  this  part  of  the 
colony.  Last  Tuesday  night,  as  His  Majesty's  schooner,  the  Gaspee,  lay  aground 
on  the  point  of  land,  called  Namquit,  a  little  below  Pawtuxet,  she  was  boarded  in  a 
hostile  manner,  by  a  number  of  persons  unknown,  who,  in  the  attack,  dangerously 
wounded  the  commander,  WiUiam  Dudingston,  by  firing  a  pistol  or  musket  ball 
through  his. arm,  from  whence  it  passed  and  entered  near  his  groin,  and  is  now 
lodged  in  some  part  of  his  body. 

As  soon  as  they  had  secured  the  possession  of  the  vessel,  they  took  out  the  captain, 
with  all  the  people  ;  the  greater  jjart  being  first  pinioned,  put  them  into  boats,  and 
then  put  them  ashore  on  the  main  land,  near  Pawtuxet ;  after  which,  they  put  fire 
to  the  schooner,  which  soon  reduced  her  to  ashes,  down  to  the  water's  edge. 

Upon  my  receiving  the  news,  I  immediately  set  out  for  Pcxwtuxet,  attended  by 
some  gentlemen  from  this  town,  went  directly  to  Capt.  Dudingston,  told  him  if  he 
needed  any  money,  surgeons,  or  a  removal  of  his  person  to  a  place  more  conven- 
ient, I  would  give  him  a,\\  the  assistance  in  my  power. 

He  replied,  he  wanted  no  favors  with  respect  to  himself,  but  only  desired  some 
care  might  be  taken  of  his  people,  that  they  might  be  collected  together,  and  sent 
either  to  Boston,  to  the  admiral,  or  else  to  the  Beaver,  at  Newport,  which  I  j^rom- 
ised  to  take  care  to  do. 

I  then  informed  him,  that  the  design  of  my  visit,  at  that  time,  was  not  only  to  af- 
ford him  any  rehef  his  circumstances  might  require,  but  also  to  gain  a  declaration 
from  his  own  mouth  respecting  the  attack  that  had  been  made  on  his  person,  and 
the  vessel  he.  conmaanded,  that  the  perpetrators  might  be  brought  to  justice. 

He  answered,  he  would  give  me  no  account  of  the  matter.  Fu-st,  because  of  his 
indisposition  of  body ;  and  secondly,  because  it  was  his  duty  to  forbear  any  thing  of 
the  nature  till  he  had  done  it  to  his  commanding  officer,  at  a  court  martial,  to  which, 
if  he  lived,  he  must  be  called  ;  but  if  he  diecj,  he  desired  it  might  all  die  with  him. 

*  Judge  Staples'a  Documentary  History,  p.  IC 


78  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

I  then  asked  him  it'  he  was  wilHng  I  should  examine  any  of  his  ofiicers  and 
people. 

He  said  he  was  willing.  I  then  proceeded  to  examine  a  number  of  them,  they  all 
agreeing  nearly  to  the  same  thing ;  and  herewith  convey  to  Your  Honor  copies  of  the 
most  material  of  their  declarations.  The  dangerous  tendency  of  this  transaction,  is  too 
obvious,  to  ]iass  it  over  with  the  least  appearance  of  neglect ;  and  thei'efore,  doubt 
not  Your  Honor  will  give  it  due  attention,  and  prosecute  such  measures  as  wisdom 
and  prudence  shall  dictate. 

It  is  the  prevaiUng  opinion  of  the  gentlemen  in  this  quarter,  that  a  proclamation, 
with  a  large  reward,  be  issued,  for  apprehending  the  persons  who  have  thus  offended. 
You  will  please  consult  the  gentlemen  your  way  ;  and,  in  the  mean  time,  I  will  en- 
deavor to  collect  the  sentiments  of  the  members  of  the  Assembly,  and  other  princiT 
pal  gentlemen  bv  name,  and  send  the  same  to  Your  Honor,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

I  am,  &c,  &c.,  DARIUS  SESSIONS. 

To  Governor  Wanton. 

Enclosed  in  this  letter,  were  the  following  affidavits  : 
Affidavit  of  Bartholomeiu  Cheever. 

The  examination  of  Bartholomew  Cheever,  seaman,  lately  belonging  to  His  Maj- 
esty's schooner,  the  Gaspee,  taken  by  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor  of  the 
colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,  is  as  followeth,  viz. : 

That  the  said  schooner,  being  bound  from  Newport  up  to  Providence^,  to  take  on- 
board some  of  His  Majesty's  seamen,  that  were  expected  froni  Boston,  did,  on  the 
9th  of  this  instant,  at  about  three  q'clock,  in  the  afternoon  of  said  day,  run  aground 
on  a  point  of  land,  about  six  miles  below  the  town  of  Providence,  where  she,  the 
said  schooner,  lay  until  twelve  o'clock,  at  night,  at  which  time,  he,  the  said  Cheever, 
was  called  upon  deck,  to  take  the  watch.  About  three-quarters  of  an  hour  after- 
wards, the  schooner  j'et  being  aground,  he  observed  some  long  boats,  about  six  or 
Kcven  in  number,  full  of  men,  dramng  near  to  the  schooner ;  upon  which,  he  in- 
formed the  commander,  Capt.  Dudingston,  who  immediately  came  on  deck,  and  or- 
dered him  to  hail  them,  and  bid  them  stand  off,  on  their  peril ;  to  which  they  an- 
swered, "  D — n  you,  we  have  you." 

The  captain  then  ordered  him  to  call  all  hands  on  deck,  Avhicli  he  did  ;  but  before 
many  of  them  got  up,  the  boats  were  alongside,  and  the  crews  getting  on  board  ; 
and  as  they  were  entering  the  schooner,  he  saw  the  flash  and  heard  the  report  of  a 
musket,  and  heard  the  captain  cry  out,  he  was  a  dead  man. 

We  were  then  ordered  into  the  hold,  and  taken  out  separately,  and  put  into  the 
boat  alongside,  the  most  of  us  being  pinioned,  and  then  put  on  shore  on  the  main 
land ;  where  we  had  not  been  long,  before  we  saw  the  schooner  on  fire,  where  she 
continued  burning,  till  the  fire  reached  the  water's  edge. 

Question — Did  you,  or  do  you  knoiy,  or  do  you  remember,  ever  to  have  seen  be- 
fore, any  of  those  persons  that  boarded  the  schooner  at  that  time  ? 

Answer — No,  his 

BARTHOLOMEW  y.    CHEEVER. 
mark. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  79 

Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,    -» 
AVarwick,  June  10,  1772.      j' 
The  above  named  Bai-tholomew  Cheever  was  solemnly  sworn  to  the  truth  of  the 
foregoing  declaration,  to  the  which  he  has  subscribed  as  above,  before — 

DARIUS  SESSIONS, 

Deputy  Governor. 

Affidavits  of  John  Johnson  and  William  J.  Caple, 

The  examination  of  John  Johnson,  boatswain  of  His  Majesty's  schooner  Gaspee, 
commanded  by  WilHam  Dudingston  ;  together  with  the  examination  of  Wni.  J.  Ca- 
ple, a  seaman  on  board  said  schooner,  taken  this  10th  day  of  June,  in  the  twelfth 
year  of  His  Majesty's  reign,  A.  D.  1 7  72,  before  the  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, severally  say: 

That  on  the  9th  of  June,  being  bound  with  said  schooner,  to  the  town  of  Provi- 
dence, in  order  to  take  on  board  some  of  His  Majesty's  seamen,  which  were  expected 
from  Boston,  in  order  to  re-place  them  on  board  His  Majesty's  ship  to  which  they 
belonged,  about  tliree  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of  said  day,  the  schooner  grounded 
on  a  point  in  the  Narragansett  Bay,  about  six  miles  southward  of  the  town  of  Provi- 
dence ;  and  about  the  middle  of  the  night,  following,  the  schooner  still  being  on 
ground,  thei'e  being  but  one  hand  on  deck,  he  discovered  seven  or  eight  long  boats, 
with  a  number  of  persons  aboard  them  ;  on  which,  the  person  on  deck  informed  the 
commander,  Wm.  Dudingston,  who  hailed  the  boats,  and  ordered  them  to  keep  off  ? 
but  the  persons  on  board  said  boats,  not  regarding  the  commander's  orders,  came  near, 
in  order  to  board  said  ^schooner ;  on  which,  the  captain  or  commander,  called  all 
hands ;  but  before  he  was  on  deck,  we  heard  two  small  arms  or  pistols  fired ;  and 
when  coming  on  deck,  the  schooner  was  boarded  ;  and  being  in  the  hatchway,  said 
Johnson  received  several  blows  with  a  stick,  and  as  soon  as  we  were  on  deck,  we 
Avere  bound,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  seamen  bound  likewise,  and  put  on  board  their 
boat,  and  landed  on  the  west  side  of  said  bay,  together  with  the  captain  or  com- 
mander, who  was  much  wounded. 

Question — Have  you  any  knowledge  of  the  persons  that  boarded  the  schooner  ? 

Answer — No.  his 

JOHN  ^    JOHNSON. 
mark, 
his 
WILLIAM  J.    X  CAPLE. 
mark. 

Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,    -^ 
Warwick,  June  10,  1772.      | 
The  within  John  Johnson  and  William  J.  Caple  made  solemn  oath  to  the  truth  of 
the  witliin  or  foregoing  declaration,  to  which  they  have  subscribed,  before — 

DARIUS  SESSIONS, 

Deputy  Governor. 


80  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OP    RHODE   ISLAND  1772. 

On  the  following  day,  June  12,  Governor  Sessions  addressed 
another  letter  to  Governor  Wanton  ;  the  bearer  of  which, 
probably  brought  back  to  him  the  proclamation  of  Governor 
Wanton,  which  follows  : 

Deputy  Governor  Sessions  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Providence,  June  12,  1772. 

Sir : — Since  I  -wrote  you  yesterday,  by  Hacker,  I  have  received  the  advice  of  all 
the.  civil  authority  in  this  town,  as  well  as  an  application  in  writing,  signed  by  a 
great  number  of  the  most  reputable  inhabitants,  who  are  unanimously  of  opinion, 
and  earnestly  desire  that  Your  Honor  forthwith  issue  a  proclamation,  with  proper 
reward,  for  the  apprehending  and  bringing  to  justice  any  and  every  person  that  was 
concerned  in  destroying  the  schooner  Gaspee,  or  in  assaulting  and  wounthng 
William  Dudingston,  the  commander  of  said  schooner ;  and,  if  Your  Honor  finds  it 
expedient  to  put  forth  such  a  proclamation,  it  is  requested  that  a  copy  thereof,  may 
be  sent  by  the  bearer,  who  goes  express,  and  has  orders  to  wait  until  it  is  deter- 
mined whether  a  proclamation  be  issued  or  not ;  and  if  it  be,  to  bring  it  back  with 
liim  timely,  that  it  may  be  inserted  in  our  newspaper  to-morrow. 

Some  exceptions  are  taken  at  the  Gaspee's  being  called  His  Majesty's  schooner, 
as  it  is  thought  by  some,  she,  in  fact,  really  was  not,  and  consequently  did  not  de- 
serve that  appellation. 

If  the  evidence  we  have  in  that  respect,  be  suflicient  to  denominate  her  a  King's 
vessel,  she  ought  to  be  called  so ;  if  not,  then  only  withqut  any  compliment,  the 
schooner  Gaspee  ;  which  is  submitted  to  Your  Honor's  better  knowledge  and  dis- 
cretion, by—  Your  Honor's  most  humble  servant, 

DARIUS  SESSIONS. 

P.  S. — Dr.  Sterling,  who  attends  Capt.  Dudingston,  informed  us  yesterday  that 
he  was  in  a  fair  way  to  recover  of  his  wounds. 
To  Governor  Wanton. 
To  the  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  at  Newport. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  81 


Proclamation  of  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island,  relative  to  the 
Destruction  of  the  Gaspee. 


By  the  Honorable  Josejih  Wanton,  Esquire,  Governor,  Captain  General  and  Com- 
mander in  Chief  of,  and  over  the  English  Colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Provi- 
dence Plantations,  in  New  England,  in  America — 

A    PROCLAMATION. 

Whereas,  on  Tuesday,  the  9th  inst.,  in  the  night,  a  number  of  people  unknown, 
boarded  His  Majesty's  armed  schooner  the  Gaspee,  as  she  lay  aground  on  a  point 
of  land,  called  Namquit,  a  little  to  the  southward  of  Pawtuxet,  in  the  colony,  afore- 
said, who  dangerously  wounded  William  Dudingston,  the  commander,  and  by  force 
took  him,  -with  all  his  people,  put  them  into  boats,  and  landed  them  near  Pawtuxet, 
and  afterwards  set  fire  to  the  said  schooner,  whereby  she  was  totally  destroyed. 

I  have,  therefore,  thought  fit,  by  and  with  the  advice  of  such  of  His  Majesty's 
Council  as  could  be  seasonably  convened,  to  issue  this  laroclamation,  strictly 
charging  and  commanding  all  His  Majesty's  officers,  within  the  said  colony,  both 
civil  and  mihtary,  to  exert  themselves  with  the  utmost  vigilance,  to  discover  and  ap- 
prehend the  persons  guilty  of  the  aforesaid  atrocious  crime,  that  they  may  be 
brought  to  condign  punishment. 

And  I  do  hereby  offer  a  reward  of  one  hundred  pounds,  sterling  money  of 
Great  Britain,  to  any  person  or  persons,  who  shall  discover  the  perpetrators  of  the 
said  villainy,  to  be  paid  immediately  upon  the  conviction  of  any  one  or  more  of 
them. 

And  the  several  sheriifs  in  the  said  colony,  are  hereby  required  forthwith  to 
cause  this  proclamation  to  be  posted  up  in  the  most  public  places  in  each  of  the 
towns  in  their  respective  counties. 

Given  under  my  hand  and  seal  at  arms,  at  Newport, 

this  1 2th  day  of  June,  in  the  twelfth  year  of  the 
reign  of  His  Most  Sacred  Majesty  George  the 
Tliird,  by  the  grace  of  God,  King  of  Great  Britain, 
and  so  forth.     Anno  Dom.  1772.  J.  WANTON. 

By  His  Honor's  command : 

HENRY  WARD,  Secretary. 

God  save  the  King. 
VOL.  VII.  11 


82  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

Notwithstanding  the  wound  of  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  he 
probably  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  of  June,  dispatched  a  mes- 
senger to  Admiral  Montagu,  with  the  news  of  the  loss  of  his 
vessel. 

The  messenger  was  doubtless  William  Dickinson,  a  midship- 
man ;  as  the  following  letter,  dated  the  1 1th,  was  received  by- 
Governor  Wanton,  from  the  admiral,  endorsing  the  deposi- 
tion of  Dickinson. 

• 
Admiral  Montagu  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Boston,  lltla  June,  1772. 

Sir  : — Enclosed  I  transmit  Your  Excellency  a  deposition  taken  before  me,  of  the 
piratical  proceedings  of  the  people  of  Providence,  in  Rhode  Island  go\ernment,  by 
attacking  His  Majesty's  schooner  with  an  armed  force,  wounding  her  commander 
in  a  dangerous  manner,  and  then  setting  her  on  fire. 

I  am  to  request  Your  Excellency  will  use  such  methods  as  you  shall  think  proper, 
for  apprehending  and  bringing  the  offenders  to  justice.  I  am  now  dispatching  a 
sloop  to  England  with  the  account  I  enclose  to  you  ;  and  am,  &c.,  &c., 

J.  MONTAGU. 

To  His  Excellency  Governor  Wanton. 

The  deposition  enclosed,  was  that  of  William  Dickinson, 
which  was  as  follows : 

Deposition  of  William  Dickinson. 

Wilham  Dickinson,  nudshipman  of  His  Majesty's  schooner  Gaspee,  sayeth : 

That  the  said  schooner  was  at  single  anchor  about  three  leagues  below  Provi- 
dence, in  Rhode  Island  government,  10th  of  June,  1772,  and  about  half  past  twelve 
o'clock,  in  the  night  or  morning,  the  watch  gave  the  alarm  that  a  number  of  boats 
were  coming  down  the  river,  and  very  near  us  (being  an  exceeding  dark  night),  we 
hailed  them,  and  ordered  them  to  keep  off. 

They  instantly  gave  us  thi-ee  cheers  ;  on  which,  we  fired  at  them  with  muskets, 
which  they  immediately  returned  with  a  half  a  dozen  muskets  (or  thereabouts). 
We  then  fired  our  pistols,  on  which  they  boarded  us  upon  the  starboard  bow,  and 
fired  a  number  of  small  arms.  Immechatcly  Lieutenant  Dudingston  (her  com- 
mander,) cried  out,  "  Good  God,  I  am  done  for."  He  was  Avounded  in  his  groin  and 
arm. 

AVliile  we  were  disputing  forward,  relative  to  their  boarding  us,  three  other  boats 
boarded  us,  upon  the  quarter.  In  the  three  boats  which  boarded  us  upon  the  c^uar- 
ter,  there  were  thirty  or  forty  men,  at  least ;  and  in  the  whole,  I  suppose  about  one 
hundi-ed  and  fifty  in  number,  on  which  we  thought  proper  (the  lieutenant  being 
wounded,)  to  surrender. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  83 

When  they  had  got  possession  of  the  schooner,  they  used  the  people  very 
ill,  by  pinioning  of  them,  and  throwing  them  into  their  boats,  and  refused  the  heu- 
tenant  and  officers  any  necessai'ies  but  what  they  had  on,  and  not  even  suffered 
the  commanding  -officer  to  have  his  papers,  and  robbed  liis  servant  of  several  silver 
spoons,  and  throwed  his  linen  and  apparel  overboard. 

We  were  then  sent  ashore,  in  two  different  boats ;  the  lieutenant  and  part  of  the 
men  in  one  boat,  and  myself  with  the  rest  of  the  people  in  the  other  boat,  at  the 
distance  of  about  two  miles  asunder,  as  we  found  at  daylight.  I  remained  on  the 
beach  ;  and  about  half  past  three  o'clock,  saw  the  schooner  on  fire  ;  and  about  half 
past  four,  I  saw  three  boats  put  off  from  her,  full  of  xnen,  and  rowed  up  towards 
Providence ;  and  an  hour  after,  another  boat  came  by  her,  and  landed  her  men  at 
Pawtuxet. 

Questions  hy  Admiral  Montar/ii. 

Q. — How  long  had  you  been  lying  in  Providence  River  ? 

A. — We  came  to  an  anchor  there,  at  about  four  o'clock,  in  the  afternoon  of  the 
Sth  of  June. 

Q — Had  you  sent  any  boat  ashore. 

A. — Ko  ;  but  employed  sounding  the  harbor. 

Q. — Had  you  been  at  Providence  before,  during  the  time  you  were  upon  that 
station  ? 

A.— No. 

Q. — Do  you  imagine  that  the  people  who  boarded  you,  came  from  Providence  ? 

A. — Yes  ;  I  believe  tlie  most  part,  but  cannot  say  all,  as  one  boat  landed  her  men 
at  Pawtvixet. 

Q. — ^Yhat  distance  is  Pawtuxet  from  Providence,  by  land  ? 

A. — Five  miles. 

Q. — What  distance  were  the  boats  from  the  schooner,  when  they  were  first 
seen? 

A. — I  was  not  upon  deck  at  first,  myself;  but  when  I  saw  them,  they  were  about 
one  hundred  yards. 

Q. — Why  did  y-ou  not  fii-e  your  great  guns  at  them  ? 

A. — They  boarded  us  upon  the  bows,  and  were  so  near  to  us,  that  we  had  not 
ti^  to  get  our  guns  out  at  the  bow  ports. 

Q. — Did  any  of  the  j^eople  that  boarded  you,  appear  hke  gentlemen  ? 

A. — Yes  ;  many  of  them  appeared  hke  men  of  credit  and  tradesmen  ;  and  but 
few  like  common  men. 

Q. — Did  they  make  use  of  any  ojDprobrious  language  ? 

A. — Yes  ;  by  threatening  to  put  the  lieutenant  to  death,  and  calhng  us  piratical 
rascals. 

Q. — Where  did  you  leave  the  Beaver  ? 

A. — Off  Golden  Island,  in  the  mouth  of  Seaconnet  Passage. 

Q. — 'What  distance  from  you  ? 

A. — About  twenty-five  miles. 

Q. — Could  she  be  in  sight  when  this  hajjpened  ? 

A. — No  ;  the  main  laud  is  between. 

Q. — Is  there  any  thing  more  that  you  can  recollect  ? 

A. — Yes  ;  one  of  the  people  took  me  by  the  coUar,  and  said,  "  D — n  you,  where 


84  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

is  your  pilot  Daggett  ?"  I  answered,  he  was  discharged  six  weeks  ago.  He  an- 
sweredj  "  D — n  your  blood,  you  lie  ;"  and  said  they  would  find  him,  and  tlee  him  alive. 

Q. — Did  they  suffer  the  lieutenant  to  put  on  any  clothes,  after  he  was 
wounded  ? 

A. — No  ;  he  was  in  his  shirt,  with  his  great  coat  over  his  shoulders,  and  a  blanket 
round  his  body. 

Q. — Was  any  other  person  wounded,  except  the  lieutenant  ? 

A.— Yes  ;  one  in  the  head- 

And  I  further  declare,  that  when  Lieutenant  Dudingston  came  on  deck,  I  saw  him 
go  and  stand  by  the  starboard  foroshrouds,  in  his  shirt,  with  a  pistol  in  one  hand  and 
a  hano-er  in  tTie  other.  After  he  was  wounded,  he  got  aft,  and  sat  down  by  the 
cabin  companion  way,  when  the  two  ring-leaders,  with  a  number  following  them, 
came  to  him,  and  said : 

"  Now,  you  piratical  rascal,  we  have  got  you.  D — n  you,  we  will  hang  you  all  by 
the  laws  of  Great  Britain.  D — n  you,  what  made  you  fire,  when  we  answered  you 
that  the  head  sheriff  was  in  the  boat  ?" 

The  captain  (N.  B.  The  head  sheriff  and  captain  are  fictitious  names  that  the 
ring-leaders  went  by)  said,  "  Stand  aside,  let  me  dispatch  the  piratical  dog." 

He  then  lifted  a  handspike  over  Mr.  Dudingston's  head,  .who  asked  "  if  they 
•would  give  no  quarters  ?" 

They  answered  "  No," 

He  then  desired  they  would  let  me  bind  up  his  wounds,  for  he  was  shot,  and 
showed  them  the  wound  in  his  left  arm. 

They  then  said,  "  D — n  your  blood,  you  are  shot  by  your  own  people." 

He  was  then  taken  down  into  the  cabin,  by  some  of  the  mob.  They  then  pin- 
ioned me,  and  put  me  into  the  boat,  where  I  remained  for  half  an  hour ;  when  one 
of  the  mob  called  to  their  people  in  the  boat  to  loosen  me,  for  the  heutenant  wanted 
me.  I  went  down  in  the  cabin  to  him.  He  was  laid  on  the  after  lockers,  and 
one  of  the  mob  washing  and  binding  up  his  wounds.  The  mob  then  got  him  on 
deck,  and  put  him  into  a  boat,  and  put  off. 

Soon  after,  I  was  ordered  into  the  boat  again,  and  put  off.  In  going  on  shore,  I 
saw  a  negro  with  the  heutenant's  hanger  ;  being  asked  by  another  how  he  got  it, 
he  said  he  took  it  from  the  captain. 

Being  down  in  the  cabin,  with  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  the  ring-leaders,  and  some 
of  the  principal  of  the  mob  demanded  his  pajiers  and  orders  for  his  proceedin^n 
such  piratical  manner.  I  then  showed  them  the  commission  from  the  lords  of  the 
admiralty,  with  all  his  orders  and  instructions  that  he  had  received  from  the  ad- 
miral, which  they  took  and  carried  away. 

In  going  ashore,  one  of  the  mob  that  rowed  the  boat,  said,  that  he  and  several 
more,  would  not  have  been  there,  but  that  they  were  taken  out  of  a  house  by  force, 
and  compelled  to  go ;  that  they  beat  a  drum  round  the  town  of  Providence,  in  the 
evening,  to  raise  a  mob.  W.  DICKINSON. 

Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,    ") 
Suffolk,  sc.  Boston,  June  11,  1772.  > 

The  above  named  William  Dickinson,  personally  appearing,  maketh  solemn  oath 
to  the  truth  of  the  foregoing  deposition,  as  written  upon  this  and  the  six  preceding 
pages,  wliich  is  taken  at  the  request  of  the  Honorable  John  Montagu,  Esq. 

Before  me,  EDMUND  QUINCY. 


1772.1  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  89 


The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Admiral  Montagu,  in  reply. 

Newport,  June  12,  1772. 

Sir : — I  have  this  moment  received  Your  Honor's  letter,  of  yesterday,  upon  the 
destruction  of  His  Majesty's  schooner  Gaspee. 

Upon  the  first  information  of  this  unhappy  affair,  which  gives  me,  and  every 
friend  to  government,  the  highest  concern,  I  called  together  all  the  members  of 
the  General  Assembly  that  I  could  conveniently,  who  unanimously  advised  me  to 
publish  the  proclamation,  of  which  I  enclose  you  a  copy. 

I  have  not,  as  yet,  been  able  to  collect  all  the  circumstances  of  this  daring  insult 
upon  authority,  so  as  to  give  you  a  perfect  idea  of  it ;  but  by  the  evidence  of  three 
of  the  people  of  the  Gaspee,  taken  before  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor,  copies 
of  which,  I  transmit,  you  will  i^erceive  that  there  is  a  material  difference  between 
them  and  the  account  given  by  William  Dickinson. 

'You  may  rely  upon  the  utmost  and  continued  exertions  of  the  officers  of 
this  colony  to  detect  and  bring  to  justice  the  perpetrators  of  this  violent 
outrage. 

I  have  the  pleasure  to  inform  you,  that  Lieutenant  Dudingston  is  in  a  fair  way  of 
recovery.  I  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c.,  J.  WANTON. 

To  His  Honor  Admiial  Montagu. 

On  the  12th,  Lieutenant  Dudingston  had  so  far  recovered, 
as  to  be  able  to  write  a  letter  to  Admiral  Montagu,  wherein  he 
presented  his  version  of  the  destruction  of  his  vessel.  This 
differs  but  little  from  those  of  Col.  Bowen  and  Dr.  Mawney, 
as  to  the  attack  of  the  boats,  his  being  wounded  and  the  sur- 
render of  his  vessel  to  an  overpowering  force. 

It  will  be  inferred,  however,  from  the  Lieutenant's  account, 
that  he  and  his  crew  were  pretty  harshly  handled,  which  may 
have  been  true.  He  had  given  great  offence  to  the  people,  by 
his  overbearing  conduct,  and  by  his  unlawful  seizure  of  prop- 
erty ;  so  that  they  were  little  disposed,  in  the  contest  on  board 
his  vessel,  to  treat  him  kindly.  But  after  he  had  been  taken 
to  Pawtuxet,  wounded,  every  attention  was  paid  him. 

It  is  natural,  that  in  stating  the  case  to  Admiral  Montagu, 
Duding.ston  would  represent  the  circumstances  as  favorable  to 
himself  and  crew  as  possible. 


86  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 


Lieut.  Dudingstoh  to  Admiral  Montagu. 

Pawtuxet,  12th  June,  1772. 

Sir : — On  "Wednesday  morning,  about  one  o'clock,  as  His  Majesty's  schooner  was 
hdng  upon  a  sjiite  of  sand  called  Namcutt,  the  sentinels  discovered  a  number  of 
boats  coming  down  the  river,  towards  us. 

As  soon  as  I  was  acquainted  with  it,  I  came  upon  deck,  and  hailed  the  boats,  for- 
bidding them  to  come  near  the  schooner,  or  I  should  order  them  to  be  fired  upon. 

They  made  answer,  they  had  the  sheriff  \\ii\i  them,  and  must  come  on  board. 

I  told  them,  the  sheriff  could  not  be  admitted  on  board  at  that  time  of  night ;  on 
which  they  set  set  up  a  halloa,  and  rowed  as  fast  as  they  could,  towards  the  vessel's 
bows.  I  was  then  using  every  means  in  my  power,  to  get  the  guns  to  bear  upon 
them,  which  I  coidd  not  affect,  as  they  came  right  ahead  of  the  vessel,  she  being 
aground.  I  then  ordered  the  men  to  come  forward  with  their  small  arms,  and  pre- 
vent them  from  boarding. 

As  I  was  standing  myself  to  oppose  them,  and  making  a  stroke  with  my  sword,  at 
the  man  who  was  attemjiting  to  come  ujj,  at  that  instant  I  found  myself  disabled  in 
my  left  arm,  and  shot  through  the  groin.  I  then  stepjjed  from  the  gunwale,  with 
an  intention  to  order  them  retire  to  close  charters  ;  but  soon  saw  that  most  of 
them  were  knocked  down,  and  myself  twice,  (after  telhng  them  I  was  mortally 
wounded). 

They  damned  me,  and  said  I  was  not  wounded  ;  if  I  was,  my  own  i")eople  had 
done  it.  As  loss  of  blood,  made  me  drop  down  upon  deck,  they  ordered  me  to  beg 
my  life,  and  cormnanded  the  j)eople  to  surrender.  As  I  saw  there  was  no  possibility 
of  defencUng  the  vessel  against  such  numbers,  who  were  in  every  respect  armed,  and 
commanded  with  regularity,  by  one  who  personated  the  sheriff,  I  thought  it  best  for 
the  people's  jjreservation,  to  propose  to  them  that  I  would  order  them  to  surrender, 
if  they  assured  me  they  should  not  be  hurt ;  which  they  did. 

I  then  called  out,  Avhich  was  immediately  echoed  by  the  peojjle  round  me,  that  I 
had  given  them  orders  to  surrender.  They  hurried  all  the  people  below,  and  or- 
dered them  up,  one  by  one,  and  tied  their  hands  behind  their  backs,  then  ordered 
them  into  different  boats. 

I  then  begged  they  would  either  dispatch  me,  or  suffer  m}-  wounds  to  be  dressed'; 
upon  that,  they  allowed  my  servant  to  be  unbound,  to  get  me  things  for  dressing, 
and  carried  me  below.  Bnt  what  was  my  surprise,  when  I  came  down  in  the  cabin, 
two  surgeons  were  ordered  clown  from  the  deck,  to  dress  me,  who  were  furnished 
with  drojis,  and  began  to  scrape  hnt  for  that  purpose. 

During  this  time,  I  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  the  jiersons  of  about  a  dozen, 
who  were  in  the  cabin.  They  appeared  to  me  to  be  merchants  and  masters  of  ves- 
sels, who  were  at  my  bureau,  reading  and  examining  my  papers.  They  promised 
to  let  me  have  the  schooner's  books,  and  my  clothes ;  instead  of  which,  as  they  were 
handing  me  up,  to  go  into  the  boat,  they  threw  them  overboard,  or  into  some  of  the 
boats.     I  was  soon  afterwards  thrust  into  a  boat,  almost  naked. 

During  the  time  they  were  rowing  me  on  shore,  I  had  an  opportunity  of  observing 
the  boat ;  which  appeared  to  me,  to  be  a  very  large  long-boat.  I  saw  by  the  man 
who  steered  her,  a  cutlass  lying  by  him,  and  directing  the  men  to  have  their  arms 
ready.     As  soon  as  they  put  off,  the  sheriff  gave  them  orders  to  land  me  on  some 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  87 

neck,  and  the  boat  to  come  oiF  Immediately ;  and  told  me  if  I  did  not  consent  to 
pay  the  value  of  the  rum,  I  must  not  expect  to  have  any  thing  belonging  to  me, 
saved. 

I  made  answer,  whatever  reparation  the  law  would  give,  I  was  ready  and  wilhng ; 
as  to  my  tilings,  they  might  do  Avith  them,  as  they  pleased.  They  were  accordingly 
going  to  land  me  on  this  neck,  when  I  told  them  they  had  better  throw  me  over- 
board. One  man,  who  had  a  little  more  humanity  than  any  of  the  rest,  said  they 
had  better  land  me  at  the  Point  of  Pawtuxet.  As  I  was  unable  to  stand,  they  un- 
bound five  of  the  men,  and  gave  them  a  blanket  to  carry  me  up.  When  I  was  half 
way  on  shore,  I  heard  some  of  the  schooner's  guns  go  otF,  and  heard  the  people  say 
she  was  on  fii-e. 

I  had  not  been  carried  far,  when  the  people  exclaimed,  I  was  on  an  island,  and 
they  saw  no  house ;  on  which,  they  laid  me  do-^yi,  and  went  in  quest  of  one.  Soon 
after,  they  came  to  acquaint  me  they  saw  one,  which  I  was  carried  to  ;  a  man  was 
immediately  dispatched  to  Providence,  for  a  surgeon.  A  httle  after,  the  people 
joined  me,  with  the  midshipman  ;  all  of  whom,  that  I  could  persuade,  arc  sent  on 
board  His  Majesty's  sloop  Beaver. 

The  schooner  is  utterly  destroyed,  and  every  tiling  appertaining  to  her,  me,  and 
the  schooner's  company.  If  I  li^•e,  I  am  not  without  hojie  of  being  able  to  convict 
some  of  the  principal  people  that  were  with  them.  The  pain,-  with  the  loss  of 
blood,  rendered  me  incapable  of  informing  you  before  of  the  particulars.  There 
are  none  of  the  people  any  ways  wounded,  but  bruised  with  handspikes. 

I  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

W.  DUDINGSTON. 

To  Admiral  Montagu. 


In  the  above  letter,  Dudingston  says,  that  m  taking  him 
ashore,  they  told  him,  if  he  "  did  not  consent  to  pay  the  value 
of  the  rum  "  he  had  seized,  "  he  must  not  expect  to  have  any 
thing  saved  belonging"  to  him  ;  to  which,  he  made  answer, 
that  he  was  ready  to  make  "  any  reparation  the  law  would 
give." 

It  appears,  by  the  following  letter,  from  the  collector  of  cus- 
toms, at  Providence,  that  the  owners  of  the  goods  referred  to, 
lost  no  time  in  laying  their  hands  on  his  person. 

William  Checkley,  to  the  Cemmissioners  of  Customs. 

[Pro\ddence],  12th  June,  1772. 

Honorable  Gentlemen  : — Hearing  this  morning,  that  the  high  sherifl"  was  gone  to 
arrest  Capt.  Dudingston,  on  the  suit  of  Jacob  Greene  and  others,  for  goods  which 
Capt.  Duchngston  lately  seized  in  the  river,  and  carried  to  Boston,  I  went  down  im- 
mediately, and  found  the  sheriff  had  just  before  arrested  him  ;  a  copy  of  the  writ  I 
herewith  enclose  to  Your  Honors. 

I  offered  to  be  security  for  hmi ;  but  Capt.  Dudingston  told  me  he  should  not  ask 


88  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

any  person  to  be  security,  as  he  did  not  expect  to  live  long,  and  the  sheriff  might  do 
as  he  pleased.  The  surgeons  told  me  he  was  too  ill  to  be  moved ;  and  as  I  expect 
the  sheriff  will  use  great  severity  with  him,  I  humbly  request  Your  Honors  to  give 
me  such  direction  in  the  matter  as  to  you  shall  seem  necessary.* 

I  am,  &c.,  &c., 

WILLIAM  CHECKLEY. 
To  the  Honorable  His  Majesty's  Commissioners  of  Customs. 

On  the  receipt  of  Lieutenant  Dudingston's  letter,  of  the  12th 
June,  Admiral  Montagu  addressed  the  following  to  Governor 
Wanton. 

The  only  thing  that  surprised  the  admiral  in  the  statement 
of  the  lieutenant,  was,  that  of  his  finding  two  surgeons  in  the 
cabin  of  the  Gaspee,  when  he  was  taken  down  wounded  ; 
whence  he  doubtless  inferred,  that  the  attacking  party  expected 
to  shed  blood,  and  that  it  was  a  previously  contrived  plot. 

Admiral  Montagu  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Boston,  IStli  June,  1772. 

Sir  : — By  return  of  express,  I  am  favored  with  Your  Excellency's  letter,  and  am 
much  obliged  for  tlie  part  you  have  taken  in  endeavoring  to  find  out  and  bring  to 
justice,  those  rebellious,  lawless  and  piratical  peoj^le,  who  were  concerned  in  wound- 
ing the  King's  lieutenant,  and  burning  his  schooner. 

It  will  not  bear  a  dispute  but  that  they  belonged  to  Providence,  as  they  were 
heard  by  four  or  five  gentlemen  that  were  in  the  town,  and  are  now  here,  beating 
the  drum  to  arms,  to  raise  a  body  of  people  to  destroy  the  King's  schooner.  I  have 
perused  the  depositions  which  Your  Excellency  enclosed ;  and  although  they  differ 
in  words,  yet  the  matter  is  much  to  the  same  purpose. 

I  have,  since  I  received  yours,  received  one  from  Lieutenant  Duchngston,  whose 
account  nearly  agrees  with  the  other,  with  this  addition  only :  that  when  he  was 
carried  down  to  his  cabin,  after  he  was  wounded,  he,  to  his  great  surprise,  found 
two  surgeons,  that  came  off  from  the  shpre  in  the  boats,  ready  to  dress  his  wounds, 
with  drops  and  scrawling  of  lint ;  and  at  least  a  dozen  of  these  people  who  were  in 
the  cabin,  who  were  at  his  bureau  reading  and  examining  liis  papers,  appeared  to 
him  to  be  merchants  and  masters  of  vessels. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  hear  the  lieut^iant  is  in  a  fair  Avay  of  recovery. 

I  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

J.  MONTAGU. 

To  His  Excellency  Governor  Wanton. 

*  Jacob  Greene  &  Co.,  the  owners  of  the  rum  and  sugar,  referred  to,  commenced  a  suit 
at  the  July  term  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,  and  recovered  judgment  against  Dudingston, 
for  the  illegal  seizure. 


1772,]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  89 

Admiral  Montagu  lost  no  time  transmitting  to  His  Majesty's 
secretary  of  state,  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough,  an  account  of  this 
affair.  His  letter  is  dated  on  the  very  day  of  Go/ernor  Wan- 
ton's first  letter  to  him  ;  and  his  account  of  it  was  given  from 
the  version  as  presented  to  him  by  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  or 
some  one  else  from  the  Gaspee,  on  the  day  she  was  destroyed. 
His  account  is  very  brief. 

The  deposition  referred  to,  is  doubtless  that  of  William  Dick- 
inson, a  midshipman  of  the  Gaspee,  a  copy  of  which,  was 
transmitted  by  the  admiral  to  Governor  Wanton,  in  his  letter 
to  him,  of  the  11th  June. 

Admiral  Montagu  to  Lord  Hillshorovgh. 


Boston,  in  New  Enoland, 


12th  June  1772.  [ 

My  Lord : — I  was  in  liopos  I  should  not  have  had  occasion  to  trouble  Your  Lord- 
ship with  any  public  letters,  while  I  have  the  honor  to  command  on  the  continent ; 
bjjt  the  lawless  and  piratical  jieople  of  Rhode  Island  obhges  rue  to  vvrite  to  you. 

By  the  enclosed  deposition,  Your  Lordship  will  see  that  this  nest  of  darin"-  smug- 
glers have  wounded  in  a  most  dangerous  manner  Lieut.  Dudingston,  and  burnt  the 
King's  schooner  Gaspee,  under  his  command,  for  no  other  cause,  except  his  being 
dilligent  in  the  discharge  of  his  duty,  by  giving  every  projjer  assistance  to  the  fair 
trader,  and  using  every  endeavor  to  suppress  the  illicit  trade  that  is  carried  on  to  a 
great  degree,  in  that  province,  and  which  can  never  be  checked  unless  tliere  are 
more  men-of-war  stationed  there,  to  keep  the  inhabitants  in  order. 

I  beg  leave  to  refer  Your  Lordship  to  the  enclosed  deposition,  for  the  particulars, 
and  wait  Your  Lordship's  instructions  for  what  is  to  be  done.  Permit  me  to  add, 
that  the  lieutenant  that  is  Avounded,  is  a  sober,  dilhgent,  good  officer ;  and  has  most 
strictly  done  his  duty  since  I  have  had  the  honor  of  commanding  here,  frequently 
at  the  hazard  of  his  hfe,  in  assisting  the  revenue.  Should  he  survive,  which  I  have 
little  hopes  of,  I  beg  leave  to  recommend  him  to  Your  Lordshijj's  favor  and  pro- 
tection, I  have  the  honor,  &e.,  &c., 

J.  MONTAGU, 


P,  S.  Herewith  I  transmit  to  Your  Lordship  copies  of  letters  which  have 
between  me.  Lieutenant  Dudingston  and  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island,  which  I 
did  not  think  necessary  to  trouble  Your  Lordship  with,  until  this  melancholy  affair 
of  the  schooner  happened.  J.  M. 

VOL,  VII.  12 


90  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  1772. 

The  following  is  the  official  account  of  the  destruction  of  the 
Gaspee>  transmitted  by  Governor  Wanton,  t«>  the  Earl  of 
Hillsborough. 


The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough. 

Newport,  Rhode  Island,    > 
June  16,  1772.  > 

My  Lord : — I  did  myself  the  honor  to  write  to  Your  Lordship  oa  the  20th  ultimo.  I 
am  now  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  addressing  Your  I^ordship  irpon  a  most  disa- 
greeable subject ;  the  destruction  of  the  schooner  Gaspee,  under  the  command  of 
Lieutenant  William  Dudingston,  by  persons  unknown.  The  particulars  relating  to 
this  unwarrantable  transaction,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  collect  them,  are  as 
follows : 

On  the  [)th  inst.,  she  run  aground  on  a  point  of  land  called  Kamquit,  a  little 
below  Pa^v•tux.et,,  oa  the  Narragansett  River.,  within  tins  colony,  Abont  three, 
quarters  of  an  hour  after  twelve  o'clock,  at  night,  there  being  but  one  hand 
on  deck,  six  or  seven  boats,  full  of  men,  were  by  him  discovered  drawing  towards 
said  schooner  ;  and  before  many  of  her  hands  had  time  to  get  upon  deck,  was 
boarded  by  the  people  in  the  boats,  who,  as  soon  as  they  had  secured  the  possession 
of  the  schooner,  took  out  the  captain  and  all  the  people,  and  set  them  ashore  on 
the  main  land ;  after  wlilch,  they  set  fire  to  the  schooner.  In  the  attack,  Mr.  Dud- 
ingston was  wounded  by  a  ball  through  his  arm,  from  whence  It  passed  and  lodged 
In  some  part  of  his  body. 

Iklr.  Sessions,  the  Deputy  Governor  of  this  colony,  immediately  upon  hearing  of 
this  unhappy  afEaIr,.  went  to  j\L-.  Dudingston,  and  offered  him  all  the  help  and  as- 
sistance in  his  power  ;•  but  Mr.  Dudingston  said  he  wanted  no  favors  for  himself. 

The  Deputy  Governor  then  told  him,  that  he  came  not  only  to  offer  him  any 
relief  his  distressed  circumstances  might  require,  but  also  to  gain  a  declaration  from 
his  own  mouth  respecting  the  destruction  of  the  schooner  under  his  command,  that 
proper  and  rigorous  measui'es  might  be  taken  to  discover  and  bring  the  perpetrators 
to  justice. 

]VL'.  Dudingston  answered,  he  woidd  give  him  no  account,  because  of  his  indispo- 
sition ;  and  also,  because  It  was  his  duty  to  forbear  any  thing  of  that  kind,  till  he 
had  done  It  to  his  commanding  officer,  at  a  court  martial,  to  which.  If  he  lived,  he 
must  be  called  ;  but  if  he  died,  he  desired  It  might  all  die  with  him. 

The  Deputy  Governor,,  with  the  consent  of  ]Mi\  Dudingston,  then  proceeded  to 
examine  a  number  of  his  imen,  and,  on  the  11th,  transmitted  copies  of  the  most  mate- 
rial of  the  examinations  to  me  ;  u,poji  the  receipt  whereof,  I  Immediately  convened 
such  of  His  Majesty's  Council  and  the  house  of  deputies  as  could  be  seasonably  no- 
tified, and  laid  before  them  the  proceedings  of  the  Deputy  Governor,  which  they  highly 
approved  of,  and  unanimously  recoBaiaiiien-tlied  my  issviing  a  prwlamatlon,  with  a  re- 
ward of  £100,  sterling,  for  the  eliscovery  of  any  of  the  persons  concerned  In  this 
violent  insult  upon  governmentj  which  I  cheerfully  comphed  with,  and  sent  them 
into  the  several  towns  within  this  colonv. 


1772  ]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  91 

This  transaction  gives  me  the  utmost  imeasiness  ;  and  Your  Lordship  may  be  as- 
sured, that  the  utniost  vigilaisce  of  the  civil  autliority  will  not  be  wanting,  to  bring 
the  perpetrators  to  exemplary  and  condign  punishment ;  and  in  justice  to  the  inhab- 
itants of  the  colony,  I  must  not  omit  mentioning,  that  the  conduct  of  thos^  who 
committed  this  outrage,  is,  by  them,  universally  condemned. 

I  wish.  My  Lord,  those  officers  who  have  lately  been  sent  into  tliis  colony,  under  a 
pretence  of  assisting  trade,  had  conducted  with  that  temper,  prudence  and  discretion 
which  persons  entrusted  with  the  execution  of  the  laws  ought,  upon  every  occasion, 
to  manifest.  • 

In  my  last,  I  informed  Your  Lordship,  that  the  inhabitants  had  been  insulted  with- 
out any  just  cause ;  and  I  am  extremely  sorry  that  I  have  still  reason  to  saj",  that 
the  trade  of  this  colony  is  Interrupted  in  a  most  unprecedented  and  oppressive  man- 
lier, without  contributing,  hi  the  least,  to  the  service  of  the  revenue.  Inward  bound 
vessels  have  been  detained  several  days,  without  the  least  colorable  pretext,  and 
then  delivered  up. 

One  from  South  Kingstown,  for  having  on  board  a  small  quantity  of  tobacco,  of 
the  growth  of  this  colony,  which  the  owner  was  transporting  to  Newport,  for  a  mar- 
ket ;  another,  for  having  only  three  or  four  dozen  wine  laid  in  by  the  captain,  for  sea 
,  stores.  The  small  freight  boats,  plying  between  the  several  towns,  with  the  produce 
of  the  colony,  are^,  by  the  severity  of  these  officers,  subjected  to  great  inconvenience, 
which  very  sensibly  affects  the  whole  colony ;  and  particularly,  the  town  of  Newjjort, 
its  metropolis,  whose  inhabitants  are  principally  supplied  with  the  necessaries  of  life 
by  water ;  and  the  obstructions  they  now  experience,  haxe  contributed  not  a  little 
to  enhance  the  price  of  fuel  and  provisions,  to  the  great  disadvantage  of  the  town ; 
and  in  my  humble  opinion,  if  such  measures  are  permitted  to  be  pursued,  the  colony 
will  ere  long  be  involved  in  the  deepest  calamity. 

These,  My  Lord,  are  serious  and  important  truths ;  and  as  Your  Lordship,  from 
your  thorough  knowledge  of  the  colony,  must  be  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  na- 
ture and  extent  of  our  trade,  the  profits  of  which,  ultimately  centering  in  Great 
Britain,  for  the  purchase  of  her  manufactures,  I  have  no  room  to  doubt  of  Your 
Lordship's  interposition  in  behalf  of  this  colony,  that  all  cause  of  comjilaint  against 
any  of  the  King's  officers  stationed  here,  may  be  removed,  and  the  inhabitants 
treated  with  that  respect  Avhich  is  due  to  the  subjects  of  His  Britannic  Majesty. 

As  a  proof,  My  Lord,  that  the  trade  of  this  colony  stands  upon  as  fair  and  legal 
a  footing  as  the  trade  of  any  part  of  His  Majesty's  dominions,  out  of  two  hundred 
sail  of  vessels  which  have  entered  this  port  since  the  1st  day  of  March  last,  only 
two  in  that  number  have  been  prosecuted  and  condemned  for  breach  of  acts  of 
trade,  •  one  of  which,  belongs  to  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  notwithstanding  they  have 
been  searched  and  rummaged  with  the  greatest  severity.  These  two  vessels,  al- 
though seized  and  condemned  here,  were  sent  by  Capt.  Linzee,  of  the  Beaver,  and 
Lieut.  Dudingston,  to  Boston,  for  sale,  in  direct  opposition  to  the  orders  of  the  court 
of  vice  admiralty,  within  this  colony  ;  and  the  marshal  of  the  said  court  prevented 
by  force  from  libelling  one  of  these  vessels  for  payment  of  the  mariners'  wages. 

These,  My  Lord,  are  but  a  few  of  the  many  grievances  which  the  people  of  this 
colony  have  been  for  months  past  harrassed  and  perplexed  with  ;  but  as  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  will  soon  be  convened,  I  make  no  doubt  they  will  order  a  more  par- 
ticular remonstrance  to  be  made. 

In  the  mean  tim_e,  permit  me.  My  Lord,  to  implore  your  attention  to  the  com- 


92  RECORDS    OF*    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

plaints  of  a  much  abused  and  injured  people,  whose  loyalty  and  affection  to  their 
Sovereign,  claims  Your  Lordship's  countenance  and  patronage.* 

I  am,  &c.,  &c.,  J.  WANTON, 

To  the  Ri<rht  Honorable  the  Earl  of  Hillsborouffh. 


"  There  is  little  room  to  doubt,"  as  Judge  Staples  observes, 
"but  that  Governor  Wanton  and  the  officers  of  the  colony 
would  have  been  satisfied  that  t'he  authors  of  the  tiiischief 
should  remain  undiscovered  ;  although  their  duty  as  officers, 
and  their  interests,  required  them  to  exhibit  a  great  zeal  and 
loyalty  on  the  occasion. 

On  the  other  hand,  Admiral  Montagu  and  his  brother  officers 
in  the  navy  and  revenue,  were  sincere  in  their  exertions  to 
bring  the  perpetrators  to  condign  punishment."  This  appears 
from  the  following  letter,  relative  to  the  deposition  of  the  negro 
Aaron,  Avhich  is  often  referred  to  in  the  proceedings  which 
follow. 


*  The  following  extract  of  a  letter,  relating  to  the  Gaspee  affair,  is  found  with  the  cor- 
respondence of  Admiral  Montagu,  in  the  state  paper  office.  It  does  not  appear  to  whom  it 
was  written. 


•'  Charles  Dudley,  Esq.,  to 


Rhode  Island,  23d  July,  1772. 

*  *  The  attack  ilpoa  the  Gftspee  was  not  the  effect  of  sudden  passion  and  resentment, 
but  of  cool  deliberation  and  fore-thought.  *  It  had  long  been  determined  she  should  be 
destroyed. 

The  paragraph  in  the  enclosed  newspaper,  under  the  Newport  head,  was  the  prelude  to 
the  diabolical  scene.     *    * 

The  next  public  step,  was  a  memorial  or  petition  from  the  merchants  in  Providence  ;  first 
laid  befoi^e  the  superior  court  of  jiidicature,  then  sitting  in  the  town,  and  afterwards  before 
the  Governor,  praying  that  the  commander  of  an  armed  vessel,  then  cruising  in  the  bay, 
should  be  called  upon  by  the  civil  authority,  to  know  by  what  powers  he  was  authorised  to 
search  ships  and  other  vessels  on  the  high  seas;  though  it  was  notorious  that  the  armed 
vessel  in  question,  sailed  under  British  colors,  and  belonged  to  His  Britannic  Majesty. 

The  piece  from  the  paper,  Newport,  February  24,  speaks  of  an  armed  schooner,  that  had 
seized  ten  or  twelve  hogsheads  of  rum  the  first  part  of  last  week ;  also,  last  Thursday, 
three  hogsheads  of  molasses,  belonging  to  a  poor  man.  Some  say,  this  piratical  schooner 
belongs  to  King  George  the  Third;  but  we  should  think  it  a  little  below  His  Bi-t-n-o 
Majesty,  to  keep  men-of-war  employed  in  robbing  some  of  his  poorest  subjects." 


1772.1  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  '  93 


Admiral  Montagu  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Boston,  8th  July,  1772. 

Sir : — By  express,  last  niglit,  from  Capt.  Linzee,  of  His  Majesty's  sloop  Beaver,  I 
l-eceived  the  enclosed  account ;  and,  although  it  comes  from  a  negro  man,  it  carries 
with  it  the  appearance  of  truth,  as  it  agrees  in  many  circumstances  with  Lieutenant 
Dudingston's  letter  (to  me),  and  also  with  the  deposition  of  the  midshipman  of  the 
Gaspec ;  added  to  this,  a  man  belonging  to  the  Gaspee,  swears  to  this  negro's  being 
in  the  boat  that  put  him  ashore,  and  challenged  him  as  soon  as  he  saw  him  come 
on  board  the  Beaver. 

These  corroborating  circumstances,  put  it  out  of  all  doubt  with  me,  that  he  was 
actually  concerned  in  taking  and  burning  the  King's  schooner.  And  as  he  has  im- 
peached several  others  that  were  concerned  in  that  piratical  act,  I  am  to  beg  Your 
Excellency  Avill  get  the  peojile  mentioned  in  the  enclosed  account,  apprehended, 
that  they  may  be  examined  before  you,  in  the  presence  of  Lieutenant  Dudingston, 
who,  I  dare  say,  will  remember  the  person  of  the  surgeon  that  dressed  his  wounds  ; 
and  may  possibly  recollect  the  persons  of  Potter  and  Brown,  who  appear  to  me,  to 
have  been  the  ring-leaders  in  destroying  His  Majesty's  schooner. 

As  this  affair  was  transacted  in  Your  Excellency's  government,  I  must  totally 
rely  on  you,  to  have  these  people  secured,  and  (if  there  is  sufficient  proof  against 
them)  brought  to  justice.  I  doubt  not  but  that  you  will  exert  yourself  as  much  as 
is  in  your  power ;  and  I  flatter  myself,  that,  with  your  assistance,  the  King  will 
have  justice  done  him,  and  the  offenders  brought  to  punishment ;  which  I  hope  will 
in  future  prevent  the  King's  officers  from  being,  upon  all  occasions,  insulted,  and 
check  the  lawless  and  piratical  behaviour  of  the  people  of  Rhode  Island. 

I  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

J.  MONTAGU. 

To  His  Excellency  Governor  Wanton. 

P.  S.  I  should  be  glad  if  Your  Excellency  would  inform  me,  whether  this  act 
was  committed  on  the  high  seas,  or  in  the  body  of  the  county  ;  if  on  the  former,  I 
doubt  not  but,  as  one  of  the  commissioners,  you  will  use  every  proper  method  to  get 
them  ajjpreliended,  that  they  may  be  tried. 

if  you  should  think  it  proper  to  take  the  negro's  deposition  on  oath,  I  should  be 
glad  if  you  would  suffer  a  proper  j^erson  to  go  on  board  the  Swan,  to  take  it  •,  and 
that  you  will  favor  me  with  a  copy  of  it. 

Statement  of  the  Negro  Aaron. 

Aaron,  a  negro  man,  has  declared  that  he  rowed  from  Providence,  the  evening 
His  Majesty's  schooner  Gaspee  was  burnt,  towards  Warren,  where  he  met  a  man, 
called  Potter,  of  Bristol,  in  a  rowing  boat,  with  eight  men,  armed  with  pistols,  guns 
and  clubs ;  the  said  Potter  desired  him  to  go  with  him. 

In  consequence  of  Potter's  desire,  I  rowed  by  his  boat,  until  I  came  within  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  of  the  King's  schooner,  that  was  on  shore  on  a  spite  of  land.  I 
then  got  into  Potter's  boat,  by  his  desire ;  he  told  me,  with  others,  that  he  was  to  join 
»ther  boats,  that  were  coming  doAvn  from  Providence,  in  order  to  burn  the  King's 


94  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1772. 

scliooner,  that  lay  on  shore.  In  about  half  an  hour  after,  we  joined  seventeen  boats 
from  Pro^acience,  commanded,  as  they  informed  me,  by  John  Brown. 

Immediately  after  the  boats  joined  company,  we  rowed  towards  the  schooner ;  be- 
fore we  came  close  to  the  schooner,  they  hailed  the  boats,  and  forbid  them  coming 
on  board ;  but  notwithstanding  the  officer  of  the  schoonei-  forbidding  the  boats 
to  come  on  board,  we  had  orders  to  roAv  uji  to  the  schooner ;  which  we  did  imme- 
diately, and  boarded  her. 

I  saw  Brown  fire  a  musket  when  in  the  boat,  under  the  bows  ;  the  captain  of 
the  schooner  immediately  fell  from  the  place  he  Avas  standing  on ;  the  surgeon,  that 
was  ordered  to  dress  the  cajitain,  was  a  tall,  thin  man,  called  "Weeks,  of  "Warwick ; 
very  soon  after  we  got  on  board  the  schooner,  the  mens'  hands,  belonging  to  the 
schooner,  were  tied  behind  their  backs,  and  put  in  boats  and  put  on  shore. 

I  rowed  the  bow  oar  in  the  boat  that  the  captain  came  on  shore  in  ;  I  think  there 
were  five  people  belonging  to  the  schooner,  in  the  boat.  The  captain  lay  abaft  all 
the  oars ;  Potter,  of  Bristol,  was  in  the  boat,  and  John  Brown,  of  Providence ; 
Brown  steered  the  boat  on  shore  ;  I  had  on  a  red  and  white  spotted  handkerchief, 
tied  on  my  head,  and  two  frocks  on  my  body. 

A  list  of  five  men's  names,  that  were  concei'ned  in  destroying  His  Majesty's 
schooner  Gaspee : 

iJohn   Brown  and  Joseph  Brown,  principal  men  of  the  town  of  Providence : 

Simeon  Potter,   of  Bristol ;  Doctor  "Weeks,   of  "Warwick ;  Richmond,   of 

Providence. 

N.  B.  One  of  the  Gaspee's  men  declared,  as  soon  as  he  saw  the  negro,  that  he 
was  the  man  that  rowed  the  bow  oar  in  the  boat  he  went  on  shore  in ;  and  that  he 
assisted  the  negro  to  row  the  oar. 

Admiral  Montagu,  at  the  same  time,  communicated  the  par- 
ticulars which  he  had  obtained  from  Aaron,  to  the  Earl  of 
Hillsborough.  He  also  takes  the  occasion  to  add  remarks  rela- 
tive to  the  character  of  the  leading  men  supposed  to  have  been 
implicated  in  the  burning  of  the  Graspee,  which  are  not  at  all 
flattering.     Here  follows  his  letter. 

Admiral  Montagu  to  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough. 

Boston,  11th  July,  1772. 

My  Lord : — Since  I  had  the  honor  of  writing  to  Your  Lordship  last,  I  have  re- 
ceived an  express  from  Capt.  Linzee,  of  His  Majesty's  sloop  Beaver,  at  Rhode  Is- 
land, informing  me  he  had  discovered  and  detained  an  indented  black  servant,  who 
was  in  one  of  the  boats  that  boarded  the  Gaspee  schooner;  that  one  of  the  men  now 
on  board  the  Beaver  (late  of  the  Gaspee),  remembered  the  man  the  moment 
he  saw  liim. 

Enclosed,  I  transmit  to  Your  Lordship  the  said  black  man's  deposition  (on  being 
examined),  by  which  Your  Lordship  will  be  able  to  judge  of  the  people  concerned, 
and  of  the  measures  necessary  to  be  taken. 

I  beg  leave  to  observe  to  Your  Lordship,  that  I  have  inquired  of  many  of  the 
principal  people  of  this  place,  who  all  knew  Potter,  of  Bristol,  mentioned  in  the  en- 


1772.]  AND   PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS,  95 

closed  depositioii,  an.d  in  general  agree  that  he  Is  a  man  of  fortune,  but  of  tlic  most 
infamous  character  possible  to  describe ;  and  has  been  guilty  of  almost  every  vice  a 
pirate  can  be  guilty  of.  The  Browns,  of  Providence,  are  principal  people  of  that 
place. 

It  appears  to  me,  My  Lord,  that  these  people  Avere  the  ringleaders  in  this 
piratical  proceeding.  1  have  therefore,  written  to  Governor  Wanton,  of  Rhode  Is- 
land, and  begged  his  utmost  exertions  may  be  used  for  the  apprehension  and  bring- 
ing to  justice  the  people  mentioned  in  the  said  deposition,  as  principals  in  this  pro- 
ceeding ;  but  the  disposition  of  the  people  of  that  government  iu  general.  Is  such, 
that  I  cannot  flatter  myself  with  much  success,  unless  some  other  method  is  taken 
ibr  appehending  them.  I  have  the  honor  to  be,  &c.,  &c,, 

J.  MONTAGU. 

To  the  Right  Honorable  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough. 

It  does  not  appear  that  Governor  Wanton  adopted  the 
course  recommended  hy  Admiral  Montagu,  to  arrest  the  par- 
ties charged  by  the  negro  Aaron,  with  being  concerned  in  the 
burning  of  the  Gaspee.  Whether  he  knew  they  w^ere  con- 
cerned in  the  affair,  which  is  probable,  and  desired  to  screen 
them,  or  whether  he  disbelieved  the  statement  of  Aaron,  and 
determined  to  make  it  so  appear,  the  reader  must  judge.  But 
it  seems  he  lost  no  time  in  obtaining  the  following  affidavits. 

Affidavits  going  to  disprove  Aaron's  Statement. 

Samuel  Thurston,  of  the  island  of  Prudence,  in  the  township  of  Portsmoutli,  in 
the  county  of  Newport,  of  lawful  age,  declareth  and  salth  : 

That  Aaron,  a  mulatto  lad,  of  about  sixteen  years  of  age,  now  on  board  His 
Majesty's  ship,  the  Swan,  conmianded  by  Capt.  Ayscough,  is  an  Indented  servant  to 
Samuel  Tompkins,  of  Prudence,  aforesaid,  son-in-law  to  the  said  Samuel  Thurston ; 
which  Samuel  Tompkins  hath  lived  In  the  same  house  with  the  declarant  for  many 
years  past,  and  have  jointly  managed  a  farm  together  ;  that  he  is  fully  persuaded 
the  said  Aaron  hath  not  been  off  from  the  said  island  for  more  than  twelve  months 
preceding  the  2d  day  of  July  Instant ;  on  the  night  of  which,  the  said  Aaron  stole  their 
boat,  and  went  on  board  His  Majesty's  ship,  the  Beaver  ;  that  particularly  on  the 
night  after  the  9th  of  June  last,  being  the  same  night  that  His  Majesty's  schooner, 
the  Gasjiee,  was  burnt,  he  Is  well  assured  that  the  said  Aaron  remained  in  his  house 
the  whole  of  the  night,  he  having  seen  him  on  the  evening  and  early  in  the  morning 
of  the  10th,  at  his  work. 

That,  at  that  time,  there  was  but  one  boat  at  that  end  of  said  Island,  which  was 
then  so  much  out  of  repair,  that  the  said  declarant  thinks  she  could  not  swim,  and 
then  lay  bottom  upwards  in  order  to  be  refitted,  being  the  same  boat  the  said 
Aaron  stole  after  she  was  repaired. 

That  he,  the  declarant,  thinks  it  absolutely  Impossible,  that  the  said  Aaron 
should  have  been,  that  night,  any  where  near  the  place  where  the  said  schooner 
was  burnt ;  and  that  the  said  Aaron  remained  at  home  from  the  s.^id  ath  of  Junei. 


96  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1772. 

until  the  2d  day  of  July ;  and  never,  during  that  time,  gave  liim  the  least  in- 
formation, suggestion  or  hint  of  his  having  any  knowledge  of  the  business  of  the 
said  schooner.  SAIM'L  TIIUKSTON. 

Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,    ■> 
Newport,  July  10,  1772.        | 
Personally^appeared  Samuel  Thurston,  (one  of  the  people  called  Quakers,)  and 
on  his_  solemn   afiirmation,  declared  that  the  above  written   declaration   is   true, 
before—  J.  WANTON, 

Governor. 

Samuel  Tompkins,  of  the  island  of  Prudence,  in  the  township  of  Portsmouth,  in 
the  county  of  Newport,  on  oath  declareth  and  saith  : 

That  Aaron,  amulatto  lad  of  about  sixteen  years  of  age,  now  on  board  His  Maj- 
esty's ship,  the  Swan,  commanded  by  Capt.  Ayscough,  is  an  indented  servant  to  the 
deponent ;  that  he  is  fully  persuaded  the  said  Aaron  hath  not  been  off  from  the  said 
island  more  than  once  or  twice  for  twelve  months  precethng  the  2d  of  July  last,  in 
the  night  of  which,  the  said  Aaron  stole  a  boat  belonging  to  the  deponent  and  his 
father-in-law,  Mr.  Sauuiel  Thurston,  and  went  on  board  His  Majesty's  ship,  the 
Beaver. 

That  particularly,  on  the  night  after  the  Dtli  of  June  last,  being  the  same  night 
that  His  Majesty's  schooner,  the  Gaspee  was  burnt,  he  is  well  assured  that  the  said 
Aaron  remained  in  his  house  the  whole  of  the  night ;  he  having  seen  him  about  nine 
o'clock,  that  evening,  with  the  rest  of  the  servants,  in  the  famih",  about  which  time 
they  retired  to  bed  ;  and,  also,  very  early  in  the  morning  of  the  10th,  the  said  Aaron, 
according  to  liis  usual  custom,  brought  the  cows  into  the  yard,  to  be  milked. 

That,  at  the  time,  there  was  but  one  boat  at  that  end  of  the  island,  which  was 
then  so  much  out  of  repair,  that  the  deponent  is  confident  she  could  not  swim,  and 
then  lay  bottom  upwards,  in  order  to  be  re-fitted,  being  the  same  boat  the  said 
Aaron  stole  after  she  was  repaired. 

That  he,  the  said  deponent,  thinks  it  absolutely  impossible  that  the  said  Aaron 
should  have  been  that  night  any  where  near  the  j^lace  where  the  schooner  Gaspee 
was  burnt ;  and  that  he,  the  said  Aaron,  remained  at  home  from  the  said  9th  of  June, 
imtil  the  said  2d  day  of  July  ;  and  never,  during  that  time,  gave  him  the  least  in- 
ibrmation,  suggestion  or  hint  of  his  having  any  the  least  knowledge  of  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  said  schooner.  SAM'L  TOMPKINS. 


Colony  of  Khode  Island,  &c.,    i 
Newport,  July  11,  17  72.      j 
]VIr.  Sauuiel  Tompkins  personally  appeared,  and  made   solemn  oath  to  t '  e  truth 
of  the  above  deposition  by  him  subscribed,  before —  J.  AVANTON, 

Governor. 

Somerset,  a  mulatto,  and  Jack,  a  negro,  indented  servants,  living  with  Samuel 
Thurston  and  Samuel  Tompkins,  on  the  island  of  Prudence,  in  the  township  of 
Portsmouth,  in  the  county  of  Newport,  of  lawful  age,  on  o  ith  severally  depose  and 
say: 

That  to  their  certain  knowledge,  AaroD,  a  mulatto  \iid,  who  is   also  an  indented 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  97 

servant  to  the  said  Samuel  Tompkins,  and  now,  as  they  are  informed,  on  board  of  a 
man-of-war,  has  not  been  off  from  said  island  for  many  months  preceding  the  2d  daj'- 
of  July  instant ;  in  the  night  of  which,  the  said  Aaron  stole  a  boat  belonging  to  the 
said  Samu  '1  Thurston  and  Samuel  Tompkins,  and  went  on  board  a  man-of-war. 

That  the  said  Aaron  has  slept  with  the  deponents  in  the  same  bed  for  several 
years ;  and  particularly  on  the  night  the  schooner  called  the  Gaspee,  was  burnt,  the 
said  Aaron  was  at  home,  at  the  dwelling-house  of  the  said  Thurston  and  Tompkins, 
and  that  he,  the  said  Aaron,  lay  in  the  same  room  and  bed  with  the  deponents  the 
whole  of  that  night ;  having  retired  to  bed  together,  between  nine  and  ten  o'clock, 
in  the  evening. 

And  the  deponents  severally  say,  that  they  have  never  had  the  least  hint  or  in- 
formation, from  the  said  Aaron,  of  his  having  any  knowledge  of  the  burning  of  the 
said  schooner  Gaspee ;  and  that  they  are  well  assured  that  he  knows  nothing  of 
the  transaction.     And  the  depoi;ents  further  say  not. 

The  mark  of  ^^^^.  SOMERSET. 
The  mark  of  X    JACK. 


Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,    y 
Newport,  July  11,  1772.       \ 
In  their  proper  persons  came   and  appeared  the  above  named    Somerset  and 
Jack ;  and  after  being  cautioned  to  tell  the  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth,  made 
solemn  oath   to  the  above  deposition,  to  which  they  have  made  their  respective 
marks.  Before—  J.  WANTON, 

Governor. 

About  the  same  time,  Capt.  Linzee,  of  the  Beaver,  then 
lying  in  Newport,  caused  the  following  deposition  to  be 
taken : 

Deposition  of  Patrick  Earle. 

The  deposition  of  Patrick  Earle,  of  lawful  age,  lately  belonging  to  His  Majesty's 
armed  schooner,  Gaspee,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  but  now  to  His 
Majesty's  ship,  the  Beaver,  commanded  by  John  Linzee,  Esq.  This  deponent 
saith : 

That  after  a  nmnber  of  boats  boarded  the  said  schooner,  as  she  lay  aground,  and 
the  peoples'  hands  were  tied,  he,  with  several  others,  was  put  into  the  same  boat 
that  the  captain  was  carried  ashore  in  ;  and  that  he  helped  a  negro  man,  called 
Aaron  Briggs,  to  row  the  bow  oar,  which  negro  is  now  on  board  His  Majesty's  ship 
Beaver,  who  hath  sworn  that  he  did  row  ashore  with  the  bow  oar ;  and  further  saith 
not.  The  mark  of  X    PATRICK  EARLE. 

Sworn  in  Newport,  16th  July,  1772.     Before  me — 

CHARLES  BARDIN, 

Justice  of  the  Peace. 


VOL.  V4I.  13 


98  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

The  statement  of  the  mulatto  boy  Aaron,  taken  on  board  the 
Beaver,  seemed  hardly  sufficient  to  warrant  the  arrest  of  the 
respectable  parties,  which  he  had  endeavored  to  implicate  in 
the  transaction,  in  question. 

Governor  Wanton,  therefore,  very  properly  desiring  that  he 
should  be  examined  by  the  civil  authority,  conformably  to  law, 
addressed  the  following  note  to  the  captain  of  the  Beaver. 

The   Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to    Captain   Linzee,  of   His 
Majesty's  ship  Beaver. 

Xewport,  July  IGth,  1772. 

Sir : — Ha\'iiig  received  information  from  the  Honorable  Admiral  Montagu,  that 
Aaron,  a  mulatto  lad,  on  board  His  Majesty's  ship,  the  Beaver,  under  your  com- 
mand, has  confessed  that  he  was  concerned  in  destroying  His  Majesty's  schooner, 
the  Gaspee,  as  she  lay  aground  on  Namquit  Point,  in  the  county  of  Kent,  witliin 
this  colony  ;  and  as  it  is  highly  necessary  that  this  lad  should  be  examined  by  the 
civil  authority,  concerning  what  he  knows  of  that  affau",  I  have  directed  the  sheriff 
to  wait  upon  you,  and  request  that  you  would  dehver  Aaron  into  his  custody,  in 
order  to  be  brought  on  shore,  that  such  proceedings  may  be  had  and  done  in  this 
matter,  as  are  agreeably  to  law. 

The  King's  attorney  general  will  attend  the  examination  ;  and  I  should  be  glad 
if  you,  or  any  of  your  officers,  would  likewise  attend. 

If  you  are  of  opinion  that  it  is  most  for  His  INIajesty's  service  to  return  Aaron  on 
board  your  ship  after  he  has  been  examined,  instead  of  committing  him  to  jail, 
you  may  be  assured  it  shall  be  done. 

]SIr.  Brenton  also  waits  on  you,  whose  opinion  on  matters  of  law,  may  be  of 
ser^-ice  to  you  in  this  important  affair.  I  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

J.  WANTON. 

To  John  Linzee,  Esq.,  commanding  His  Majesty's  sliip,  the  Beaver. 

Warrant  to  the  Sheriff  of  the  County  of  Neivport,  for  the  Arrest 
of  the  Negro  Aaron. 

Colony  of  Rhode  Island. 

_^         GEORGE  THE  THIRD,  by  the  grace  of  God,  King  of  Great  Britain, 
■]  L.  S.  [■  France  and  Ireland,  Defender  of  the  Faith,  &c.     To  the  sheriff  of  the 

county  of  Newport,  or  his  lawfiil  dejiuty,  greeeting  : 

Whereas,  I  have  received  information,  that  Aaron,  a  mulatto  lad,  otherwise 
called  Aaron  Bowler,  alias  Briggs,  now  on  board  His  Majesty's  ship,  the  Beaver, 
under  the  command  of  Captain  John  Linzee,  in  the  harbor  of  Newjiort,  aforesaid, 
with  divers  other  malefactors,  to  me  as  yet  unknown,  did,  in  the  night  of  the  9th  of 
June  last,  unlawfully  and  riotously  assemble   and   gather  together   to  disturb  the 


1772.]  AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  99 

peace  of  our  said  lord  the  King ;  and  being  so  assembled  and  gathered  together, 
with  force  and  arms,  an  attack  did  make  upon  His  Majesty's  schooner,  the  Gaspee, 
under  the  command  of  Lieutenant  William  Dudingston,  as  she  lay  aground  on  a 
point  of  land,  called  Namquit,  within  the  township  of  Warwick,  in  the  county  of 
Kent,  in  the  colony  aforesaid ;  and  liim,  the  said  William  Dudingston,  then  and 
there,  being  in  the  peace  of  our  said  lord  the  King,  did  dangerously  wound,  and  the 
said  schooner  then  and  there  did  wickedly,  wilfully  and  feloniously  burn  and  destroy, 
against  the  peace  of  our  said  lord  the  King,  liis  crown  and  dignity. 

Therefore,  in  the  name  of  our  sovereign  lord  the  King,  I  command  and  charge 
you,  that  immediately  upon  the  receipt  hereof,  you  repair  on  board  His  Majesty's  ship 
Beaver,  aforesaid,  and  make  diligent  search  for  the  said  Aaron  ;  and  if  he  be  by  you 
found,  to  bring  him  before  me,  or  some  other  lawful  authority  within  this  colony,  to 
be  examined  concerning  the  premises,  that  such  other  jjroceedings  may  be  had  and 
done,  as  to  law  and  justice  doth  appertain. 

Hereof  fail  you  not,  as  you  will  answer  the  contrary  at  your  peril ;  and  make  true 
retmni  of  this  warrant  with  your  doings  thereon. 

Given  under  my  hand  and  seal,  this  16th  day  of  July,  in  the  twelfth  year  of 
His  Majesty's  reign.     Anno  Domini  17  72. 

METCALFE  BOWLER, 

Just,  of  Assize. 

Newport,  July  17,  1772. 
By  virtue  of  the  within  warrant,  I  waited  upon  John  Linzee,  Esq.,  within  men- 
tioned, who  refused  to  deliver  up  the  within  named  Aaron,  in  presence  of  James 
Brenton,  Esq.  ROBERT  LILLIBRIDGE,  JR., 

D.  Sheriff. 

This  request  of  Governor  Wanton,  was  treated  by  Capt. 
Linzee  with  great  contempt,  and  utterly  disregarded  by  him, 
as  will  appear  by  the  Governor's  letter  to  Admiral  Montagu. 

It  appears,  from  the  following  letter  from  Lieutenant  Dud- 
ingston, to  Admiral  Montagu,  that  his  fears  for  his  personal 
safety,  were  not  wholly  removed. 

Lieutenant  Dudingston  to  Admiral  Montagu. 

Brentou's  Point,  near    -^ 
Newport,  July  1772.    | 
Sir  : — This  day  I  received  yours  of  the  8th  inst.,  and  am  hardly  able  to  give  an- 
swer, from  the  painful  situation  I  am  in  ;  nor  is  it  possible,  at  present,  for  me  to  be  of 
the  least  use  in  respect  to  the  negro. 

I  have  no  doubt  of  his  being  in  the  boat  with  me,  and  it  is  what  I  expected,  that 
the  Governor  would  say  he  was  an  impostor ;  and  I  cannot  help  telling  you,  that, 
without  I  was  able  to  retire  to  a  ship,  I  should  not  exist  one  night  on  shore,  if  I  was 
capable  to  make  oath  to  any  one  of  the  people  mentioned. 


loo  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

I  beg  this  may  be  private,  till  I  can  be  moved  ;  as  tbe  copy  of  the  former  letter, 
being  made  public  to  the  people  by  the  Governor,  puts  me  in  great  danger. 

I  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

W.  DUDINGSTON. 
To  Admiral  Montagu. 

Governor  Wanton  next  communicated  to  Admiral  Montagu^ 
the  proceedings  he  had  taken  in  relation  to  Aaron  ;  expresses 
his  firm  conviction  that  he  was  not  present  at  the  burning  of 
the  Gaspee  ;  and  that,  from  his  notoriously  bad  character,  his 
word  should  not  be  believed.  He  also  makes  known  to  the 
Admiral  his  application  to  Capt.  Linzee,  for  Aaron,  and  the 
contempt  with  which  he  treated  his  request,  which  request,  it 
seems,  was  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  one  of  the  judges 
of  the  supreme  court. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Admiral  Montagu. 

Newport,  July  22,  1772. 

Sir  : — Your  favOr  of  the  8th  inst.,  I  have  received,  together  with  the  information 
given  by  one  Aaron,  a  mulatto  servant,  relative  to  the  destruction  of  the  Gaspee  . 
on  receiving  of  which,  I  pursued  every  measure  in  my  power  to  investigate  and  find 
out  the  truth  of  the  various  assertions  comprised  in  his  declaration. 

For  which  end,  I  caused  to  be  examined  on  oath,  some  of  the  family  with  whom 
this  declarant  lived  as  a  servant ;  persons  of  credit  and  estabhshed  character,  who 
were  separately  examined,  and  whose  testimony  perfectly  agreed  in  every  circum- 
stance, on  such  examination  ;  by  which,  and  from  the  general  bad  character  of  the 
declarant,  I  was  fully  convinced  that  no  regard  could  be  had  to  this  information  ;  that 
the  declarant  could  not  be  present  at  the  time  when  this  offence  was  committed  ;  as 
it  is  fully  proved  that  he  was  at  home,  on  an  island,  near  seven  miles  from  the  place 
where  the  disaster  happened. 

However,  being  very  solicitous  that  every  inquii-y  should  be  made,  that  might  re- 
flect light  on  this  imhappy  affair,  I  had  a  conference  with  one  of  the  judges  of  the 
superior  court,  before  whom  this  matter  must  finally  come  to  be  adjudged,  who  gave 
it  as  his  opinion,  that  it  was  absolutely  necessary  that  this  declarant  should  be  de- 
livered up  to  the  civil  authority,  to  be  properly  examined.  He  therefore  issued  his 
warrant  to  take  Aaron  into  his  custody. 

At  the  same  time,  I  wrote  Capt.  Linzee  a  letter,  requesting  him  to  deliver  him  to 
the  sheriff,  in  order  to  his  being  examined ;  both  which,  were  treated  by  Capt. 
Linzee  with  great  contempt,  and  by  him  utterly  disregarded. 

What  could  be  his  motives  or  reasons  for  such  his  conduct,  I  am  not  able  to  ac- 
count for.  It  certainly  is  a  gi-eat  contempt  of  the  civil  authority  of  this  colony,  who 
have  the  only  power  and  jurisdiction  to  try  all  and  every  offence  committed  within 
the  same,  to  refuse  dcUvering  up  an  offender,  who,  by  his  own  confession,  hath  ac- 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  101 

knowledged  liis  guilt,  and  what  is  sufficient  for  his  conviction,  supposing  what  he 
hath  declared,  to  be  true  ;  and,  if  otherwise,  he  ought  to  be  proceeded  against 
agi-eeably  to  law,  and  punished  according  to  his  offence. 

I  have  transmitted  to  you  the  several  depositions,  by  which,  I  apprehend  you  will 
agree  with  me  in  opinion,  that  no  dependence  can  be  had  on  the  declaration  given 
by  the  informant,  but  must  wholly  be  disregarded.  Villainy  of  this  kind,  is  not  new. 
We  have  a  recent  instance  of  this  sort,  at  home.  Britain  and  others,  conspiring  in 
the  most  horrid  manner,  to  charge  the  officers  of  state  with  a  crime  that  the  whole 
world  knew  they  could  not  possibly  be  guilty  of. 

The  schooner,  when  she  was  destroyed,  lay  agi'ound,  in  a  narrow  river,  near 
thirty  miles  from  the  main  sea  ;  and  as  all  ports  and  havens  are  infra  corpus  comi- 
iaius,  I  am  of  opinion,  that,  in  this  case,  the  admiral  hath  no  jurisdiction.  His 
Honor  the  Chief  Justice,  has  favored  me  with  his  opinion  on  this  matter,  which  here- 
with I  enclose. 

When  Aaron  is  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  civil  authoi'ity,  Avhatever  is  legal 
and  necessary,  will  undoubtedly  be  done.  I  have  advised  with  the  Iving's  attorney, 
whose  opinion  and  advice  coincides  with  what  I  have  written  on  the  subject  of 
Aaron's  declaration.  I  am  Your  Honor's 

Most  obedient  humble  servant, 

J.  WANTON. 

To  the  Honorable  Admiral  Montagu. 

Admiral  Montagu  in  reply  to  the  Gover?ior  of  Rhode  Island. 


Boston,  1st  September,  1772. 

Sir  : — I  received  your  letter,  dated  2  2d  July,  with  three  dej^ositious  enclosed.  I 
deferred  answering  it,  till  I  had  seen  and  examined  Aaron,  the  black  indented  ser- 
vant, who  says  he  was  in  one  of  the  boats  that  boarded  and  burnt  the  Gasjoee ;  and 
it  is  clear  to  me,  from  many  corroborating  circumstances,  that  he  is  no  imjaostor. 

Sorry  I  am,  that  no  regard  can  be  had  to  his  information  in  your  opinion.  In  my 
opinion,  the  depositions  Your  Excellency  sent  me,  prove  nothing  that  confutes  any 
thing  he  has  said. 

However,  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  do  more  than  I  have,  to  bring  the  offenders  to 
justice  ;  the  whole  must  rest  with  you,  who  are  upon  the  s^iot.  I  fmd  the  master  of 
Aaron,  the  black,  has  arrested  Capt.  Linzee,  for  the  detention  of  his  servant ;  therefore, 
as  Capt.  Linzee  has  done  nothing  but  by  my  orders,  I  have  bailed  him,  and  will  keep 
the  fellow.     I  did  intend  sending  him.  to  you,  had  not  his  master  taken  this  step. 

I  shall  not  trouble  Your  Excellency  any  more  on  the  subject  of  the  Gaspee,  but 
leave  the  result  of  the  whole  conduct  of  His  Majesty's  good  subjects  at  Khode  Island 
to  him  and  his  ministers ;  and  am,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

J.  MONTAGU. 

To  Governor  Wanton. 

Here  ended  the  proceedings  of  the  colony,  and  the  corres- 
pondence with  the  English  admiral,  in  relation  to  this  subject, 
previous  to  the  action  upon  it  by  the  British  government. 


102  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

From  various  references,  it  appears  that  under  date  of  the 
4th  of  September,  1772,  Lord  Dartmouth  addressed  a  letter  to 
Governor  Wanton,  transmitting  the  royal  proclamation,  com- 
mission, instructions,  etc.  ;  which  letter,  unfortunately,  is  not 
found  in  the  files  of  the  secretary's  office  ;  nor  does  it  appear 
in  the  compilation  of  Judge  Staples.* 

In  writing  to  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  on  the  20th  February, 
1773,  Judge  Horsmanden,  one  of  the  royal  commissioners, 
says  on  his  arrival  in  Rhode  Island,  on  the  31st  December, 
1772,  in  pursuance  of  His  Lordship's  instructions,  "  he  was 
surprised  to  find  that  the  main  object  of  our  errand,  was  be- 
come public,  wiiich,  in  prudence,  was  to  be  kept  secret  ;  nev- 
ertheless, Your  Lordship's  letter  to  Governor  Wanton,  was 
published  in  the  Boston  weekly  paper,  and  spread  industri- 
ously over  all  New  England.  However  amazing  to  us,  upon 
inquiry  it  carae  out,  that  the  Governor  had  communicated  it  to 
his  Assembly,  who  had  got  it  printed.  Upon  expostulating  with 
the  Governor  upon  it,  he  said,  he  was,  by  law,  obliged  to  com- 
municate ail  dispatches  from  the  ministry  to  his  corporation, 
and  sworn  so  to  do,"  etc.f 


*  Grovernor  Wanton,  in  his  letter  to  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  dated  December  24,  1772, 
mentions  this  letter. 

t  In  a  subsequent  letter  to  Governor  Wanton,  which  will  be  found  in  the  order  of  its 
date,  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth  complains  of  the  publication  of  his  letter  of  the  4th  of  Septem- 
ber, in  the  common  newspaper,  parts  of  which,  were  "  secret  and  confidential,  and  addressed 
personally"  to  himself.  His  Lordship  fears,  too,  that  this  act  "cannot  be  considered  as 
entirely  corresponding  with  the  assurances  given,  of  paying  the  strictest  attention  and 
deference  to  such  orders"  as  he  may  transmit  to  the  Governor. 

The  following  letters  from  Governor  Hutchinson,  of  Massachusetts,  to  a  gentleman  in 
London,  are  from  "  The  Remembrancer,"  for  the  year  1776,  Vol.  II.,  p.  59  : 

Governor  Hutchinson  to  Secretary  Pownall. 

"  Boston,  29th  August,  1772. 

Dear  Sir  :— I  troubled  you  with  a  long  letter  the  2lst  July.  Give  me  leave  now  only  to 
add  one  or  two  things,  which  I  then  intended,  but  to  avoid  being  too  tedious,  omitted. 

People  in  this  province,  both  friends  and  enemies  to  government,  are  in  great  expecta- 
tions from  the  late  affair  at  Rhode  Island,  of  the  buruing  the  King's  schooner ;  and  they  con- 
sider the  manner  in  which  the  news  of  it  will  be  received  in  England,  and  the  measures  to 
be  taken,  as  decisive.  If  it  is  passed  over  without  a  full  ioqairy  and  due  resentment,  our 
liberty  people  will  think  they  may  with  impunity  commit  any  acts  of  violence,  be  they 
ever  so  atrocious,  and  the  friends  to  government  will  despond  and  give  up  all  hopes  of  being 
able  to  withstand  the  faction. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  103 

III  the  "  Massachusetts  Spy,  or  Thomas's  Weekly  Journal,'' 
published  at  Boston,  on  the  31st  December,  1772,  is  the  fol- 
lowing, which  is  doubtless  the  chief  portion  of  the  missing 
letter  referred  to. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Lord  Dartmouth  to  the  Governor  of 
Rhode  Island. 

"  The  follov/ing  may  be  depended  upon,  as  a  genuine  extract  of  the  letter  from 
Lord  Dartmouth,  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island,  dated  Whitehall,  September 
4,  1772: 

'  The  particulars  of  that  atrocious  proceeding  (referring  to  the  burning  the 
Gaspee  schooner),  have,  by  the  King's  command,  been  examined  and  considered 
with  the  greatest  attention ;  and  although  there  are  some  circumstances  attending 
it,  in  regard  to  the  robbery  and  plunder  of  the  vessel,  which,  separately  considered, 
might  bring  it  within  the  description  of  an  act  of  piracy,  yet,  in  the  obvious  view  of 
the  whole  transaction,  and  taking  all  the  circumstances  together,  the  offence  is, 
in  the  opinion  of  the  law  servants  of  the  crown,  who  have  been  consulted  upon  that 
question,  of  a  much  deeper  dye,  and  is  considered  in  no  other  light,  than  as  an  act 
of  high  treason,  viz.  :  levying  Avar  against  the  King. 

And,  in  order  that  you  may  have  all  proper  advice  and  assistance,  in  a  matter  of 
so  great  importance,  His  Majesty  has  thought  fit,  with  the  advice  of  his  Privy 
Council,  to  issue  his  royal  commission,  under  the  great  seal  of  Great  Britain,  noixii- 
nating  yourself  and  the  chief  justices  of  New  York,  New  Jersey,  and  the  Massachu- 
setts Bay,  together  with  the  judge  of  the  vice  admiralty  court  established  at  Boston, 
to  be  His  Majesty's  conmiissioners  for  inquiring  into,  and  making  report  to  His 
Majesty,  of  all  the  circumstances  relative  to  the  attacking,  plundering  and  burning 
the  Gasj^ee  schooner. 

The  persons  who  were  the  immediate  actors,  are  men  of  estate,  and  property,  in  the 
colon}'.  A  prosecution  is  impossible.  If  ever  the  government  of  that  colony  is  to  be  re- 
formed, this  seems  to  be  the  time  ;  and  it  would  have  a  happj-  eiFect  in  the  colonies  which 
adjoin  to  it.  Several  persons  have  been  advised  by  letters  from  their  friends,  that  as  the 
ministry  are  united,  and  opposition  at  an  end,  there  will  certainly  be  an  inquiry  into  the 
state  of  America,  the  next  session  of  Parliament.  The  denial  of  the  supremacy  of  Parlia. 
ment,  and  the  contempt  with  which  its  authority  has  been  treated  by  the  Lilliputian  As- 
semblies of  America,  can  never  be  justified  or  excused  by  any  one  member  of  either 
House  of  Parliament." 

Governor  Hutchinson  to  Samuel  Hood,  Esq. 

"Boston,  2d  September,  1772. 

Dear  Sir  : — Capt.  Linzee  can  inform  you  of  the  state  of  Rhode  Island  colony  better  than  I 
can  do;  so  daring  an  insult,  as  burning  the  King's  schooner,  by  people  who  are  as  well 
known  as  any  who  were  concerned  in  this  last  rebellion,  and  yet  cannot  be  prosecuted,  will 
certainly  rouse  the  British  lion,  which  has  been  asleep  these  four  or  five  years. 

Admiral  Montagu  says  that  Lord  Sandwich  will  never  leave  pursuing  the  colony,  until  it 
is  disfranchised.     If  it  is  passed  over,  the  other  colonies  will  follow  the  example." 


104  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

The  King  trusts  that  all  jjersons  In  tlie  colony,  will  pay  a  due  respect  to  his  royal 
commission,  and  that  the  business  of  it  will  be  carried  on  without  molestation  ;  at  the 
same  time,  the  nature  of  this  offence,  and  the  great  number  of  persons  who  appear 
to  have  been  concerned  in  it,  makes  every  precaution  necessary.  Hjs  Majesty,  has, 
therefore,  for  their  further  support  In  the  execution  of  this  duty,  thought  fit  to  direct 
me  to  signify  his  pleasure  to  Lieutenant  General  Gage,  that  he  do  hold  himself  in 
readiness  to  send  troojis  into  Rhode  Island,  whenever  he  shall  be  called  upon  by  the 
commissioners  for  that  purpose,  in  order  to  aid  and  assist  the  civil  magistrate  In  the 
suppression  of  any  riot  or  disturbance,  and  in  the  preservation  of  the  public  peace. 
I  have  only  to  add,  upon  that  head,  that  His  Majesty  depends  on  the  vigilance  of 
the  civil  magistrates  of  the  colony,  to  take  the  proper  measures  for  the  arresting  and 
commuting  to  custody,  In  order  to  their  being  brought  to  justice,  such  persons,  as 
shall,  upon  proper  information  made  before  them,  or  before  His  Majesty's  commis- 
sioners, appear  to  have  been  concerned  in  the  plundering  and  dcstroj-Ing  the  Gaspee 
schooner. 

It  is  His  Majesty's  intention,  in  consequence  of  the  advice  of  his  Privy  Council, 
that  the  persons  concerned  in  the  bm-nlng  the  Gaspee  schooner,  and  In  the  other 
violences  which  attended  that  daring  insult,  should  he  brought  to  England,  to  he 
tried:  and  I  am,  therefore,  to  signify  to  you  His  Majesty's  pleasure,  that  such  of  the 
said  offenders  as  may  have  been,  or  shall  be,  arrested  and  committed  within  the 
colony  of  Rhode  Island,  be  delivered  to  the  care  and  custody  of  Rear  Admiral  Mon- 
tagu, or  the  commander  in  chief  of  His  Majesty's  ships  In  North  America,  tor  the 
time  being,  or  to  such  officers  as  he  shall  appoint  to  receive  them ;  taking  care  that 
you  do  give  notice  to  the  persons  accused.  In  order  that  they  may  procure  such  wit- 
nesses on  their  behalf,  as  they  shall  judge  necessary  ;  which  witnesses,  together  with 
all  such  as  may  be  proper,  to  support  the  charge  against  them,  will  be  received  and 
sent  hither  with  the  jirlsoners.'  " 

At  the  August  session  of  the  General  Assembly,  the  subject 
of  the  destruction  of  the  Gaspee,  was  introduced  by  the  fol- 
lowing communication  from  the  Governor  : 

Governor  Wanton  to  the  House  of  Deputies  of  Rhode  Island. 

To  the  House  of  Deputies  : 

Gentlemen  : — The  measures  which  hai*  been  pursued  for  discovering  the  persons 
who  were  concerned  in  destroj-Ing  the  Iving's  armed  schooner,  the  Gaspee,  as  she 
lay  aground  on  a  point  of  land,  called  Namquit,  in  this  colony,  will  appear  from  the 
several  papers  which  I  have  delivered  to  ]Mr.  Speaker,  in  order  to  be  laid  before 
you,  for  your  Information. 

I  have.  In  consequence  of  that  unhappy  transaction,  addressed  the  Right  Honora- 
ble the  Earl  of  Hillsborough  ;  a  copy  of  which,  and  also  what  I  wrote  to  the  agent, 
upon  the  same  occasion,  I  have  deUvered  to  Mr.  Speaker. 

I  thought  It  my  duty,  during  the  recess  of  the  Assembly,  to  acquaint  the  secretary 
of  state  with  this  affair,  lest,  by  an  entire  silence,  or  from  misinformation,  any  im- 
pressions might  be  made  prejudicial  to  the  colony. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  105 

I  hope  my  proceedings  will  meet  your  approbation  ;  and  submit  to  your  determi- 
nation what  is  further  necessary  to  be  done,  recommending  the  same  to  your  serious 
and  immediate  consideration.  I  have  the  honor  to  be,  &c.,  &c., 

Council  Chamber,  |  J.  WANTON. 

Newport,  August  18th,  1772.  ^ 

At  the  same  session,  Deputy  Governor  Sessions  presented 
an  account  for  expenses  incurred  by  him  in  collecting  evidence 
rehitinn:  to  the  destruction  of  the  Gaspee  ;  for  subsisting-  her 
crew,  while  at  Pawtuxet,  and  in  sending  them  on  board  His 
Majesty's  ship,  the  Beaver,  which  lay  in  the  bay  below. 

Mr.  Samuel  Aborn,  of  Pawtuxet,  also  presented  a  bill  for 
securing  the  stores,  anchors,  guns  and  other  effects  belonging 
to  the  burnt  vessel  ;  all  of  which  bills,  were  ordered  to  be 
paid. 

The  following  additional  proceedings  are  from  the  records  of 
the  session  : 

Proceedings  of  the   General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island,  relative 
to  the  Gaspee. 

Whereas,  His  Honor  the  Governor,  hath  laid  before  this  As- 
sembly, a  full  and  particular  narrative  of  the  measures  he  hath 
pursued,  in  consequence  of  the  burning  of  His  Majesty's 
schooner,  the  Gaspee  ;  and  of  the  steps  he  hath  taken  to  dis- 
cover the  perpetrators  of  that  atrocious  piece  of  villainy  ;  upon 
due  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  whole  of  His  Honor's  pro- 
ceedings be  approved  ;  and  that  His  Honor  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  requested  to  transmit  a  copy  thereof,  to  the  agent  of 
the  colony,  in  Great  Britain  ;*  and  to  pursue  such  further  mea- 
sures respecting  the  said  affair,  during  the  recess  of  the 
General  Assembly,  as  shall  appear  necessary. 

And  whereas,  His  Honor  issued  a  proclamation,  promising  a 
reward  of  £100,  sterling,  to  any  person  or  persons  who  shall 
discover  the  persons  guilty  of  the  said  crime  ;  — 

*  The  letter  to  the  agent,  in  London,  is  not  preserved  on  the  files  in  the  secretary's  office. 
It  did  not  probably  vary  from  the  letter  to  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough,  before  given. 

VOL.  VII.  14 


106  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OP    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

It  is  therefore  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  this  As- 
sembly will  make  provision  for  paying  the  above  mentioned 
reward,  in  case  any  person  or  persons  shall  be  entitled  thereto. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  no  copies  of  let- 
ters, or  other  proceedings,  relating  to  the  above  mentioned 
affair,  be  delivered  out  by  the  secretary,  to  any  person  or  per- 
sons, whomsoever. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  letter  from  His  Honor  the 
Governor,  to  the  Right  Honorable  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough,  of 
the  20th  of  May  last,  containing  a  narrative  of  the  proceedings 
respecting  His  Honor's  calling  Lieut.  Dudingston  before  him, 
&c.,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  approved. 

AVhereas,  Joseph  Rhodes  of  Cranston,  cooper,  hath  in  his 
hands  the  sum  of  $79,  belonging  to  Lieut.  Dudingston,  which 
he  refuseth  to  deliver, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the 
Deputy  Governor  and  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby,  requested  and  empowered  to  make  inquiry 
into  that  affair,  and  to  settle  all  differences  between  the  parties  ; 
and  that,  if  the  said  Rhodes  will  not  comply  therewith,  they 
advise  the  said  Dudingston  to  take  the  proper  method  for  ob- 
taining his  right. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  107 


Proclamation  of  King  George  III,  relative  to  the  Destruction  of 

the  Gas  pee. 


GEORGE    R  . 

BY  THE  KING. 

A      PROCLAMATION: 

For  the  discovering  and  apprehending  the  persons  who  plundered  and  burnt  the 
Gaspee  schooner,  and  barbarously  Avounded  alid  ill-treated  Lieutenant  William 
Dudingston,  commander  of  the  said  schooner. 
Whereas,  we  have  received  information,  that,  upon  the   10th  day  of  June  last, 
59etween  the  hours  of  twelve  and  one,  in  the  morning,  in  the  Providence  or  Narra^- 
gansett  River,  in  our  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  a  great 
number  of  persons,  armed  with  guns  and  other  offensive  weajwns,  and  led  by  two 
persons,  who  were  called  the  captain  and  head  sheriff",  in  several  armed  boats,  at- 
tacked and  boarded  our  vessel  called  the  Gaspee  schooner,  then  lying  at  single  an- 
chor in  the  said  river,  commanded  by  our  Lieutenant  AVilliam  Dudingston,  under 
the  orders  of  our  Rear  Admiral  John  INIontagu ;  and  having  dangerously  wounded 
and  barbarously  treated  the  said  WilUam  Dudingston,  took,  plundered  and  burnt 
the  said  schooner. 

We,  to  the  intent  that  said  outrageous  and  heinous  offenders  may  be  discovered, 
and  brought  to  condign  punishment,  have  thought  fit,  with  the  advice  of  our  Privy 
Council,  to  issue  this  our  royal  proclamation. 

And  we  are  hereby  graciously  pleased  to  promise,  that  if  any  person  or  persons 
shall  discover  any  person  or  persons  concerned  in  the  said  daring  and  heinous  of- 
fences above  mentioned,  so  that  he  or  they  may  be  apprehended  and  brought  to 
justice,  such  discoverer  shall  have  and  receive,  as  a  reward,  for  such  discovery,  upon 
conviction  of  each  of  the  said  offenders,  the  sum  of  Jive  hundred  pounds. 

And  if  any  person  or  persons  shall  discover  either  of  the  said  persons  who  acted 
as,  or  called  themselves,  or  were  called  by  their  said  accomplices,  the  head  sheriff"^ 
or  the  captain,  so  that  they,  or  either  of  them,  may  be  apprehended  and  brought  to 
punishment,  such  discoverer  shall  have  and  receive,  as  a  reward  for  such  discovery, 
upon  conviction  of  either  of  the  said  persons,  the  further  sum  oi'Jioe  hundred  pounds, 
over  and  above  the  sum  of  Jive  hundred  pounds,  herein  before  promised,  for  the  dis- 
covery and  apprehending  any  of  the  other  common  offenders  above  mentioned. 

And  if  any  person  or  persons  concerned  therein,  exce2:)t  the  two  persons  who 
were  called  the  head  sheriff  and  captain,  and  the  person  or  persons  who  wounded 


108  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

said  Lieutenant  William  Dudingston,  shall  discover  any  one  or  more  of  tlie  said  ac- 
complices, so  that  he  or  they  may  be  apprehended  and  brought  to  punishment,  such 
discoverer  shall  have  and  receive  the  said  reward  or  rewards  oi  five  hundred  pounds  ^ 
or  one  thousand  pounds,  as  the  case  may  be;  and  also  our  gracious  pardon  for  his 
said  offence ;  and  the  commissioners  for  executing  the  office  of  treasurer  of  our 
exchequer,  are  hereby  required  to  make  payment  accordingly,  of  the  said  rewards. 

And  we  do  hereby  strictly  charge  and  command  all  our  governors,  deputy  gov- 
ernors, magistrates  officers  and  all  other  our  loving  subjects,  that  they  do  use  their 
utmost  diligence,  in  their  several  places  and  capacities,  to  find  out,  discover  and 
apprehend  the  said  offenders,  in  order  to  their  being  brought  to  justice. 

And  we  do  hereby  command  that  this  our  proclamation  be  printed  and  pub- 
lished, in  the  usual  form,  and  affixed  in  the  principal  jjlaces  of  our  town  of  New- 
port, and  other  towns  in  our  said  colony,  that  none  may  pretend  ignorance. 

Given  at  our  Court,  at  St.  James,  the  twenty-sixth  day  of  August,  17  72,  in  the 
twelfth  year  of  our  reign. 

God  save  the  King. 


Royal  Co?nmission  to  the  Commissioners  of  Inquiry,  relative  to 
the  Destruction  of  the  Gaspee. 

GEORGE  THE  THIRD,  by  the  grace  of  God,  of  Great  Britain,  France  and 
Ireland,  King,  Defender  of  the  Faith,  &c.,  to  our  trusty  and  well  beloved  Jo- 
seph Wanton,  Esquire,  Governor  of  our  colony,  called  the  English  colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  in  New  England,  in  America  ;  our 
trusty  and  well  beloved  Daniel  Horsmanden,  Esquire,  our  chief  justice  of  our 
province  of  New  York ;  our  trusty  and  well  beloved  Frederick  Smythe,  Es- 
quire, our  chief  justice  of  our  province  of  New  Jersey  ;  our  trusty  and  well  be- 
loved Peter  Oliver,  Esquire,  our  chief  justice  of  our  Province  of  the  Massachu- 
setts Bay,  in  New  England ;  and  otlr  trusty  and  well  beloved  Robert  Auch- 
muty.  Esquire,  our  judge  of  our  vice  admiralty  court,  estabhshed  at  Boston, 
with  jurisdiction  in  all  causes  arising  within  the  limits  of  our  colonies  of  New 
Hampshire,  Massachusetts  Bay,  Rhode  Island  and  Connecticut,  greeting : 

Whereas,  our  armed  schooner,  called  the  Gaspee  schooner,  commanded  by  Lieu- 
tenant William  Dudingston,  under  the  orders  of  Rear  Admiral  Montagu,  was  sta- 
tioned in  Providence  or  Narragansett  River,  in,  or  near  to  our  colony  of  Rhode  Is- 
land and  Providence  Plantations,  in  New  England,  the  said  Lieutenant  Dudingston, 
having  proper  commission  and  authority,  to  seize  to  our  use,  such  prohibited  and  un- 
accustomed goods,  as  he  should  find  carried  in  and  on  board  any  sliip,  bottom* 
boat  or  other  vessels,  contrary  to  law,  whereby  the  same  is  forfeited. 

And,  whereas,  we  have  been  informed  that  very  many  ill-disposed  persons  have 
dared,  from  time  to  time,  in  defiance  of  our  laws  and  authority,  to  insult  and  other- 
wise hinder  and  obstruct  the  said  Lieutenant  William  Dudingston,  in  the  perform- 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIOxNS.  109 

ance  of  liis  duty,  and  their  boldness  in  that  respect  grew  to  so  desperate  an  height, 
that  on  or  about  the  10th  day  of  June  last,  great  multitudes  of  people  were  assem- 
bled in  our  town  of  Newport,*  and  places  adjacent,  in  our  said  colony,  by  beat  of 
drum,  armed  with  guns  and  other  offensive  weapons,  and  led  on  by  two  persons 
whom  they  called  the  head  sheriff  and  the  captain,  and  so  proceeded  in  warlike 
manner,  with  armed  boats,  to  attack  our  said  schooner  ;  and  having  dangerously 
wounded  the  said  lieutenant,  overpowered  the  crew,  took,  plundered  and  burnt  our 
said  vessel. 

We,  being  desirous  to  be  perfectly  informed  how  so  daring  an  attempt  could  be 
concerted,  prepared  and  carried  into  execution  in  the  chief  town  of  our  said  colony, 
the  residence  of  the  Governor,  and  principal  magistrates  thereof,  not  only  for  the 
purpose  of  bringing  the  said  offenders  and  their  maintainers,  aiders  and  abettors, 
to  condign  punishment,  but  also  to  the  end,  that  fit  and  speedy  order  may  be 
taken  for  securing  the  future  peace,  obedience,  and  well  government  of  our  said 
colony  ;  and  placing  much  confidence  in  yom-  wisdom,  diligence,  loyalty  and  integ- 
rity, do,  by  these  presents,  appoint  you,  the  said  Joseph  Wanton,  Daniel  Hors- 
manden,  Frederick  Smythe,  Peter  Oliver  and  Robert  Auchmuty,  our  commissioners, 
to  inquire  into  and  report  to  us  a  full  and  true  account  of  all  the  circumstances  rela- 
tive to  the  attacking,  taking,  plundering  and  burning  our  said  schooner  ;  and  to  the 
assembling,  arming,  training  and  leading  the  people  concerned  therein  ;  and  to  the 
concerting  and  preparing  the  said  attack,  and  of  all  other  insults  and  obstructions 
which  have  been  given  to  the  said  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  or  to  our  service  in  gen- 
eral in  our  said  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  and  of  the 
causes  which  have  occasioned  so  daring  a  violation  of  our  laws  and  authority  ;  and 
also  to  inquire  and  report  what  measures  have  been  taken  or  used  by  the  magis- 
trates of  our  said  colony,  and  other  our  good  subjects  therein,  respecting  the 
same. 

And  for  the  better  execution  of  our  royal  will  and  pleasure  therein,  we  do  hereby 
give  unto  you,  the  said  Joseph  Wanton,  Daniel  Ilorsmanden,  Frederick  Smythe,  Peter 
OHver,  and  Robert  Auchmuty,  or  any  three  of  you,  full  power  and  authority  to  re- 
ceive all  such  informations  and  advertisements  as  shall  be  brought  unto  }ou,  by  or 
from  any  of  our  loving  subjects  or  others,  touching  the  premises ;  and  also,  to  inquire, 
by  the  examination  of  witnesses  on  oath,  which  oath  we  do  hereby  give  you  or  any 
of  you,  full  power,  wan-ant  and  authority  to  administer,  or  by  such  other  ways  and 
means  as  you,  or  any  three  of  you,  shall,  in  your  discretion,  tliink  fit,  into  the 
premises,  or  any  of  them. 

And  we  do  further  give  you,  or  any  three  of  you,  full  power  and  authority  to  send 
for  such  persons,  papers,  and  records,  as  shall  be  useful  to  you,  for  the  better  carry- 
ing on  the  ser\4ce  hereby  intended,  wiUing  and  requiring  you,  the  said  Governor, 
the  Deputy  Governor,  and  all  other  our  magistrates,  officers,  and  loving  subjects 
within  the  said  colony,  to  be  in  all  things  helpful,  aiding  and  assisting  to  you,  and 
every  of  you,  in  the  execution  of  this,  our  royal  commission. 

And  we  do  further  strictly  charge  and  command  j'ou,  and  every  of  you,  that,  in 
the  execution  and  performance  of  the  powers  and  authorities  to  you  hereby  given, 


*  This  is  a  mistake.    It  was   not  in  Newport,  but  in  Providence,  where  the  party  was 
organized. 


110  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1772. 

you,  and  every  of  you,  do  carefully  observe  and  conform  yourselves  to  such  instruc- 
tions as  shall  be  given  and  sent  unto  you,  in  Avriting,  under  our  sign  manual,  and  to 
report  to  us  a  full  and  true  account  of  your  proceedings  herein. 

In  witness  wliereof,  we  have  caused  these  our  letters  to  be  made  patent.  Witness 
oursclf,  at  Westminster,  the  second  day  of  September,  iu  the  twelfth  year  of  our 
reign. 

By  the  King  himself. 

YORKE. 

Royal  Instructions  to  the  Commission  of  Inquiry,  relative  to  the 
Destructioji  of  the  Gaspee. 

GEOEGE    R. 

f  ^— >-^  .  Instructions  to  our  trusty  and  well  beloved  Joseph  Wanton,  Daniel  Hors- 
(     ■    ■  I      manden,    Frederick  Smythe,    Peter    Oliver    and   Robert   Auchmuty, 
Escpiires,  our  commissioners  for  in(|uinng  into  the  circumstances  relative 
to  the  attacking,  plundering  and  burning  our  armed  schooner,  called 
the  Gaspee   schooner,  Avithin  our  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  in  America, 
on  the  10th  day  of  June  last,  and  into  the  causes  thereof,  and  of  the 
violences  and  insults  oflcred  upon  that  occasion,  to  our  officers  em- 
ployed in  our  service. 
Given  at  our  court  at  St.  James,  the  4th  day  of  September,  1772,  in  the  twelfth 
year  of  our  reign. 

Article  1st.  With  these  our  instructions,  you  will  receive  our  commission,  under 
our  great  seal  of  Great  Britain,  constituting  and  appointing  you  our  commissioners, 
for  inquiring  into  and  making  report  to  us  of  all  the  circumstances  relative  to  the  at- 
tacking, plundering  and  burning  the  Gaspee  schooner  on  the  10th  of  June  last,  in 
the  Narragansett  River,  within  our  colony  of  Rhode  Island;  and  to  the  assembhng, 
arming,  and  leading  on  the  persons  who  made  the  said  attack,  and  to  the  concerting 
and  preparing  the  same ;  together  with  all  such  other  powers  and  authorities  as 
are  judged  necessary  for  that  purpose.  You  are  therefore,  to  take  upon  you,  the 
execution  of  the  trust  reposed  in  you,  and  so  soon  as  three  or  more  of  you  shall 
have  been  assembled  at  Newport,  within  our  said  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  you  are 
to  cause  our  said  commission  to  be  read  and  published  in  such  manner  and  form, 
and  with  such  solemnity  as  are  due  to  the  authority  from  which  it  proceeds,  and  the 
important  occasion  for  which  it  is  issued,  using  your  own  discretions  as  to  all  such 
other  times  and  places  of  your  meetings,  according  to  what  shall  appear  to  you,  or 
the  major  part  of  j-ou,  to  be  most  fit  and  proper. 

Art.  2d.  You  are  to  use  your  utmost  care  and  dilligence,  pursuant  to  the  au- 
thorities and  directions  contained  in  our  said  commission,  in  making  a  very  full  and 
particular  inquiry  into  all  the  circiunstances  relative  to  the  attacking,  plundering 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  Ill 

and  destroying  our  armed  schooner,  the  Gaspce,  on  the  10th  of  June  last,  m  the 
Narragansett  River,  within  our  said  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  and  to  the  assembling, 
arming  and  leading  on  the  persons  who  made  the  said  attack,  as  also  into  the  causes 
and  occasions  thereof;  and  into  all  the  steps  that  have  been  taken  by  the  civil 
magistrates  in  their  respective  stations,  for  the  discovery  and  punishment  of  the  per- 
trators  of  those  heinous  oifences.  And  to  those  ends,  you  are  to  summon  before 
you,  all  such  persons  as  you  shall  think  may  be  able  to  give  any  information  touching 
the  said  objects  of  inquiry ;  and  hkewise,  to  order  all  informations,  depositions  and 
examinations,  which  may  have  been  taken  and  made  in  writing,  touching  those 
matters,  or  authentic  copies  thereof,  to  be  laid  before  you,  and  to  make  a  report  to 
us,  by  one  of  our  principal  secretaries  of  state,  of  all  your  joroceedings,  and  of  what 
shall  appear  to  you,  respecting  the  conduct  of  the  magistrates  and  people  of  Rhode 
Island,  on  that  occasion. 

Art.  3d.  And  whereas,  the  civil  magistrates  and  officers  within  our  said  colony 
of  Rhode  Island,  are  entrusted  with  the  power  and  authority  to  arrest  and  commit 
to  custody  such  of  the  persons  concerned  in  the  plundering  and  destroying  the 
Gaspee  schooner,  and  in  the  inhuman  treatment  of  our  officer  who  commanded  her, 
against  whom  any  information  shall  be  taken,  in  order  to  the  said  offenders  being 
sent  to  England  to  be  tried  for  that  offence  ;  it  is  therefore,  our  will  and  pleasure, 
that  you  do,  from  time  to  time,  communicate  to  the  said  civil  officers  and  maois- 
trates,  such  information  as  you  shall  be  able  to  collect,  touching  the  persons  con- 
cerned in  that  daring  attack  upon  our  authority  and  commission,  to  the  end  that 
they  may  be  accordingly  arrested  and  delivered  to  the  custody  of  the  commander  in 
chief  of  our  ships  and  vessels  in  North  America,  pursuant  to  such  directions  as  we 
have  thought  fit  to  give  for  that  purpose. 

Art.  4th.  And  whereas,  it  is  of  importance  with  regard  to  the  mode  of  proceed- 
ing against  the  said  offenders,  that  they  should  be  exactly  informed  of  the  place 
where  the  offence  was  committed,  it  will,  therefore,  be  your  duty  to  take  care  in 
all  your  proceedings  upon  this  inquiry,  as  well  as  in  your  reports  thereof  to  us,  by 
one  of  our  principal  secretaries  of  state,  to  ascertain  with  the  greatest  precision, 
whether  the  offence  was  committed  and  done  Avithin  the  body  of  the  colony  ;  and  if 
so,  within  what  county  or  district  thereof;  and  if  not  so,  in  what  other  place  the 
said  offence  was  conmiitted  and  done. 

Art.  5th.  And  whereas,  there  may  be  reason  to  apprehend,  from  the  outrages 
which  have  been  committed  within  our  said  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  by  numbers  of  law- 
less persons,  that  insults  may  be  offered  to  you,  it  is  therefore  our  will  and  pleasure, 
that  if  any  disturbance  shall  arise,  with  a  view  to  obstruct  you  in  the  execution  of 
your  duty,  and  any  violence  should  in  consequence  thereof,  be  offered  to  you,  you 
do,  in  such  case,  give  immediate  notice  thereof  to  the  commander  in  cliief  of  our 
forces  in  North  America,  and  require  of  him  to  send  such  a  military  force  into  the 
colony,  as  you  shall  judge  necessary  for  your  protection,  and  for  the  aiding  the  civil 
magistrates  in  suppressing  any  tumults  or  riots,  and  preserving  the  pubfic  peace. 

Lastly.  It  is  our  will  and  pleasure,  that  you  do  take  an  account,  by  way  of 
journal,  of  all  your  acts  and  proceedings  in  the  execution  of  the  powers  and  direc- 
tions given  to  you,  and  that  the  reports  which  you  are  to  make  to  us,  by  one  of  our 


112  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  1772. 

ipal  secretaries  of  state,  of  those  proceedings,  be  in  writing,  and  signed  by  any 


prmc: 

three  or  more  of  you.^ 


G.  R. 


*  Extract  from  the  Providence  Gazette,  of  Saturday,  December  26,  1772 : 

"  To  be,  or  not  to  be,  that's  the  question  ;  whether  our  unalienable  rights  and  privileges  are 
any  longer  worth  contending  for,  is  now  to  be  determined.  Permit  me,  my  co'intrymen, 
to  beseech  you  to  attend  to  your  alarming  situation. 

The  stamp  act  you  opposed  with  a  spirit  and  resolution  becoming  those  who  were  truly 
solicitous  to  transmit  to  posterity  those  blessings  which  our  forefathers  purchased  for  us  in 
the  wilds  of  America,  at  an  immense  expense  of  blood  and  treasure. 

But  behold,  an  evil  infinitely  worse,  in  its  consequences,  than  all  the  revenue  laws  which 
have  been  passed  from  the  reign  of  Charles  the  First,  to  this  time,  now  threatens  this  dis- 
tressed, piratically  plundered  country. 

A  court  of  inquisition,  more  horrid  than  that  of  Spain  or  Portugal,  is  established  within 
this  colony,  to  inquire  into  the  circumstances  of  destroying  the  Gaspee  schooner ;  and  the 
persons  who  are  the  commissioners  of  this  new-fangled  court,  are  vested  with  most  exor- 
bitant and  unconstitutional  power.  They  are  directed  to  summon  witnesses,  apprehend 
persons  not  only  impeached,  but  even  suspected  !  and  them,  and  every  of  them,  to  deliver 
them  to  Admiral  Montagu,  who  is  ordered  to  have  a  ship  in  readiness  to  carry  them  to 
England,  where  they  are  to  be  tried. 

Three  of  the  commissioners  are  a  quorum,  who  are  directed  to  apply  to  General  Gage,  for 
troops  to  protect  them  in  their  oiBces,  and  preserve  the  colony  from  riots  and  disturbances. 
The  royal  commission  for  these  gentlemen,  together  with  their  instructions,  is  transmitted 
to  Admiral  Montagu,  who,  upon  being  notified  that  they  are  convened  in  conformity  to 
their  appointment,  is  to  attend  them,  and  then  deliver  their  commission  and  instructions, 
and  to  be  aiding  with  his  sage  counsel  and  advice,  whenever  necessary. 

So  much  has  transpired,  respecting  this  alarming  star-chamber  inquisition.  And  who 
among  the  natives  of  America,  can  hear  it  without  emotion  ?  Is  there  an  American,  in 
whose  breast  there  glows  the  smallest  spark  of  public  virtue,  but  who  must  be  fired  with 
indignation  and  resentment,  against  a  measure  so  replete  with  the  ruin  of  our  free  consti- 
tution ?  To  be  tried  b}'  one's  peers,  is  the  greatest  privilege  a  subject  can  wish  for ;  and  so 
excellent  is  our  coustitatiou,  that  no  subject  shall  be  tried,  but  by  his  peers. 

This  establishment  is  the  grand  barrier  of  our  lives,  liberties  and  estates;  and  whoever 
attempts  to  alter  or  invade  this  faudamental  principle,  by  which  the  liberties  of  the  people 
have  been  secured  from  time  immemorial,  is  a  declared  enemy  to  the  welfare  and  happiness 
of  the  King  and  state.  The  tools  of  despotism  and  arbitrary  power,  have  long  wished  that 
this  important  bulwark  might  be  destroyed,  and  now  have  the  impudence  to  triumph  in  our 
faces,  because  such  of  their  fellow  subjects  in  America,  as  are  suspected  of  being  guilty  of 
a  crime,  are  ordered  to  be  transported  to  Great  Britain  for  trial,  in  open  violation  of  Magna 
Charta. 

Thus  are  we  robbed  of  our  birth-rights,  and  treated  with  every  mark  of  indignity,  insult 
and  contempt ;  and  can  we  possibly  be  so  supine,  as  not  to  feel  ourselves  firmly  disposed 
to  treat  the  advocates  for  such  horrid  measures  with  a  detestation  and  scorn,  proportionate 
to  their  perfidy  and  baseness  ? 

Luxury  and  avarice,  a  more  fatal  and  cruel  scourge  than  war,  will  ere  long  ravage  Britain 
and  ultimately  bring  on  the  dissolution  ofthat  once  happy  kingdom.  Ambition,  and  a  thirst 
for  arbitrary  sway,  have  already  banished  integrity,  probity  and  every  other  virtue,  from  those 
who  are  entrusted  with  the  government  of  our  mother  country.  Her  colonies  loudly  com- 
plain of  the  violences  and  vexations  they  sufter  by  having  their  moneys  taken  from  them, 
without  their  consent,  by  measures  more  unjustifiable  than  highway  robbery ;  and  ap- 
plied to  the  basest  purposes, — those  of  supporting  tyrants  and  debauchees.  No  private  house 
is  inaccessible  to  the  avarice  of  custom-house  officers  ;  no  place  so  remote  whither  the  injus- 
tice and  extortion  of  these  miscreant  tools  in  power,  have  not  penetrated. 

Upon  the  whole,  it  is  more  than  probable,  it  is  an  almost  absolute  certainty,  that,  ac- 
cording to  the  present  appearances,  the  state  of  an  American  subject,  instead  of  enjoying 


1772.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  113 


These   papers  were   transmitted  to  Admiral  Montagu,  and 
sent  by  him  to  Governor  Wanton,  by  express. 

Admiral  Montagu  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Boston,  lltli  December,  1772. 
Sir  :— Last  night  an  express  arrived,  with  dispatches  from  the  Right  Honorable 
My  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty,  by  which  came  under  cover  to  me,  the 
packet  1  send  to  you,  herewith. 

the  privileges  of  an  Englishman,  will  soon  be  infinitely  worse  than  that  of  a  subject  of 
France,  Spain,  Portugal,  or  any  other  the  most  despotic  power  on  earth  ;  so  that,  my  coun- 
trymen, it  behoves  you,  it  is  your  indispensable  duty  to  stand  forth  in  the  glorious  cause  of 
freedom,  the  dearest  of  all  your  earthly  enjoyments  j  and,  with  a  truly  Roman  spirit  of 
liberty,  either  prevent  the  fastening  of  the  infernal  chains  now  forging  for  you,  and  your 
posterity,  or  noblr  perish  in  the  attempt. 

To  live  a  life  of  rational  beings,  is  to  live  tree ;  to  live  a  life  of  slaves,  is  to  die  by  inches. 
Ten  thousand  deaths  by  the  halter,  or  the  axe,  are  infinitely  preferable  to  a  miserable  life  of 
slavery  in  chains,  under  a  pack  of  worse  than  Egyptian  tyrants,  whose  avarice  nothing  less 
than  your  whole  substance  and  income,  will  satisfy  ;  and  who,  if  they  can't  extort  that,  will 
glory  in  making  a  sacrifice  of  you  and  your  posterity,  to  gratify  their  master  the  devil,  who 
is  a  tyrant,  and  the  father  of  tyrants  and  of  liars.  AMERICANUS. 

Extracts  from  the  Providence   Gazette,  of  Saturday, 
December  26,  1772. 

Newport,  December  21,  1772. 

Extract  of  a  letter  from  a  gentleman  in  Boston,  to  his  friend  in  this  town  : 

"  I  here  enclose  you  an  extract  of  a  letter  from  a  gentleman  in  Eng  land,  to  another  in 
Boston.  In  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  which,  the  admiral  received  a  packet  by  an  express 
which  arrived  in  this  town  on  Thursday  evening  last,  ordering  the  ships  to  your  harbor ; 
in  consequence  of  which  order,  the  ships  are  now  getting  ready  as  fost  as  possible ;  they  were 
kept  to  work  all  day  yesterday,  and  commanded  to  be  ready  to  sail  on  Tuesday  afternoon, 
or  Wednesday  morning,  at  furthest. 

The  admiral  is  in  very  high  spirits  on  the  occasion,  and  cheerfully  undertakes  an  expedi- 
tion which  promises  to  gratify  his  rancor  against  your  colony.  It  is  to  be  hoped,  from  his 
avowed  disposition  towards  our  Rhode  Island  brethren,  that  he  will  meet  with  a  proper  re- 
ception among  them. 

I  have  just  received  information  which  you  may  depend  upon  :  the  high  commissioned 
court,  specially  appointed,  with  novel,  unconstitutional  and  exorbitant  powers,  for  the  trial 
of  the  persons  concerned  in  burning  the  schoouer,  are  forthwith  to  repair  to  Rhode  Island 
for  that  purpose;  and  are  to  be  accompanied  with  His  High  Mightiness  the  Admiral. 

The  regiment  at  Castle  William,  a  regiment  from  New  York,  and  a  third  regiment,  are 
immediately  to  march  for  Rhode  Island  ;  and  unless  you  exhibit  a  gtiantum  sujicit  of  ]^iissiye 
obedience  and  non-resistance,  the  same  tragedy  may  be  acted  in  Newport  and  Providence, 
which  makes  the  6th  of  March  so  memorable  at  Boston." 

Extract  of  a  letter  from  a  gentleman  of  character,  in  England,  to  his  friend,  in  Boston  : 
"  Our  tyrants  in  the  administration,  arc  greatly  exasperated  with  the  late  manoeuvre  of 
the  brave  Rhode  Islanders;  as  a  regard  to  the  rights  of  the  subject,  and  the  principles  of 
justice,  never  marked  the  measures  of  the  present  wretched  conductors  of  the  wheels  of  gov- 
ernment, you  will  not  be  alarmed  when  I  tell  you  that  they  have  determined  to  vacate  the 

VOL.  VII.  15 


114  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1772. 

As  it  may  be  of  great  consequence,  I  have  thought  proper  to  charge  Mr.  Mon- 
tagu, one  of  my  lieutenants,  with  it.* 

In  my  despatches  from  their  Lordships,  I  am  directed  to  repair  to  Khode  Island, 
to  assist  you,  and  the  rest  of  the  gentlemen  in  the  commission,  which  I  shall  do  as 

charter  of  that  colony.  To  eflfect  this  purpose,  which  in  their  own  apprehension,  will  be 
attended  with  some  difficulty,  Admiral  Montagu  is  ordered,  with  the  small  craft  which  are 
with  him,  to  line  the  harbor  of  Rhode  Island,  with  positive  orders  to  apprehend  the  persons 
concerned  in  the  enterprize  above  mentioned. 

Awed  by  the  formidable  appearance  of  this  hectoring  commander  and  his  gallant  squa- 
dron, these  bitter  pills  are  to  be  crammed  down  their  throats;  but  the  friends  of  true  British 
freedom,  are  not  without  hopes  that  the  stomachs  of  that  heroic  colony  will  reject  the  dose 
prepared  for  them. 

Be  united,  our  dear  suflFering  brethren  ;  be  steady,  and  success  awaits  you;  freedom,  glo- 
rious freedom,  will  be  the  purchase.  We  believe  that  the  ancient  British  spirit  of  independ- 
ence, which  once  blest  this  island,  has  improved  by  transplantation,  and  preserves  its 
vigor  in  the  breasts  of  Americans ;  cherish  it,  my  dear  friends  !  and  by  relieving  yourselves, 
save  the  small  remnant  of  the  virtuous  in  Britain." 

Extract  of  a  letter  from  a  gentleman  in  Boston,  to  his  friend,  in  this  town,  dated  Decem- 
ber 14,  1772: 

"  I  would  have  you  inform  your  townsmen,  that  the  admiral  has  hoisted  his  flag  on  board 
one  of  the  frigates,  and  will  sail  for  Newport,  in  a  day  or  two  ;  and  is  determined  to  lay 
your  town  and  Providence,  in  ashes ;  he  swore  by  God  (some  time  ago),  that  he  would  burn 

the  town  of  Providence  to  ashes.     Mr.  P ,  of  this  town,  will  attest  to  it ;  hope  you  will 

try  him  for  treason. 

It  is  surmised,  that  they  are  going  to  deprive  you  of  your  charter ;  hope  you  will  give  it 
up  peaceably,  like  true  friends  to  government,  and  not  contend  with  your  superiors,  but  be 
subject  to  the  higher  powers;  for  the  powers  that  be,  are  ordained  (I  believe),  of  the 
devil." 

*  The  following  is  from  the  Providence  Gazette,  of  December  19,  1772  : 

"By  the  Cruizer  sloop-of-war,  Capt.  Howe,  arrived  at  New  York,  from  England,  His 
Honor  the  Governor,  has  received  dispatches  from  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  secretary  of  state 
for  the  American  department,  relative  to  the  Gaspee  armed  schooner,  destroyed  some  time 
since,  and  the  very  extraordinary  measures  adopted  by  government  for  inquiring  into  the 
matter,  and  punishing  the  offenders. 

For  this  purpose,  we  are  told  that  commissioners  are  to  sit  at  Newport,  and  examine  such 
persons  as  Admiral  Montagu  shall  direct  to  be  apprehended.  These  devoted  persons,  it  is 
further  said,  are  to  be  transported  to  England,  where  they  are  to  be  tried  for  high  treason. 
The  admiral,  with  a  number  of  ships  and  tenders,  is  to  be  at  Newport ;  and  the  com- 
missioners are  directed  to  apply  to  General  Gage  for  troops,  if  they  shall  think  them 
necessary. 

In  this  situation  of  affairs,  every  friend  to  our  violated  constitution,  cannot  but  be  greatly 
alarmed.  The  idea  of  seizing  a  number  of  persons,  under  the  points  of  bayonets,  and 
transporting  them  three  thousand  miles  for  trial,  where,  whether  guilty  or  innocent,  they 
must  unavoidably  fall  victims  alike  to  revenge  or  prejudice,  is  shocking  to  humanity,  repug- 
nant to  every  dictate  of  reason,  liberty  and  justice ;  and  in  which,  Americans  and  freemen 
ought  never  to  acquiesce." 

Extract  from  the  proceedings  of  a  town  meeting  held  at  Dorchester,  in  the  Massachusetts 
Bay,  January  4,  1773  : 

"  Resolved,  that  at  a  time  when  open  attacks  upon  our  happy  constitution  are  multiplied, 
it  is  incumbent  upon  the  people  to  be  watchful ;  and  especially  at  this  time,  when  we  are 
alarmed  with  a  new  and  unheard  of  grievance,  in  a  late  act  passed  by  the  British  Parlia- 
ment, whereby  the  crown  is  empowered,  so  that  persons  supposed  to  be  guilty  of  certain 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  115 

soon  as  you  inform  me  that  you  are   ready,  with  the   commissioners,  to  proceed  to 
business,  and  deliver  the  commission,  and  the  King's  instructions  to  you. 

In  the  meantime.  Captain  Keeler,  in  His  Majesty's  ship  Mercury,  has  my  orders 
to  assist  you,  and  receive  any  prisoners  or  jiersons  you  may  send  him.  Permit  me 
to  say,  I  should  think  it  advisable  to  have  the  persons  apprehended  that  I  sent  you 
an  account  of  some  months  ago,  which  the  indentured  mulatto  informed  of,  and  has 
sworn  against.  The  mulatto  remains  on  board  with  the  captain,  and  shall  be  ready 
to  attend  the  commission,  whenever  he  is  called  for. 

As  I  find  Caj^t.  Keeler  is  often  made  a  prisoner,  from  frequent  arrests  he  meets 
with,  as  well  as  insults  when  he  comes  on  shore,  I  am  to  desire,  in  case  the  commis- 
sion should  at  any  time  want  him,  you  will  direct  his  person  to  be  secured  from  in- 
sults or  arrests. 

Whenever  you  will  favor  me  with  your  commands,  you  will  find  me  ready  to  co- 
operate with  you  in  every  thing  for  the  King's  service. 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

J.  MONTAGU. 

To  Governor  Wanton. 

P.  S.  I  must  beg  leave  to  recommend  to  you,  as  first  in  the  commission,  to  ap- 
point a  time  for  the  first  meeting,  and  to  give  notice  to  the  other  gentlemen  named 
in  the  commission  and  me  ;  and  that  you  will  make  the  time  as  short  as  you  can, 
consistent  with  proper  notice,  for  particular  reasons. 

This  led  to  the  following  correspondence  before  the  opening 
of  the  session  of  the  commissioners  : 


The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Admiral  Montagu. 

Newport,  December  14,  1772. 

Sir : — I  am  favored  with  yours,  by  Mr.  Montagu,  together  with  dispatches  from 
the  Right  Honorable  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  respecting  the  destruction  of  the 
Gaspee. 

I  shall  appoint  a  time  for  meeting  the  commissioners  authorized  to  inquire  into 

crimes,  may  be  hurried  away  from  any  county  in  North  America,  where  such  crime  may  be 
supposed  to  have  been  committed,  to  b-^  tried  in  any  county  in  England,  ivhere  His  Majesty 
or  his  successors  shall  judge  proper  ;  which  appears  to  us  to  come  little  short  of  any  court 
of  inquisition,  and  appears  plainly  to  us  destructive  of  the  main  pillar  of  the  British 
constitution." 

Extract  from  the  proceedings  of  a  town  meeting,  held  at  Ipswich,  in  the  Massachusetts 
Bay,  December  17,  1772  : 

"  Resolved,  that  we  have  been  of  late  greatly  alarmed  at  the  appointment  of  commis- 
sioners, in  consequence  of  a  late  act  of  Parliament,  entitled  '  An  act  for  the  better  persei'v- 
ing  His  Majesty's  dockyards,  magazines,  ships,  ammunition  and  stores,  and  to  inquire  after 
the  persons  concerned  in  burning  His  Majesty's  schooner,  the  Gaspee,  at  Providence ;' 
which,  though  a  very  unjustifiable  act,  yet  we  apprehend  this  method  of  proceeding,  an  in- 
fringement upon  the  liberty  of  the  subject,  and  of  the  most  dangerous  consequence,  as  the 
constitution  has  already  provided  a  rnethod  for  the  trial  of  those,  and  all  other  offenders." 


116  EECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1772. 

the  cii'cumstances  of  that  transaction,  as  soon  as  may  be',  and  give  you  the  earhest 
intelligence  thereof,  in  conformity  to  His  Majesty's  orders.  His  Majesty's  procla- 
mation I  shall  cause  to  be  printed  without  delay,  and  sent  into  the  several  towns 
within  the  colony.  I  am,  &e.,  &c., 

J.  WANTON. 
To  the  Honorable  J.  INIontagu. 

The   Governor  of  Rhode  Island^  to  Peter   Oliver^  Esq.,   Chief 
Justice  oj  Massachusetts. 

Newport,  December  14,  1772. 
Sir  : — By  express  from  Admiral  Montagu,  I  have  this  moment  received  a  letter 
from  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  advising  of  your  being  one  of  the  commissioners  for  in- 
quiring into  the  circumstances  of  burning  the  schooner  Gaspee.  I  have  thought 
proper  to  give  you  this  information,  and  that  I  shall  fix  upon  a  time  for  meeting  the 
commissioners,  and  give  you  and  the  other  gentlemen  named  in  the  commission, 
notice  thereof,  without  delay.  I  am,  &c.,  &c., 

J.  WANTON. 
To  the  Honorable  Peter  Oliver,  Esq. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Robert  Auchmuty,  Esq.,  Judge 
of  the  Vice  Admiralty  Court ,  Boston. 

Itoxbury,  December  11,  1772. 
Sir : — I  embrace  this  opportunity  of  acquainting  you,  that  I  have  received  His 
Majesty's  orders  to  attend  you  and  the  other  gentlemen,  commissioners  for  examining 
into  the  business  and  plundering  the  schooner  Gaspee.  In  obedience  to  which,  I 
shall,  on  notice,  with  all  convenient  dispatch,  attend  you  on  that  aifair.  I  shall  be 
glad  to  know  when  you  think  the  gentlemen  can  be  got  together ;  and  am. 

Your  Honor's '^nost  obedient  servant, 

ROBERT  AUCH^IUTY. 
To  Governor  Wanton. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Judge  Auchmuty. 

Newport,  December  14,  1772. 
Sir : — I  have  received  your  favor  by  Mr.  Montagu.     I  shall  fix  upon  a  time  for 
meeting  the  commissioners,  appointed  to  inquire  into  the  circumstances  of  destroying 
the  Gaspee  schooner,  and  give  you  and  the  other  gentlemen,  mentioned  in  the  com- 
mission, the  earliest  intelligence  thereof.  I  am,  &c.,  &c., 

J.  WANTON, 
To  the  Hon.  Robert  Auchmuty. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  117 

Circular  of  the   Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Judges  Oliver  and 
Auchmuty. 

Newport,  December  24,  1772. 

Sir : — When   I   received   the    Earl   of  Dartmouth's   letter   of  the   4th  of  Sep- 
tember, and  in  consequence  thereof,  wrote  you  on  the  14th  inst.,  I  was  preparing  to 
set  out  for  the  Assembly,  who  were   adjourned  to  meet  that  day  at  Providence,  and 
therefore  I  had  not  then  time  to  attend  so  maturely  to  His  Lordship's  letter  as  its  ' 
importance  required. 

The  letter  I  received  from  Admiral  IMontagu,  by  the  same  express  which  brought 
me  the  dispatches  from  Lord  Dartmouth,  induced  me  to  suppose  I  was  authorized 
to  appoint  a  time  for  the  first  meeting  of  the  commissioners  ;  but  as  Lord  Dartmouth 
has  signified  to  me,  that  my  associates  in  the  commission,  are  directed  to  rejiair  to 
Newport,  and  by  a  vessel  this  day  from  Nevv^  York,  I  am  informed  that  the  chief 
justice  of  that  province,  and  the  chief  justice  of  New  Jersey  have  engaged  their  pas- 
sage^,  and  will  be  here  some  time  next  week. 

I  thought  it  proper  to  give  you  this  information,  and  that  I  am  ready  to  meet  you, 
agreeably  to  the  royal  instructions,  whenever  it  may  suit  your  convenience  to  attend. 
As  soon  as  a  quorum  can  be  got  together,  I  shall,  without  loss  of  time,  notify  Ad- 
miral Montagu,  in  obedience  to  the  liing's  command. 

I  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

J.  WANTON. 

Circular  to  the  Judges  Oliver  and  Auchmuty. 

The   Governor   of  Rhode   Island  to  the  Sheriffs  of  the  several 
Counties. 

Newport,  December  22,  1772. 
Sir  : — In  obedience  to  the  King's  command,  signified  to  me,  by  the  Right  Honora- 
ble the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  one  of  liis  principal  secretaries  of  state,  I  have  caused  to 
be  printed  His  Majesty's  proclamation  for  discovering  and  apprehending  the  per- 
sons who  plundered  and  burnt  the  Gaspee  schooner;  copies  of  which,  I  send  you  by 
express,  which  you  are  forthwith  to  affix  in  the  most  pubhc  places  of  the  several 
towns  within  your  colony.  I  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

J.  WANTON. 
Circular  to  the  sheriffs  of  the  several  counties. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Admiral  Montagu. 

Newport,  December  24,  1772. 
Sir : — ^By  a  vessel  tliis  day  from  New  York,  I  am  informed  that  the  Judges  Hors- 
manden  and  Smythe,  have  engaged  their  passages  in  the  sloop  Lydia,  John  Free- 
body,  master,  and  will  probably  be  here  in  about  a  week.     I  give  you  this  informa- 
tion, for  your  governmeqt.  I  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

J,  WA??TON. 
To  Admiral  Montagu. 


118  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 


Admiral  Montagu  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Boston,  28tli  December,  1772. 

Sir  : — I  am  favored  with  your  letter,  informing  me  that  the  Judges  Horsmanden  and 
Smythe  are  expected  at  Rhode  Island  in  the  course  of  the  week.  If  you  will  be 
pleased  to  inform  me  when  you  are  readj^  to  receive  His  Majesty's  commission,  I 
will  take  care  to  have  it  delivered  agreeably  to  my  instructions. 

I  shall  be  glad  to  know  whether  you  intend  to  proceed  to  business,  or  adjourn  to 
any  particular  time,  that  I  may  conduct  myself  relative  to  His  Majesty's  service 
here,  accordingly.  I  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

J.  MONTAGU. 

To  His  Honor  Governor  Wanton. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Admiral  Montagu. 

Newport,  January  1,  1773. 
Sir  : — The  Judges  Horsmanden  and  Smythe  arrived  here  last  evening,  from  New 
York,  and  are  ready  to  proceed  immediately  upon  business.  A  number  sufticient 
to  constitute  a  quorum,  are  now  assembled  at  Newjjort,  waiting  to  receive  from  you 
the  royal  commission  and  iiistructions,  of  which  I  have  thought  it  proper  to  give  yoi; 
this  information,  by  express. 

I  shall  be  glad  to  wait  upon  you,  at  Newport;  and  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

J.  WANTON. 
To  Admi)-al  Montagu. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Judge  Aiichmuty. 

Newport,  January  1,  1773. 

Sir  : — The  Judges  Horsmanden  and  Smythe  arrived  last  evening  from  New 
York.  This  will  be  delivered  you  by  express  I  send  to  the  Admiral ;  and  hope  I 
shall  have  the  pleasure  of  waiting  on  you  this  week,  if  your  health  will  permit. 

My  letter  to  Judge  Oliver,  you  have,  without  doubt,  sent  him.  I  am,  therefore, 
jn  expectation  of  seeing  liim,  every  Lour.  I  have  only  to  add  the  compliments  of 
the  season ;  and  am,  sir,  &c.,  &c.,  J.  WANTON. 

To  Judge  Auchmuty. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Capt.  Robert  Keeler,  of  His 
Majesty's  Ship  Mercury. 

Newport,  January  4,  1773. 
Sir : — The  commissioners  meet  at  twelve  o'clock  this  day,  at  the  colony  house ;  at 
which  time,  I  expect  the  return  of  the  express,  vfhen  it  is  probable  it  will  be  deter- 
mined whether  it  is  proper  to  defer  opening  the  conmiission  until  the  admiral  ar- 
rives.    Your  attendance  will  be  necessary.  I  am  yours,  &c. ,  &c., 

J.  WANTON. 
To  Captain  Robert  Keeler. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  119 


Admiral  Montagu  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Boston,  2d  January,  1773,    -i 
at  3  o'clock,  afternoon.       j 

Sir : — I  am  this  moment  favored  with  your  letter,  by  express,  acquainting  me 
that  the  Judges  Horsmanden  and  Smythe  are  arrived  at  Newport,  and  ready  to  pro- 
ceed immediately  upon  business,  and  are  therefore  ready  to  receive  His  Majesty's 
royal  commission,  wliich,  by  my  instructions,  I  am  to  cause  to  be  delivered  to 
them. 

I  beg  leave  to  inform  you,  that  my  captain  left  this  place  yesterday  morning, 
charged  with  the  commission  to  be  given  to  Captain  Keeler,  the  senior  officer  of  His 
Majesty's  shijjs  at  Rhode  Island,  Avho  has  my  orders  to  wait  on  you,  and  know  your 
pleasure,  when  he  shall  wait  upon  the  commissioners  with  it. 

He  is  also  directed  to  give  the  conomissioners  all  the  assistance  in  his  power,  and 
to  receive  such  persons,  either  prisoners  or  witnesses,  as  they  shall  send  to  him. 

He  has  likewise  my  directions  to  inform  the  commissioners  that  he  has  some  peo- 
ple on  board  that  can  give  infomiation  relative  to  the  burning  the  Gaspee,  as  well 
as  of  the  persons  concerned  in  that  affair  ;  and  he  is  directed  to  send  them  to  the 
commissioners  whenever  they  are  pleased  to  demand  them. 

As  the  season  of  the  year  does  not  admit  of  my  coming  to  Rhode  Island  with  my 
flag,  and  such  ships  as  shall  be  necessary  to  assist  the  commissioners,  agreeably  to 
my  instructions ;  yet,  if  the  commissioners  shall  think  it  right,  and  for  the  good  of 
the  service  they  are  upon,  that  my  presence  is  necessary,  I  shall  be  ready  to  set  out 
the  moment  I  receive  such  notice  from  them.  But  I  flatter  myself  they  will  be  able 
to  do  so,  without  me,  as  I  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  receive  such  persons  as  may  be 
sent  from  them.  I  am,  &c.,  &c., 

J.  MONTAGU. 

To  Governor  Wanton. 


120  RECORDS    OF    TIIE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  ROYAL  COMMISSION,  FOR 
INQUIRING  INTO  THE  CIRCUMSTANCES  RELA- 
TIVE TO  THE  TAKING  AND  BURNING  OF  IIIS 
MAJESTY'S  SCHOONER  GASPEE. 

The  commissioners  met  at  the  state  house,  in  Newport,  on 
the  5th  day  of  January,  1773. 

Present — the  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Daniel  Ilorsmanden, 
Esquire,  Frederick  Smythe,  Esquire,  Peter  Oliver,  Esquire, 
and  Robert  Auchmuty,  Esquire. 

Colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations  : 

Proceedings  had  and  taken  by  virtue  of  a  royal  commission, 
under  the  seal  of  Great  Britain,  directed  to  the  Honorable 
Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Governor  of  the  English  colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  in  New  Eng- 
land, in  America  ;  Daniel  Horsmanden,  Esq.,  chief  justice 
of  the  Province  of  New  York  ;  Frederick  Smythe,  Esq., 
chief  justice  of  the  Province  of  New  Jersey  ;  Peter  Oliver, 
Esq.,  chief  justice  of  the  Province  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  in 
New  England  ;  Robert  Auchmuty,  Esq.,  judge  of  the  vice 
admiralty  court,  established  at  Boston,  with  jurisdiction  in 
all  causes  arising  within  the  limits  of  the  colonies  of  New 
Hampshire,  Massachusetts  Bay,  Rhode  Island  and  Connec- 
ticut, commissioners  appointed  for  inquiring  into  and  re- 
porting to  His  Majesty  a  full  and  true  account  of  all  the 
circumstances  relative  to  the  attacking,  taking,  plundering 
and  burning  His  Majesty's  armed  schooner,  called  the  Gas- 
pee,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  William  Dudingston,  within 
the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  in  America,  on  the  10th  day  of 
June,  A.  D.  1772  ;  and  for  other  purposes  therein  men- 
tioned, at  the  colony  house,  at  Newport,  in  Rhode  Island, 
Tuesday,  the  5th  day  of  January,  A.  D.  1773,  the  above 
commissioners  being  present. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  121 

His  Majesty's  said  royal  commission,  witli  instructions  to 
said  commissioners,  under  Ilis  Majesty's  signet  and  sign 
manual,  were  delivered  to  the  said  commissioners,  by  Robert 
Keeler,  Esq.,  commander  of  His  Majesty's  ship  ISIercury, 
which  said  commission  was  publicly  read  and  proclaimed. 

On  the  perusal  of  said  instructions,  the  commissioners  con- 
ceived that  the  presence  of  Rear  Admiral  Montagu,  com- 
mander in  chief  of  His  jMajesty's  ships  and  vessels  employed 
in  North  America,  was  necessary,  for  the  furtherance  of  the 
present  service. 

The  following  letter  was  thereupon  written,  and  delivered 
by  James  Clarke,  one  of  the  secretaries  to  the  commissioners, 
to  Captain  Symonds,  to  be  by  him  immediately  conveyed  to 
Admiral  Montagu  : 

The  Commissioners  of  Inquiry,  c^c,  to  Admiral  Montagu. 

Xewport,  January  o,  1773. 
Sir : — We,  His  IMajesty's  commissioners,  for  inquiring  into  the  attacking,  burning 
and  plundering  His  Majesty's  schooner,  the  Gaspee,  &c.,  being  met  at  this  place,  in 
order  to  prevent  the  delay  of  business,  thought  proper  to  receive  the  royal  commis- 
sion and  instructions,  from  Capt.  Keeler,  -whicli,  until  yours  of  the  •2d  inst.,  we  con- 
eluded  would  have  been  delivered  by  you. 

This  day  the  commission  was  ojiened  and  published,  and  the  instructions  carefully 
perused  ;  in  one,  of  which,  we  find  the  following  words  :  "  To  the  end  that  they  may 
be  accordingly  arrested,  and  deli^■ered  to  the  custody  of  the  commander  In  chief  ot 
our  ships  and  vessels  in  North  America,  pursuant  to  such  directions  as  we  have 
thought  fit  to  give  for  that  purpose." 

By  virtue  of  these  words,  we  conceive,  that  In  case  any  person  or  persons  should 
be  arrested  for  the  above  mentioned  crime,  you  are  the  only  person  to  whom  such 
prisoners  can  regularly  be  delivered  for  safe  custody ;  therefore,  we  think  your  at- 
tendance at  Newport,  is  absolutely  necessary.  We  are  sorry  to  give  you  this 
trouble  ;  but  our  duty,  as  we  apjjrehend,  obliges  us  to  do  it. 
We  are,  sir,  with  great  respect. 

Your  most  humble  and  obedient  servants, 
JOSEPH  WANTON,  FREDERICK  SMYTIIE, 


DANIEL  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER, 

ROBERT  AUCHMUTY, 


Commissioners. 


To  Admiral  IMontagu. 
VOL.  VII.  16 


122  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  1772. 

The  commissioners  tlien  proceeded  to  take  the  usual  state 
oaths,  which  were  administered  first  by  Daniel  Horsmanden, 
Esq.,  to  Joseph  Wjinton,  Esq.,  and  afterwards  by  him,  to  the 
other  commissioners. 

The  commissioners  then  appointed  James  Brenton  .and 
James  Clarke,  Esqs.,  joint  secretaries,  who  were  accordingly 
sworn  truly  and  lailhrully  to  execute  the  duties  of  tlieir 
office. 

The  following  is  the  form  of  the  oath  taken  by  the  com- 
missioners : 

The  form  of  the  Oath  taken  hy  the  Commissioiiers. 

We  do  soletonly  and  jiiueeroly,  in  the  presence  of  God,  profess,  testify  and  de- 
clare, that  we  do  believe,  that  in  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  snipper,  there  is  not  any 
transubstantiation  of  the  elements  of  bread  and  wine  into  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ, 
at  or  after  the  consecration  thereof,  by  any  person,  whatsoever ;  and  that  the  invoca- 
tion or  adoration  of  the  Virgin  Marj^,  or  any  other  saint,  and  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass, 
as  they  are  now  used  in  the  Church  of  Rome,  are  superstitious  and  idolatrous.  And 
we  do  solemnly,  in  the  presence  of  God,  profess,  testify  and  declare,  that  we  do 
make  this  declaration  and  every  part  thereof,  in  the  plain  and  ordinary  sense  of  the 
words  read  unto  us,  as  they  are  commonly  understood  by  English  Protestants, 
without  any  evasion,  equivocation  or  mental  reservation,  whatsoever ;  and  without 
any  dispensation  already  granted  us  for  this  purpose  by  the  Pope,  or  any  other  au- 
thority or  person,  vvdiatsoever ;  or  without  any  hope  of  any  such  dispensation  from 
any  person  or  authority,  whatsoever  ;  or  without  thinking  that  we  are,  or  can  be 
accpiitted  before  God  or  man,  or  al;solved  of  this  declaration,  or  any  part  thereof, 
although  the  Pope,  or  any  other  })erson  or  persons,  or  power,  whatsoever,  shall 
dispense  with,  or  annul  tlie  same,  or  declare  that  it  v.'as  null  and  void,  from  the 
beginning,  J.  WAXTOX,  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER. 

ROBT.  ALTHMUTY, 

We  do  truly  and  sincerely  acknowledge,  profess,  testify  and  declare,  in  our  con- 
sciences, before  God  and  the  world,  that  our  sovereign  lord,  George  the  Third,  is 
the  lawful  and  rightfiil  King  of  this  realm,  and  all  other  His  Majesty's  dominions 
thereunto  belonging.  And  we  do  solemnlj-  and  sincerely  declare,  that  we  do  be- 
lieve, in  our  consciences,  that  not  any  of  the  descendants  of  the  person  who  pre- 
tended to  be  Prince  of  Wales  during  the  life  of  the  late  King  James  the  Second, 
and  since  his  decease  pretended  to  be,  and  took  upon  himself  the  style  and  title  of 
King  of  England,  by  the  name  of  James  the  Third ;  or  of  Scotland,  by  the  name  of 
James  the  Eighth  ;  or  the  style  and  title  of  King  of  Great  Britain,  hath  any  right 
or  title,  whatsoever,  to  the  crown  of  this  realm,  or  any  other  the  dominions  thei-e- 
unto  belonging.     And  we  do  renounce,  refuse,  and  alijure  any  allegiance  or  obedi- 


1772.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATiONt 


12: 


c'liec  to  anj-  of  tlicm.  And  wc  do  sv/ear,  that  we  will  bru"  faithful  and  true  aUeg;- 
anco  to  His  Majesty  King  George  the  Third,  and  him  will  (leiend  to  the  utmost  of  our 
power,  against  all  traitorous  conspiracies  and  attcmpl,-,  whatsoever,  whicli  shall  be 
made  against  his  person,  crown  or  dignity.  And  we  \--iil  do  our  utmost  endeavor  to 
disclose  and  make  known  to  His  Majestj',  and  his  successors,  all  treason  and  trai- 
torous conspiracies  which  we  shall  ]^now  to  be  against  him  or  any  of  them.  And 
we  do  faithfull}'  promise  to  the  utmost  of  our  po^vcr,  to  support,  maintain  and  de- 
fend the  succession  of  the  crown  against  the  descendants  of  the  said  James,  and 
against  all  other  persons,  Avhatsoevcr ;  which  succession,  by  an  act  entitled  "  An  act 
for  the  further  limitation  of  the  crown,  and  l)etter  securing  the  rights  and  liberties 
of  the  subject,"  is,  and  stands  limited  to  the  princess  Sophia,  clectoress  and  duchess 
dowager  of  Hanover,  and  the  heirs  of  her  body,  being  Protestants.  And  all  these 
tilings  we  do  plainly  and  sincerely  ackuovfledgc  and  swear,  according  to  these  ex- 
press -sVords  by  us  spoken,  and  according  to  the  plain  and  comnjon  sense  and  under- 
standing of  the  same  words,  without  any  equivocation,  mental  evasion,  or  secret 
reservation,  whatsoever.  And  v/e  do  make  this-  recognition,  acknowledgment,  al)- 
jin'ation,  renunciation  and  promise  lieartily,  v.-illingly  and  truly,  upon  the  true  faith 
of  a  Chi-istian.     So  hel])  us  God. 

J.  WANTON,  FRED.  SMYTIIE, 

DAN.  HOKSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER. 

ROBT.  AUC:HMUTY. 


We  do  sv.-ear,  that  we  do,  fi-om 
our  hearts,  abhor,  detest  and  ab- 
jure, as  impious  and  heretical,  that 
damnable  doctrine  and  position, 
that  princes  excommunicated  or 
deprived  by  the  Pope  or  an}-  au- 
thority of  the  See  of  Rome,  may 
be  deposed  or  murdered  by  their 
subjects,  or  any  other,  whatsoever. 
And  we  do  declare,  that  no  foreign 
prince,  person,  prelate,  stale,  or 
potentate,  hath,  or  ought  to  have, 
any  jurisdiction,  power,  suj^eri- 
ority,  pre-eminence  or  authoriiy, 
ecclesiastical  or  spiritual,  within 
this  realm.     So  help  us  God. 


^  /^^^A^^^-^<^ 


124  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1772. 

The  proceedings  of  the  said  commission  were  then  Jidjourned 
till  to-morrow,  at  11  o'clock,  then  to  meet  at  the  colony  house, 
aforesaid. 

Wednesday,  January  G,  1773. 

The  commissioners  met,  according  to  adjournment. 

Tiie  commissioners  determined  that  it  was  necessary  that  an 
advertisement  be  published  in  the  next  Newport  Mercury, 
giving  notice  that  the  said  commissioners  had  assembled,  and 
were  now  daily  sitting  at  the  colony  house,  in  Newport,  for 
the  purpose  of  proceeding  upon,  and  duly  executing  the  said 
commission  ;  and  that  they  are  ready  to  receive  information 
relative  to  the  attacking,  taking,  plundering  and  burning  the  Gas- 
pee  schooner,  on  the  10th  of  June  last  past ;  in  consequence  of 
which  resolutions,  the  following  advertisement  was  ordered  to 
be  published  : 

Advertisement   in   the  Neivport  Mercury,  of  the  meetings  of  the 
Commissioners. 

"  CoLOXY  ov  Rhode  Island  axd  Pkovidexce  Plaxtatioxs  : 

The  i:)ublic  arc  hereby  informed,  lliat  the  honorable  the  commissioners,  appointed 
under  the  seal  of  Great  Britain,  for  inquiring  into  the  circumstances  of  attacking, 
plundering  and  burning  His  Majesty's  schooner  Gaspee,  under  the  command  of 
Lieutenant  WilHam  Dudingston,  on  the  10th  of  June  last,  are  now  convened,  and 
continue  to  sit  every  day,  Sundays  excepted,  at  the  colony  house,  in  Newport,  in 
conformity  to  His  Majesty's  instructions. 

Wljercfore,  all  persons  who  can  give  any  information  to  the  said  commissioners, 
relative  to  the  assembling,  arming  and  leading  on  the  j^ersons  who  made  the  said 
attack,  and  the  directing  and  preparing  the  same,  are  requested  forthwith  to  give 
information  thereof,  to  said  commissioners  at  the  above  mentioned  place. 

By  order  of  the  commissioners,—  JOSEPH  BRENTON, 

JA]\n<:S  CLARKE, 

Secretaries." 

The  proceedings  on  said  commission,  were  then  adjourned 
till  to-morrow,  at  10  o'clock  ;  then  to  meet  at  the  colony 
house,  aforesaid. 

Thursday,  January  7,  1773. 
The  commissioners  met,  according  to  adjournment. 
Present — Joseph  Wiinton,   Esq.,  Frederick   Smythe,  Esq., 
Peter  Oliver,  Esq.,  Robert  Auchmuty,  Esq. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  125 

Governor  Wanton  laid  before  the  commissioners  four  letters, 
which  had  passed  between  him,  Admiral  Montagu  and  Lieu- 
tenant Dudingston  ;  also,  one  other  letter,  signed  by  Governor 
Wanton,  and  transmitted  by  him,  by  order  of  the  General  As- 
sembly, of  the  colony,  aforesaid,  to  Rear  Admiral  jMontagu  ; 
which  letters,  are  prior  in  date,  to  the  attacking  and  burning 
His  Majesty's  schooner  Gaspee,  which  were  read,  and  ordered 
to  be  put  on  fde. 

Sundry  papers,  letters  and  depositions,  to  the  number  of 
twenty,  containing  the  proceedings  of  the  Governor  and 
Deputy  Governor  of  the  colony,  aforesaid,  relative  to  the  burn- 
ing the  schooner,  were  delivered  by  Governor  Wanton  to  the 
commissioners,  which  were  also  read,  and  ordered  on  file. 

Governor  Wanton  informed  the  commissioners,  that  Mr. 
Sessions,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  colony,  was  in  Newport, 
and  ready  to  attend  the  commissioners,  to  give  them  an  ac- 
count of  the  steps  he  had  taken,  in  order  to  discover  the  per- 
sons who  destroyed  His  Majesty's  schooner  Gaspee. 

A  message  was  sent  to  Mr.  Sessions,  requesting  his  attend- 
ance ;  who  accordingly  came  before  the  commissioners,  and 
was  by  them  requested  to  give  in  writing,  upon  oath,  a  full 
and  particular  account  of  the  measures  he  had  taken,  in  order 
to  the  discovery  of  the  persons  who  perpetrated  the  aforesaid 
crime  ;  which  he  assured  the  commissioners  he  would  do, 
without  loss  of  time. 

Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  Chief  Justice  of  said  colony,  also 
appeared  before  the  commissioners,  and  assured  them  he  was 
ready  and  willing  to  aid  and  assist  the  commissioners  in  the  ex- 
ercise of  the  power  and  authority  with  which  they  are  in- 
vested, for  discovering  the  persons  who  destroyed  the  Gaspee 
schooner,  &c. 

The  commissioners  then  requested  Mr.  Hopkins  to  give  them, 
in  writing,  a  full  and  particular  account  of  all  the  proceedings 
had  and  done  by  him,  for  discovering  and  bringing  to  justice 
the  persons  who  committed  the  aforesaid  offence  ;  and  also 
what  knowledge  or  information  he  had  obtained  of  the  assem- 


126  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

bling,  arming  and  leading  on  the  persons  who  perpetrated  the 
same  ;    which  he  also  promised  to  do,  without  loss  of  time. 

The  proceedings  on  the  commission  were  then  adjourned  till 
to-morrow,  at  lU  o'clock  before  noon  ;  then  to  meet  at  the 
colony  house,  aforesaid. 

Friday,  Jonuarij  8,  1773. 

The  commissioners  met,  according  to  adjoumment. 

Present — Joseph  Wanton,  Esrj.,  Daniel  Horsmanden,  Esq., 
Frcdeiick  Smythe,  Esq.,  Peter  Oliver,  Esq.,  Robert  Auch- 
muty,  Esq. 

Mr.  Brenton,  one  of  the  secretaries  under  the  present  com- 
mission, v^as  examined  by  the  commissioners,  touching  the  ob- 
struction to  the  execution  of  a  warrant  issued  by  Metcalfe 
Bowler,  Esq.,  on  the  17th  of  July  hist,  in  order  to  apprehend 
the  negro  Aaron,  then  on  board  His  Majesty's  slup,  the 
Beaver  ;  which  examination,  was  reduced  to  writing,  sworn 
to  before  the  commissioners,  an<l  ordered  to  be  filed. 

Deposition  of  James  Brenton. 

James  Brenton,  now  residing:  in  Xewport,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  in  North 
America,  Esi|.,  Leing  of  full  age,  duly  sworn  upon  tiie  lioly  evarigelists,  deposes  and 
saith: 

That,  upon  the  1 7tli  day  of  July  last,  he  was  requested  by  the  Hon.  Joseph  Wan- 
ton, Esq.,  Governor  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  aforesaid,  to  attend  Robert  Lilli- 
bridge,  one  of  the  deputy  sheriffs  in  the  county  of  Newport,  in  said  colony,  who  was 
ordered  with  a  warrant  from  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Esq.,  one  of  the  justices  of  assize,  in 
said  colony,  to  repair  on  board  His  Majesty's  ship,  the  Beaver,  and  to  make  diligent 
search  for  one  Aaron,  a  mulatto  lad,  charged  with  being  concerned  (with  others  un- 
known), in  attacking  and  burning  His  Majesty'.j  scliooner,  the  Gaspee,  on  the  10th 
of  June  last ;  and  upon  finding  the  said  Aaron,  to  take  him  before  the  said  Metcalfe 
Bowler,  or  some  other  lawful  authorit}',  in  order  that  the  said  Aaron  might  be  ex- 
amined relative  to  the  said  transaction,  and  bo  2-sroccedcd  against,  according  to 
law. 

That  this  deponent,  about  1  o'clock,  in  the  afternoon,  of  the  said  17th  day  of  July, 
went  with  the  said  deputy  sheriff,  from  said  Newport,  in  order  to  go  on  board  His 
Majesty's  ship,  the  Beaver,  then  lying  in  the  harbor  of  Newport ;  that,  when  the  boat 
in  which  this  deponent  and  the  said  deputy  sheriff  were,  came  near  the  said  ship, 
they  were  forbidden  by  the  sentinel,  upon  the  ship's  gangway,  from  going  on  board. 

This  deponent  then  acquainted  a  person,  v/ho  appeared  to  be  the  commanding 
officer,  upon  the  deck  of  the  said  ship,  that  he,  this  deponent,  with  your  said  deputy 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  127 

sheriff,  wove  then  come  to  dcmund  tliat  Aaron,  a  mulatto  lad,  who  was  charged  -with 
being  concerned  in  the  attacking  and  hurning  the  schooner  Gaspee,  and  who,  tliey 
were  informed,  was  then  on  board  said  ship,  might  be  delivered,  to  the  deputy 
sheriff,  in  pursuance  of  a  warrant  for  that  purpose. 

That  the  said  ofiicer  then  on  deck,  answered  this  deponent,  that  Captain  Linzee, 
the  commander  of  the  said  ship,  was  not  on  board ;  and  that  he,  the  said  oflicor, 
could  do  nothing  without  orders.  The  said  officer  further  acquainted  them,  that 
Capt.  Linzee  was  then  on  shore,  at  Brenton's  Point. 

That,  this  deponent  then,  together  with  the  said  deputy  sherifl',  went  on  shore,  at 
the  farm  of  Jahleel  Brenton  ;  where,  at  the  said  Jahleel  Brenton's  house,  this  de- 
ponent sa,w  the  said  Capt.  Linzee,  and  acc[uaintcd  him  that  he  came  to  attend  the 
deputy  sheriff  with  a  v.'arrant,  in  order  to  demand  of  him,  the  said  Capt.  Linzee, 
that  he  would  deliver  up  to  the  civil  magistrate  a  mulatto  boy,  called  Aaron  (who, 
they  were  informed,  was  on  board  the  Beaver  man-of-vv^ar,  under  his  command),  in 
order  for  his  examination  and  commitment ;  and  at  the  same  time,  this  deponent 
showed  to  the  said  Capt.  Linzee,  the  said  warrant,  and  he  was  then  and  there  re- 
quested to  deliver  up  said  mulatto,  in  consequence  thereof. 

To  which,  the  said  Capt.  Linzee  then  answered,  that  it  was  true  that  he  had  the 
said  mulatto  then  on  board  His  Majesty's  said  ship,  the  Beaver ;  but  that  he  would 
not  dehver  him  to  any  cl\-il  authority,  whatever,  in  the  said  colony. 

Tliis  deponent  then  told  Capt.  Linzee,  that  he,  this  deponent,  canie  to  Avait  upon 
the  said  Capt.  Linzee,  at  the  particular  request  of  Governor  Wanton,  the  chief  mag- 
istrate of  said  colony,  in  order  to  explain  to  him,  if  necessary,  the  nature  of  the  war- 
rant, and  the  impropriety  of  Capt.  Linzee's  conduct,  in  withholding  a  man  charged 
with  a  capital  crime,  from  the  civil  power. 

To  which,  Capt.  Linzee  replied,  that  he  knew  no  civil  authority,  in  said  colony  • 
that,  in  regard  to  the  Governor,  he  ^vas  a  damned  rascal,  and  that  Admiral  Mon- 
tagu's power  was  the  only  povver  he  knew  in  America,  and  without  his  orders  ho 
should  not  deliver  the  said  rnulatto. 

The  deponent  then  asked  him,  the  said  Capt.  Linzee,  if  he  had  any  doubt  about 
the  legality  of  the  warrant,  which  this  deponent  held  in  his  hand  ? 

To  which,  Capt.  Linzee,  looking  carelessly  upon  it,  said,  it  mioht  be  "-ood  for 
what  he  knew  ;  but  that  he  did  not  regard  it  any  more  than  if  it  was  a  piece  of 
blank  paper. 

This  deponent  further  saith,  that  the  deputy  sheriff  (who  was  with  this  deponent, 
at  Jahleel  Brenton's  farm,)  did  not  go  into  the  house  where  Capt.  Linzee  was,  but 
waited  without  doors,  as  Capt.  Linzee  (being  at  that  time  suspicious  of  bein-i'  ar- 
rested by  civil  process,  on  account  of  some  seizures  which  had  been  made  by  him,) 
would  not  consent  that  the  deputy  sheriff  should  see  him.  And  further  this  depo- 
nent saith  not.  j.  BRENTON. 

Newport,  January  8,  1773. 

Sworn  to,  before  the  commissioners, — 

J.  WANTON,  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  IIORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER. 

ROBT.  AUCimUTV, 


128  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

The  commissioners  thought  it  advisable  to  defer  the  exami- 
nation of  any  of  the  witnesses  respecting  the  burning  of  the 
Gaspee,  &c.,  until  the  arrival  of  Admiral  Montagu,  at  New- 
port ;  or  they  receive  an  answer  from  him,  to  their  letter  writ- 
ten the  5th  inst.,  and  transmitted  by  Capt.  Symonds. 

The  proceedings  on  the  commission  then  adjourned  till  to- 
morrow, at  10  o'clock,  in  the  forenoon,  then  to  meet  at  the 
colony  house,  aforesahl. 

Saturday,  January  9,  1773. 

The  commissioners  met,  according  to  adjournment. 

Present — Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Daniel  Horsmanden,  Esq., 
Frederick  Smythe,  Esq.,  Peter  Oliver,  Esq.  and  Robert 
Auchmuty,  Esq. 

Darius  Sessions,  Esq.,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  colony  of 
Rhode  Island,  attended  the  commissioners,  with  a  declaration 
in  writing,  containing  a  full  and  particular  account  of  the 
measures  he  had  taken,  in  order  to  make  a  discovery  of  the 
persons  concerned  in  the  attacking  and  burning  the  Gaspee 
schooner  ;    which  was  read,  sworn  to,  and  ordered  to  be  filed. 

Deposition  of  Deputy  Governor  Darius  Sessions. 

Colony  of  Rhode  Islaxd,  &c.  : 

Be  it  remomborc'd,  that  at  Newport,  in  said  colony,  on  the  9tli  day  of  January,  in 
the  year  of  our  Lord  1773,  betbre  the  commissioners  appointed  by  a  commission  un- 
der the  great  seal  of  Great  Britain,  for  inquiring  into  and  reporting  unto  His  Majesty, 
all  the  circumstances  of  burning  His  Majesty's  schooner  Gaspee,  &c.,  on  the  10th 
of  June  last,  in  his  proper  jierson,  came  and  ajipeared  the  Hon.  Darius  Sessions, 
Esq.,  of  Providence,  and  Dejiuty  Governor  of  the  colony,  aforesaid ;  who  being 
duly  sworn  upon  the  holy  evangelists  of  Almighty  God,  testifieth  and  saith : 

That  in  the  9th  of  June  last,  at  about  9  o'clock,  he  heard  a  drum  beat  in  the 
street,  opposite  to  his  house.  Soon  after  he  went  to  his  window  and  looked  out, 
and  saw  the  drum  sui-rounded  by  a  number  of  hoys,  at  some  chstance  from  the 
house,  going  up  street ;  in  a  short  time  afterwards,  he  heard  the  drum  returning  ; 
whereupon,  he  went  back  to  his  window,  where  he  remained  until  it  passed  his 
house ;  and,  as  the  moon  shone  very  bright,  he  could  plainly  discover  they  were 
only  a  company  of  boys,  not  exceeding  ten  or  twelve  in  number ;  two  or  three  of 
which,  appeared  to  be  about  thirteen  or  fom-teen  years  of  age  ;  the  others  about  ten 
or  twelve  ;  and  concluding  they  were  gathered  together  for  no  other  design  than  to 
divert  themselves  with  the  drum,  he  retired  from  his  window,  without  savino-  anv- 


1772.]  AND    TROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  129 

thing  to  the  boys ;  soon  aftei'  which,  the  noise  of  the  drum  ceased ;  the  remaining  part  of 
tliat  night,  he  heard  not  the  least  noise  or  disturbance  in  the  streets,  or  in  any  other 
part  of  the  town,  nor  received  any  the  least  liint,  suggestion,  intimation  or  information  of 
■  any  riot,  outrage  or  tumultuous  assembling  of  the  people,  nor  intention  thereof; 
neither  did  he  then  know  there  was  an  armed  Vessel  in  the  river,  nearer  than  the 
town  of  Newport,  which  is  thirty  miles  from  Providence  ;  had  he  known,  or  even 
suspected  any  riot,  liis  utmost  endeavors  would  have  been  exerted  in  surpress- 
ing  it. 

The  next  morning,  one  of  his  neiglibors  came  and  told  him  the  Gaspee  was  burnt, 
and  the  captain  wounded ;  and  that  an  express  had  arrived  in  town  ibr  a  siu'geon, 
to  dress  the  wounds  of  the  officer,  who  lay  then  at  Pawtuxet,  about  five  miles  from 
^l■o^■idence. 

Innnediacely  upon  liearlng  this  disagreeable  news,  he  set  out  vrith  a  design  to  examine 
into  the  affiur  ;  and  when  he  reached  Pawtuxet,  he  saw  the  schooner  on  fire,  lying 
on  a  point  of  land,  called  and  known  by  the  name  of  Namquit  Point,  about  two  miles 
from  Pawtuxet,  in  the  town  of  Warwick,  in  the  county  of  Kent,  and  colony,  aforesaid, 

lie  made  inquiry  if  any  of  the  offenders  were  known,  but  could  get  no  informa- 
tion ;  he  then  went  to  a  small  house  by  the  shore,  where  he  heard  Lieutenant  Dud- 
ingston  v^as  lodged,  and  there  found  liim  in  dangerous  circumstances. 

He  told  Lieutenant  Dudingstou  if  he  wanted  money,  surgeons,  or  better  lodgings, 
or  any  kind  of  assistance,  he  should  have  every  relief  in  his  power. 

Mr.  Dudlngston  replied,  that  he  had  saved  his  money,  which  was  about  one  hun- 
dred dollars,  and  therefore  wanted  no  favors  for  liimself ;  but  desired  that  some  care 
might  be  taken  of  his  people,  that  they  might  be  collected  together,  and  sent  to  the 
admiral,  at  Boston,  or  on  board  the  Beavei',  at  Newport,  v.-hich  the  deponent  prom- 
ised he  would  do. 

He  then  told  Mr.  Dudlngston  the  design  of  his  visit  at  that  time,  was  not  only  to 
afford  him  any  assistance  he  might  need,  but  also  to  procure  such  a  declaration  from 
his  own  mouth,  respecting  the  attack  that  had  been  made  on  his  person,  and  the 
vessel  he  commanded,  that  the  offenders  might  be  brought  to  justice. 

Mr.  Dudlngston  ausAvered,  that  he  would  give  him  no  account  of  the  matter. 
First,  because  orhis  indisposition  of  body ;  and  second,  because  it  was  liis  duty  to 
forbear  any  thing  of  thatf  nature,  until  he  had  done  it  unto  a  court  martial,  unto 
wliich,  if  he  lived,  he  would  be  called  by  his  commanding  officer. 

The  deponent  then  asked  him,  if  he  was  willing  he  should  examine  his  ofiicers 
and  people  ;  which,  after  some  refusal,  he  consented  to  ;  and  they  all  agreeing 
nearly  to  every  thing  material  relative  to  the  destruction  of  tlio  sclsoojier,  he  forth- 
v/ith  transmitted  copies  of  their  examinations  to  the  Governor. 

The  deponent  then  gave  orders  that  the  seamen  should  be  collected  together,  and 
provided  with  victuals  and  lodgings,  and  that  a  boat  should  be  got  ready  by  the  next 
morning,  to  carry  them  on  board  the  Beaver ;  all  which,  was  executed  with  care 
and  expedition. 

The  deponent  also  gave  orders  that  tlie  stores  and  remains  sliould  be  collected 
and  lodged  in  a  warehouse,  which  A\as  done,  and  soon  after  delivered  to  Capt. 
Linzee,  of  the  Beaver. 

He  also  desired  a  gentleman,  who  lived  near  Mr.  Dudlngston,  to  supply  said  Dud- 
lngston with  any  thing  he  wanted ;  and  also  that  he  would  lodge  and  entertain  any 
surgeons  or  others,  who  might  come  to  visit  him  ;  and  which  the  deponent  verily  be- 
VOL.  VII.  17 


130  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

Hevcs  he  verily  complied  with.     These  expenses  were  recommended  by  the  depo- 
nent, to  the  General  Assembly,  who  ordered  payment  out  of  the  pubhc  treasury. 

The  deponent  consulted  w^ith  the  Chief  Justice,  and  most  of  the  civil  au- 
thority in  that  jiart  of  the  colony  where  he  resides,  who  highly  disapproved  of  the 
riot ;  and  universally  declared  they  were  ignorant  of  any  of  the  proceedings,  and 
gave  it  as  their  opinion  that  measures  ought  to  be  pursued  for  discovering  and 
bringing  to  justice  the  perpetrators. 

A  proclamation  was  soon  after  issued  by  the  Governor,  which  was  posted  up  in 
all  the  towns  near  where  the  offence  was  committed ;  but  as  yet,  the  deponent  has 
not  received  any  information  of  any  of  the  persons  concerned  in  that  offence  ;  nei- 
ther has  he  ever  heard  that  information  has  been  made  to  any  of  the  civil  authority 
within  the  colony.     And  further  this  deponent  saith  not. 

DARIUS  SESSIONS. 

N.  B.  The  words,  "  nor  intention  thereof,"  on  the  fifth  line  of  the  second  page  ; 
"  and  colony,  aforesaid,"'  on  the  eighteenth  line  of  the  same  page  ;  "  which,  after 
some  refusal,  he  consented  to,  and  they,"  in  the  nineteenth  hue  of  the  third  page  ; 
"  relative  to  the  destruction  of  the  schooner,"  in  the  twentieth  line  of  the  same 
page,  were  interlined  before  the  above  deposition  was  signed  and  sworn  to. 

Sworn  to,  at  Newport,  this  9th  day  of  January,  before  us, — 

J.  WANTON,  '  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER. 

ROBT.  AUCHMUTY. 


A  letter  was  delivered  to  the  commissioners,  about  two  o'- 
clock, P.  jM.,  then  sitting  at  the  colony  house,  by  express,  in 
answer  to  their  letter  of  the  5th  instant,  and  forwarded  by 
Capt.  Symonds,  which  was  read,  and  ordered  to  be  filed. 

Admiral  Montagu  to  the  Commissioners,  ^c. 

Boston,  8th  January,  1773,    1 
1  o'clock,  P.  M.  j>" 

Gentlemen  : — I  was  last  night  favored  with  your  letter,  by  Capt.  Symonds  ;  and 
as  you  are  so  desirous  of  having  me  at  Rhode  Island,  I  shall,  without  you  alter  your 
opinions,  set  out  on  Monday  next. 

At  the  same  time,  give  me  leave  to  observe  to  you,  that  my  coming  at  the  time, 
is  attended  with  a  great  delay  to  His  Majesty's  service  here,  and  at  Halifax,  and  can 
answer  no  purpose,  as  I  have  fully  and  properly  directed  the  conunanding  officer  at 
that  place  in  what  manner  he  is  to  act,  relative  to  his  assisting  the  commissioners 
and  receiving  the  prisoners.. 

You  say,  by  your  instructions,  you  are  directed  to  deliver  to  the  custodj"  of  the  com- 
mander in  chief  of  His  Majesty's  ships  and  vessels  in  North  America,  all  such  prisoners 
as  may  be  apjirehended ;  and  therefore,  you  are  of  opinion,  that  in  that  case,  if  any 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  131 

person  or  persons  sLould  be  arrested  for  the  crime  set  forth  in  your  commission,  I  am 
the  only  person  to  whom  such  prisoners  can  regularly  be  delivered,  for  safe  custody. 

In  answer  to  which,  I  beg  leave  to  refer  you  to  the  sixth  paragraph  of  My  Lord 
Dartmouth's  letter,  to  Governor  Wanton,  where  you  will  see,  "  The  prisoners  are  to 
be  delivered  to  the  care  and  custody  of  Rear  Admiral  Montagu,  or  the  commander 
in  chief  in  North  America,  for  the  time  being,  or  to  such  officer  as  he  shall  appoint 
to  receive  them." 

By  my  instructions  from  the  lords  of  the  admiralty,  I  am  directed  to  repair  to 
Rhode  Island,  as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be,  with  such  of  His  Majesty's  ships  and 
vessels  under  my  connnand,  as  I  shall  judge  proper,  and  give  all  the  aid  and  assist- 
ance in  my  power,  for  discovering  and  bringing  to  justice  the  offenders. 

The  winter  season  is  so  far  advanced,  as  prevents  my  complying  with  that  part 
of  my  orders,  as  it  is  very  improper  to  move  so  large  a  ship  as  the  Captain,  at  this 
time  of  the  year ;  and  without  her,  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  carry  on  the  service. 

I  flatter  myself,  there  has  been  no  delay  of  business,  owing  to  my  not  coming  with 
the  commission  ;  for  had  I  been  there,  I  should  have  tendered  it  in  the  same  man- 
ner I  have  done,  as  by  my  instructions,  I  am  directed,  when  the  commissioners  are 
ready  to  1-eceive  itj  to  cause  it  to  be  delivered  to  them. 

I  shall  certainly  set  out  on  Monday  next,  if  I  can  complete  my  business  here,  and 
be  ready  to  give  you  every  assistance  in  my  power. 
I  am,  with  respect,  gentlemen, 

Your  most  obedient,  and  most  humble  servant, 

J.  MONTAGU. 

To  His  Majesty's  commissioners,  at  Rhode  Island. 

The  commissioners  immediately  ngreed  to  an  answer  ;  which 
was  written  accordingly,  and  sent  off  about  three  o'clock,  by 
the  same  express. 

Monday,  January  11,  1773. 

The  commissioners  met,  according  to  adjournment. 

Present — Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Daniel  Horsmanden,  Esq., 
Frederick  Smythe,  Esq.,  Peter  Oliver,  Esq.,  and  Robert  Auch- 
muty,  Esq. 

The  commissioners  received  a  letter  from  Metcalfe  Bowler, 
Esq.,  one  of  the  justices  of  assize,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Is- 
land, tendering  his  services  in  aid  of  the  commission,  which 
was  read  ordered  to  be  filed. 


132  EECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    HIIODE    ISLAND  [1772. 


Justice.  Metcalfe  Bowk?-  to  the  Commissioners^,  §'C. 

Isewpori,  Jaiuiarv  11,  17  73. 

Gentlemen  : — In  obedience  to  His  Mnjesty'.s  command,  signified  by  Lord  Dartmouth, 
to  His  Honor  tiie  Governor,  dated  Wbiteliall,  September  4th,  1772,  wliich  was  laid  be- 
fore tlie  General  Assembly,  wherein  His  Lordship  expressed  His  Majesty's  depend- 
ence upon  the  care  dud  vigilance  of  the  civil  magistrates  of  the  colony,  to  -take  the 
prosier  measures  for  arresting  and  committing  to  custody,  in  order  to  tlieir  being 
brought  to  justice,  such  persons  as  shall,  upon  proper  inlbrmation  belbre  them,  or 
before  His  Majesty's  commissioners,  appear  to  have  been  concerned  in  the  plunder- 
ing and  destro}-ing  His  Majesty's  schooner  Gaspec,  and  dangerously  wounding  and 
ill-treating  His  Majesty's  oiiieer  who  commanded  her,  &c. 

As  a  civil  magistrate,  and  one  of  His  Majesty's  justices  of  assize,  in  and  throughout 
the  colony,  impressed  with  a  regard  for  the  dignity  of  the  crown,  and  the  welfare  of 
the  colony,  I  now  tender  my  assistance,  whenever  it  shall  be  necessary  ;  and  when 
called  upon  by  the  commissioners,  or  otherwise,  will  exert  every  authority  which  the 
colony  has  invested  me  with,  towards  the  apprehending  any  persons  against  whom 
information  may  be  lodged,  of  being  concerned  in  the  destruction  of  His  Majesty's 
schooner,  the  Gaspee,  or  may  aj)pear  to  have  been  any  ways  aiding  or  assisting  in 
tbat  most  daring  insult  offered  against  His  Majesty's  crown  and  dignity,  within  the 
colony,  on  the  10th  of  June  last. 

I  am,  with  the  greatest  respect. 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

JVIETCALFE  BOWLER 

To  tlie  Honorable  His  jSIaiestv's  Commissioners. 


The  commi.ssioiier3  issued  <a  summons  for  bringing  before 
them  Stephen  GuUey,  ;i  witnes.s,  relative  to  the  taking  and 
burning  of  the  Gaspee  schooner,  in  order  to  be  examined  be- 
fore them,  at  11  o'clock,  to-morrow  morning. 

Tuesday,  Januarij  12. 

The  commissioners  met,  according  to  adjournment. 

Present — Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Daniel  Horsraanden,  Esq., 
Frederick  Smythe,  Esq.,  Peter  Oliver,  Esq.,  and  Robert  Auch- 
muty,  Esq. 

Stephen  Gulley,  who  was  summoned  to  give  evidence  to  the 
commissioners,  of  what  he  knew  concerning  the  attacking  and 
burning  the  Gaspee,  &c.,  appeared  before  them,  and  was  ex- 
amined upon  oath  ;  which  examination  was  reduced  to  writ- 
ing, signed  by  the  deponent,  and  ordered  to  be  filed. 


1772.1  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  133 


The  Deposition  of  Stephen  Gidtei/. 

The  examination  on  oatli,  of  Stephen  GuUey,  before  the  honorable  commissioners, 
this  12th  clay  of  January,  A.  D.  1773. 

Question — What  is  your  name  and  oeeupation  V 

Answer — Stephen  Gulley,  is  my  name,  and  &  huslxmdman,  my  occupation. 

Q. — What  age  are  you  '? 

A. — Aged  fort}'-oue  years. 

Q. — Where  is  your  place  of  abode  ? 

A. — At  Smithfield,  in  the  county  of  Providence,  in  tlie  colony  of  Rhode  Island. 

Q. — Have  you  lately  been  on  board  any  of  His  IMajesty's  ships  ?  What  ship  ? 
Hov/  long  have  j^ou  been  on  board  '? 

A. — That  he  has  been  on  board  His  Majesty's  ghip,  tlie  Lizard,  ever  since  Tues- 
day last ;  and  that  he  went  voluntarily  on  board  for  his  own  personal  safet}-. 

Q. — What  reason  had  you  to  suppose  you  was  imsafe  ? 

A. — On  Monday  night,  the  Sth  inst.,  he  went  into  the  public  house,  at  the  ferry, 
on  Rhode  Island  side,  where  he  sat  down  and  called  for  some  da-ink,  which  they 
gave  him  ;  he  then  called  foi'  supper,  and  had  it ;  afterwards,  he  rose  from  the  table 
and  sat  down  near  the  fire-place,  by  the  master  of  the  house,  wdien  a  fflan,  unknown 
to  him,  came  and  sat  down  by  his  side. 

I  asked  where  he  was  bound  ;  he  said  to  Newport.  Tlie  man  told  him  he  would 
not  get  there  ;  he  asked  him  for  what  reason  he  thought  so ;  he  replied,  there  were 
about  twenty  armed  men  in  the  road,  one  of  them,  with  two  brass  pistols ;  who, 
he  said,  were  come  to  take  him  alive  or  dead,  to  cai-ry  him  back  to  Providence ; 
that  he,  said  man,  went  out  into  the  other  room. 

The  landlord  then  spoke  to  the  deponent,  and  told  him  he  would  give  him  a  word 
of  advice ;  he  said  there  were  about  twenty  armed  men,  that  said  they  would  have 
him,  the  deponent ;  and  that  he  did  not  know  but  they  would  tear  his  house  down, 
if  he  stayed  there. 

He  then  called  his  children,  and,  he  believes,  his  wife,  into  the  room,  and  gave 
them  a  strict  charge  to  tell  the  men,  if  they  inquired  after  this  deponent,  that  he 
was  gone  out  with  the  landlord,  to  talk  together  ;  and  that  this  happened  about 
eight  o'clock,  in  the  evening. 

The  landlord  then  told  him  he  Avould  show  him  a  way  where  he  might  escape  tlieir 
hands,  that  they  might  know  nothing  wdiere  he  was  gone.  The  landlord  then  went 
with  him  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  he  thinks  from  said  house,  in  sight  of  a  pond, 
and  they  then  parted,  the  landlord  first  directing  him  to  the  road  to  Newport. 

Q. — What  do  you  know  relative  to  the  attacking  and  burning  the  Gaspee 
schooner,  on  the  said  10th  of  June  last  ? 

A. — As  to  my  own  knowledge,  I  know  nothing  about  it ;  but  that  some  time 
about  the  last  of  December  last,  he  was  told  by  Capt.  William  Thayer,  of  Mendon, 
in  the  Province  of  Massachusetts,  that  Saul  Ramsdale,  late  of  Mendon,  who  was  a 
shoemaker,  at  woi'k  at  Providence,  at  the  time  the  Gaspee  was  burnt,  told  him  and 
one  of  his  sons,  he  knew  who  the  persons  were,  who  were  concerned  in  that  affair ; 
nd  that  he,  the  said  Ramsdale,  was  in  company  with  them,  before  they  went  off 
from  Providence,  but  did  not  go  himself;  upon  which,  this  deponent  went  immedi- 
ately to  Ramsdale,  who  was  then  at  Mendon. 


134  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

lie  found  a  young  fellow  with  him ;  but  upon  this  deponent  teUIng  Ramsdale  that 
he  wanted  a  private  conversation  with  him,  the  young  man  went  away ;  this  depo- 
nent then  asked  him  about  the  burning  of  said  Gaspee  schooner,  and  whetlier  he 
had  any  knowledge  of  that  matter. 

Ramsdale  then  asked  liim  who  told  him  that  he,  Ramsdale,  knew  any  thing  of 
that  matter. 

He  told  him  he  did  not  choose  to  say  who  gave  liim  that  intelligence  ;  he,  said 
deponent,  then  told  him,  if  he  would  give  this  deponent  any  intelligence  about 
the  burning  the  Gaspee  schooner,  he  would  be  a  good  friend  to  him. 

Ramsdale  then  told  him  he  did  know  something  about  the  thing;  that  he 
knew  the  heads  of  the  gang  that  went  down  the  river  vv'ith  that  intention  ;  that  he 
saw  two  men  with  guns  under  their  anns  ;  and  one  of  them  swore  with  a  very  high 
oath,  that  he  would  be  revenged  upon  the  affair  he  was  going  upon,  before  he  re- 
turned ;  and  that  he,  the  said  Ramsdale,  was  jiicked  for  one  of  the  gang  to  go  with 
them ;  but  being  faint-hearted  and  discouraged,  he  did  not  go. 

This  deponent  then  asked  him  whether  some  of  the  Browns  were  not  con- 
cerned. 

Ramsdale  answered  yes ;  but  does  not  remember  that  he  mentioned  his  Christian 
name. 

He,  this  deponent,  then '  asked  him  how  many  in  number  there  were  ;  if  there 
were  two  hundred. 

He  said  more. 

He  then  asked  him,  if  there  were  four  hundred. 

He  said  not  so  many. 

He  then  asked  himv  if  tliere  were  three  hundred. 

He  said  yes. 

He  then  asked  him,  if  there  were  any  more. 

He  said  yes  ;  something  upwards. 

He  then  parted  with  said  Ramsdale,  and  this  deponent  then  went  to  Boston. 
This  deponent  further  saith,  that  he  had  been  acquainted  v/itli  said  Ramsdale  many 
years ;  that  he  told  said  Ramsdale  that  he  would  be  sent  for,  and  Ramsdale  begged 
he  would  not  discover  him.     ,  STEPHEN  GULLEY. 

Newport,  12th  January,  1773. 

Sworn  to,  before  us,— 

J.  WANTON,  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER. 

ROBT.  AUCHMUTY, 

The  commissioners  were  of  opinion,  that  it  was  necessary  to 
issue  a  summons  to  Saul  Ramsdale,  William  Thayer  and  Jo- 
seph Borden. 

A  summons  was  accordingly  issued,  and  delivered  to  Samuel 
Clarke,  who  was  sent  off  express,  at  2  o'clock. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  135 

Wednesdaij^  Januanj  13,  1773. 

The  commissioners  met,  according  to  aeljoiirnment. 

Present — Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Daniel  Horsmanden,  Esq., 
Frederick  Smythe,  Esq.,  Peter  Oliver  Esq.,  and  Robert  Auch- 
muty,  Esq. 

Joseph  Borden,  of  Portsmouth,  inn-holder,  pursuant  to  sum- 
mons, appeared  before  the  commissioners,  and  w;is  examined 
upon  oath  ;  which  examination,  was  taken  in  writing,  and  or- 
dered to  be  filed. 

The  Deposition  of  Joseph  Borden. 

Colony  of  Rhode  Island,   ] 
Ne-wport,  ss.  January  IStli,  1773.      ) 

Joseph  Borden,  of  Portsmonth,  in  the  county  of  Newport,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode 
Island,  &c.,  landholder,  of  lawful  age,  appeared  before  the  honorable  commissioners 
for  Inquiring  into  the  circumstances  of  burning  the  Gaspee,  &c. ;  and  being  sworn 
upon  the  holy  evangelists  of  Almighty  God,  deposeth  and  saith : 

That  some  time  in  the  beginning  of  last  week,  a  man  came  to  his  house,  in  Ports- 
mouth, who  called  himself  Stephen  Gulley ;  he  appeared  to  be  in  litjuor,  and  re- 
quested that  he  might  have  supper  and  lodgings,  which  the  deponent  told  liim  he 
might  have. 

Before  supper,  he  went  from  the  deponent's  house,  in  company  with  one  Thomas 
Aylesbury  ;  and  as  they  had  both  been  noisy  and  used  very  bad  language,  the  de- 
ponent fastened  the  doors  of  his  house,  in  order  to  keep  them  out. 

After  some  time,  this  Stephen  Gulley  returned,  and  knocked  at  the  door ;  upon 
"which,  he  let  him  in,  and  told  him  his  supper  was  ready  in  the  back  room ;  and 
while  he  was  eating  his  supper,  Aylesbury  returned,  and  said  to  Gulley,  "  My  friend, 
I  believe  you  are  upon  some  bad  design,  as  I  understood,  by  your  talk,  you  are  going 
to  Newport  to  give  information  about  the  burning  the  Gaspee." 

To  which,  Gulley  replied,  that  "  It  was  nobody's  business  but  his  own." 

Then  Aylesbury  told  him,  he  would  not  get  to  Newport,  as  there  Avere  a  number 
of  Indians,  with  brass  pistols,  in  the  road,  who  would  take  care  of  him. 

But  this  deponent  in  fact  sayeth,  that  he  did  not  know,  neither  has  he  any  reason 
to  believe,  there  were  any  Indians  in  the  road  leading  to  Newpoi-t ;  and  the  depo- 
nent supposed  that  Aylesbury  told  his  story  to  Gulley,  with  no  other  design  but  to 
frighten  him. 

After  Aylesbury  left  the  room,  Gulley  asked  the  deponent  what  he  should  do ; 
and  as  he  recollected  Aylesbury  was  in  liquor,  and  did  not  know  but  there  might 
be  some  disturbance  between  him  and  Gulley,  he,  the  deponent,  told  Gulley  there 
was  a  lower  road  that  he  might  go  in,  by  which  he  might  avoid  that  which  Ayles- 
bury had  told  him  the  Indians  Avere  in  ;  and  if  he  would  pay  his  reckoning,  he  would 
go  and  direct  him  to  that  road. 

On  which,  he  asked  the  deponent  if  he  would  not  take  a  weapon  with  him. 

Whereupon,  he  replied,  that  he  should  not  take  a  weapon  with  him,  as  he  did  not 


13G  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

believe  any  body  would  hurt  him,  the  deponent,  oi'  the  said  Gullcy ;  and  then  im- 
mediately proceeded  to  show  him  the  road,  by  going  with  him,  as  far  as  his  barn, 
which  is  about  twenty  rods  from  the  deponent's  house  ;  and  showed  him  a  pond,  near 
to  which,  was  a  road  ;  and  directed  him  to  take  that  road,  and  steer  southward,  till 
he  came  into  the  main  road,  which  he  would  soon  do.  The  deponent  then  left 
Gulley,  and  returned  to  his  dwelling  house,  where  he  saw  nobody  but  his  own 
fomily,  either  in  the  house  or  about  it,  and  every  thing  remained  quiet. 

And  this  deponent  further  saith,  that  while  he  was  in  the  kitchen,  soon  after 
Gullcy  came  to  his  liouse,  and  before  Aylesbury  had  told  Gulley  he  believed  he  was 
upon  some  bad  design,  he  heard  a  person  reading  the  King's  proclamation  for  dis- 
covering the  persons  Tv^ho  burnt  the  Gaspee  schooner  ;  upon  which,  Gulley  said  it 
was  a  line  reward,  and  he  intended  to  have  it ;  and  the  deponent  believes  that 
Aylesbury  was  then  in  the  room ;  and  further,  this  deponent  saith  not. 

JOSEPH  BORDEN. 

Sworn  to,  at  Newpoi't,  the  day  and  year  before  written,  before  us, — 

J.  WANTON,  FRED.  S:MYTIIE, 

DAN.  IIORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER. 

ROBT.  AUCIIMUTY, 

Thursday,  Januartj  14,  1773. 

The  commissioners  met,  according  to  adjournment. 

Present — Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Daniel  Horsmanden,  Esq., 
Frederick  Smythe,  Esq.,  Peter  Oliver,  Esq.  and  Robert  Auch- 
muty,  Esq. 

Aaron,  the  mulatto,  appeared  before  the  couimisssioners, 
and  was  examined  upon  oath,  relative  to  the  burning  the  Gas- 
pee,  which  was  taken  in  writing,  and  filed. 

Deposition  of  the  Negro  Aaron  Briggs. 

The  examination  of  Aaron,  a  mulatto,  upon  oath,  taken  this  14t]i  day  of  January, 
A.  D.  1773. 

Aaron  Briggs,  aged  eighteen  years,  or  thereabout,  declares,  that  at  the  age  of  five 
years,  he  was  bound  by  the  town  of  Portsmouth,  an  ajjprentice  to  Capt.  Samuel 
Tompkins,  of  Prudence  Island,  until  he  should  arrive  at  the  age  of  twenty-four 
years  ;  from  which  time,  until  he  went  on  board  the  man-of-war,  he  was  constantly 
in  the  service  of  the  said  Capt.  Tompkins,  as  a  laborer,  on  his  form. 

That  his  master  kept  a  two-mast  boat,  in  which  to  transport  his  farm  pi-oduce  to 
market ;  which  was  the  only  sail-boat  within  five  miles  of  his  master's  farm,  at  the 
time  the  Gaspee  was  burnt. 

That,  at  that  time,  one  Remington,  who  lived  about  one  mile  from  Avhere  the  de- 
ponent lived,  had  a  row-boat,  large  enough  for  six  hands  to  row ;  also,  one  Ephraim 
Peirce,  at  about  a  mile  and  a  half  distaiuee,  had  a  two-mast  boat ;  and  that  the  sails 
of  his  master's  boat,  had  been  taken  off  some  time  before  the  night  on  which  the 
Gaspee  was  burnt ;  and  she  leaked  in  such  a  manner,  that  she  could  not  sail. 

That  a  little  after  sunset,  on  the  night  on  which  the  Gaspee  was  burnt,  he  left  the 


1772.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  137 


island  of  Prudence,  but  does  not  know  the  day  of  the  week,  or  the  day  of  the 
month  ;  that  he  went  off  the  island  in  a  httle  fisliing-boat,  of  two  oars,  which  boat 
lay  just  before  the  house  ;  that  before  sunrise,  and  about  an  hour  after  day-break, 
he  returned  to  his  master's  house,  from  the  shore  Avhere  they  landed  the  people  be- 
longing to  the  Gaspcf  ;  which  shore,  was  about  a  mile  above  said  Gaspee  ;  and  the 
Gaspee  about  six  miles  from  his  master's  house ;  and  that  it  was  about  four  or  five 
miles  from  his  master's,  to  the  place  where  they  lauded  the  Gaspee  people  ;  that  he 
found  the  oars  in  the  boat,  that  he  went  off  said  island  in. 

That  the  reason  he  Avent  off  the  island,  was  to  carry  the  boat  round  to  the  east 
side  of  said  island,  to  carry  a  man  named  Samuel  Faulkner,  a  hired  man,  to  Bristol 
the  next  night ;  and  that  this  young  man  told  the  deponent,  that  he  Avould  ask  his 
master's  leave,  for  that  purpose. 

That  going  round  said  island,  at  about  half  a  mile  from  said  shore  of  said  island, 
he  met  a  boat  and  one  Potter,  whose  Christian  name  he  does  not  know,  and  whom 
he,  in  company  with  Faulkner,  abovenamed,  had  once  seen  on  a  wharf,  at  Bristol, 
and  there  heard  him  called  by  the  name  of  Potter. 

And  further  says,  that  said  Faulkner  told  him,  that  that  was  the  person  who 
owned  the  rope-walk  at  Bristol,  which  they  had  been  in  ;  that  when  he  met  said 
Potter,  as  above  mentioned,  he  was  in  a  boat  which  was  rowed  with  eight  oars ;  that 
the  time  he  met  the  said  Potter,  was  about  half  an  hour  after  he,  this  deponent  left 
the  island,  and  he,  said  Potter,  was  about  five  miles  from  Bristol ;  that  there  were 
eleven  men  in  said  boat;  said  Potter  was  in  the  stern  sheets;  that  the  Aveather  was 
cloudy  ;  that  Avhen  Potter  hailed  him,  they  were  about  fifteen  rods  distant. 

The  first  Avords  Potter  spoke,  Avas  by  asking  Avho  Avas  in  that  boat. 

The  deponent  answered,  he  was  in  there. 

Potter  told  him  to  come  that  way,  he  wanted  to  speak  to  him. 

Upon  which,  he  Avent  to  him ;  and  Potter  told  him  he  Avanted  this  deponent  to 
go  up  Avith  him,  about  a  mile,  and  that  he  Avould  be  back  in  an  hour. 

This  deponent  said  he  could  not ;  he  was  in  a  hurry  to  go  home. 

To  which.  Potter  replied,  he  must  go  with  him. 

The  deponent  ansAvered,  he  could  not ;  he  must  go  home,  or  his  master  Avould 
pimish  him ;  and  this  deponent  then  began  to  row  aAA^ay. 

Potter  told  him  he  wanted  this  deponent  to  go  with  him,  to  fetch  something  doAvn, 
Avhieh  this  deponent  had  forgotten  ;  and  that  he  would  pay  him  for  so  doing. 

This  deponent  said  he  had  rather  go  home,  for  if  his  master  should  miss  him,  he 
Avould  say  he  Avas  out  all  night,  and  flog  him. 

Upon  AAdiich,  Potter  said,  there  is  no  can't  in  the  matter ;  you  must  go  along  with 
me  ;  Ave  shall  be  back  in  an  hour ;  and  further  said,  give  me  your  painter,  you  need 
not  roAv,  we  Avill  carry  you  up  there. 

Upon  Avhich,  this  deponent  gave  them  the  painter ;  that  he,  this  djeponent,  being 
in  his  OAvn  boat,  Avas  roAved  up  by  Potter's  boat,  till  they  came  Avithin  half  a  mile  pf 
the  schooner. 

Potter  then  said  to  this  deponent,  get  into  my  boat ;  that  he  got  into  the  boat ; 
Potter  then  told  him,  they  were  going  to  burn  the  manrofrwar  schooner,  and  that 
he,  this  deponent,  must  go  AvIth  him. 

To  Avhich  he  repUed,  that  it  Avas  hard  for  him  to  be  brought  there,  where  he 
might  lose  his  life. 

Potter  then  said,  they  were  all  upon  their  lives. 

Tliis  deponent  still  repeated,  it  Avas  hard  for  him  to  go. 

VOL.  VIX.  IS 


138  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

But  Potter  said  he  must  go,  now  he  was  there ;  that  they  would  give  him  a  wea- 
pon, and  he  must  do  as  they  did,  knock  them  down,  and  not  let  them  kill  him,  if  he 
could  help  it,  and  gave  him  a  handspike  ;  the  rest  were  armed  some  with  caitlasses, 
some  with  muskets;  this  happened  at  about  10  o'clock,  at  night. 

Potter  further  told  this  deponent,  that  they  expected  sixteen  or  seventeen  more 
boats  from  Providence. 

In  about  an  hour  afterwards,  thej-  met  eight  boats,  about  half  a  mile  from  the 
schooner,  which  appeared  to  be  pretty  full  of  people. 

Upon  their  meeting.  Potter  and  two  men,  called  Brown  by  the  people,  whom  this 
deponent  did  not  know,  talked  about  how  they  should  board  the  schooner.  One  of 
these  person?,  called  Brown,  got  into  Potter's  boat,  on  which  they  were  hailed  from 
the  Gaspee,  and  told  to  stand  off;  upon  Avhich,  Brown  said  row  up. 

Inmiediately  after,  he,  this  deponent,  saw  the  captain  of  the  schooner  come  upon 
deck,  in  his  breeches,  and  fired  a  pistol  into  one  of  the  boats,  and  wounded  one  of 
the  men  in  the  thigh ;  that  he  saw  a  man  who  was  iii  the  boat  with  Potter,  and  who 
was  called  Brown,  fire  a  musket,  which  wounded  the  captain;  after  which,  there 
was  no  more  firing ;  but  they  instantly  boarded  the  schooner ;  that  the  captain  of 
the  schooner,  when  he  was  wounded,  he  thinks,  stood  by  the  foreshrouds,  upon  the 
left  hand  side. 

When  they  got  on  board,  there  were  about  four  of  the  schooner's  men  on  deck, 
and  the  rest  were  coming  up  out  of  the  hold  ;  and  somebody  said,  "  Knock  'em 
down  and  kill  them ;  no  matter  what  you  do  with  them." 

That  this  deponent  did  not  know  the  Browns,  nor  hear  them  called  bv  their 
Christian  names  ;  and  further  declares,  that  it  was  John  Brown,  who  shot  the  cap- 
tain ;  and  that  he  hath  never  seen  either  of  the  Browns  since. 

That  after  they  got  possession  of  the  vessel,  they  took  the  hands  belonging  to  the 
schooner,  and  threw  them  down  the  hold  ;  and  this  happened  about  3  o'clock,  in  the 
morning. 

Then  the  people  searched  the  vessel,  took  the  captain's  jiapers,  which  he  desired 
they  would  give  him ;  but  they  refused,  tore  them,  and  threw  them  overboard.  Then 
they  took  the  Gaspee's  people,  tied  their  hands,  and  j^ut  them  into  the  boat,  and 
carried  them  ashore,  this  deponent  going  with  them. 

By  the  time  they  got  half  way  ashore,  the  schooner  was  on  fire  ;  that  before  they 
went  ashore,  a  doctor,  whom  they  called  Weeks,  from  one  of  the  boats,  dressed  the 
captain's  wounds  ;  that  when  they  had  landed  the  people,  they  untied  their  hands, 
and  let  them  go,  and  the  captain  of  the  schooner  they  carried  up  to  a  house. 

After  they  had  landed  the  men,  they  put  oiF  to  return,  and  Potter  told  them  he 
would  give  him  two  dollars  for  what  he  had  done,  which  he  accordingly  did ;  ujjon 
which,  this  deponent  set  off"  in  his  own  boat,  and  rowed  home ;  that  it  was  about 
four  o'clock,  when  they  had  landed  the  schooner's  people ;  that  it  was  a  moonli"-ht 
night,  but  sometimes  cloudy  ;  that  soon  after  the  people  had  boarded  the  schooner, 
they  hoisted  the  top-sails,  her  head  laying  up  towards  Providence  ;  and  he  saw  nothing 
further  done  to  her,  or  her  sails ;  that  the  schoooner,  when  they  boarded  her,  was 
aground ;  that  the  person  who  acted  as  surgeon,  he  thinks  he  has  seen  at  his  mas- 
ter's house  ;  but  is  not  sure  it  was  the  same  person. 

This  deponent  further  says,  that  the  person  to  whom  he  first  gave  an  account  of 
the  above  affair  of  burning  the  Gaspee,  was  Capt.  Linzee,  of  the  Beaver. 

Some  time  after  the  burning  of  the  schooner,  he  went  on  board  the  Beaver,  in  his 
master's  said  boat ;  that  immecUately  upon  his  going  on  board,  they  put  him  in  irons, 


1772.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  139 


because  iliey  Imagined  he  intended  to  run  away  from  his  master  ;  it  was  about  10 
o'clock,  at  night,  when  the  deponent  was  put  in  irons,  and  was  released  about  10 
o'clock,  the  next  day,  and  then  they  were  going  to  flog  him. 

After  he  was  tied  up  to  the  mast,  one  of  the  Gaspee's  men,  called  Paddy  Alls, 
jumped  up,  and  told  the  captain,  that  he  thought  he,  this  deponent,  was  one  that 
was  aboard  the  schooner  Gaspee. 

About  this  time,  the  deponent  had.said  nothing  about  the  burniug  of  the  schooner^ 
nor  had  made  no  discovery  relating  to  what  he  knew. 

The  captain  asked  the  man  if  he  was  sure  of  It. 

He  said  yes. 

The  captani  asked  what  clothes  he  had  on. 

The  man  said  two  frocks. 

Then  the  captain  told  the  man  to  examine  what  clothes  he  had,  which  they  found 
were  two  frocks. 

There  was  no  mention  made  of  any  other  clothes.  The  next  day,  Paddy  Alis, 
and  the  deponent,  were  called  up  before  the  captain,  who  asked  Paddy  if  he  was 
sure  that  this  deponent  was  one  concerned  in  the  attack  on  the  schooner. 

He  said  yes. 

He  further  asked  him,  if  he  could  swear  to  it. 

He  answered  yes. 

That  the  captain  then  administered  an  oath  to  the  said  Paddy,  upon  the  Bible, 
who  swore  that  this  deponent  was  there. 

The  captain  then  said  to  this  deponent,  "  My  lad,  you  see  this  man  has  declared 
you  was  there ;  and  if  you  don't  tell  who  was  there  with  you,  I  will  hang  you  at  the 
yard  arm,  immediately ;  and  if  you  do,  you  shall  not  be  hurt." 

Upon  which,  this  deponent  told  the  captain  all  the  heads  that  were  there ;  the 
captain  saying  he  did  not  want  to  know  any  thing  about  the  poor  people,  but  only 
the  heads. 

This  deponent  further  says,  that  he  never  spoke  to  any  of  the  Beaver's  crew  till 
he  got  on  board ;  that  his  master's  boat,  in  which  this  deponent  went  on  board  the  ship, 
Ills  master  went  on  board  and  received  again  ;  that  this  deponent  went  on  board  said 
man-of-war  with  an  intention  not  to  return  again  to  his  master  ;  that  he,  tliis  depo* 
nent,  never  was  christened,  and  that  he  should  have  told  Capt.  Linzee  all  he  knew 
relating  to  the  Gaspee,  immediately  upon  his  going  on  board,  if  they  had  not  put 
him  in  iro'ns. 

The  deponent  further  says,  that  the  morning  after  the  burning  of  the  schooner, 
when  he  returned  to  his  master's,  he  went  to  bed  with  two  black  servants,  with  whom 
he  usually  slept ;  he  lay  there  a  little  while,  and  upon  his  master's  knocking,  he  got 
up,  and  went  to  fetch  the  cows. 

That  when  he  first  returned  to  his  master's  house,  he  got  in  at  a  lower  window, 
on  the  south-west  part  of  the  house,  which  opens  into  the  middle  room ;  that  during 
the  whole  transaction  on  said  night  the  schooner  was  burnt,  no  man  called  this  de- 
ponent by  his  name,  or  knew  liim.  his 

AARON    'A  BRIGGS. 
mark. 

Sworn  to,  tins  14th  day  of  January,  A.  D.  1773,  at  the  council  chamber,  in  New- 
port, before  us — 

J.  WANTON,  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER. 

ROBT.  AUCHMUTY, 


140  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  1772. 

The  commissioners  issued  a  summons  for  Patrick  Earle,  to 
appear  before  them,  on  Friday,  the  15th  inst.,  to  give  evi- 
dence of  what  he  knows  respecting  the  burning  of  the  Gas- 
pee,  &c. 

The  commisssioners  received  a  letter  from  Admiral  Mon- 
tagu, acquainting  them  of  his  arrival  at  Newport. 

Admiral  Montagu  to  the  Commissioners^  ^"C. 

NcAvport,  Rhode  Island,  > 
14th  January,  1773.      > 
Gentlemen :— At  your  request  (although  at  a  A'ery  unseasonable  time  of  the  year, 
and  not  in  the  manner  I  am  directed  by  my  instructions  from  my  lords  commission- 
c»3  of  the  admiralty),  I  am  come  to  this  place,  and  have  hoisted  my  flag  on  board 
the  Lizard. 

I  shall  be  glad,  therefore,  that  you  will  inform  me  what  service  I  can  render  to 
you,  in  the  execution  of  your  commission. 

I  flattered  myself  I  had  given  Captain  Keeler  (the  senior  officer  of  His  Majesty's 
ships  here,)  such  orders  as  would  not  have  required  my  attendance,  until  I  was  able 
to  have  come  in  a  proper  manner,  with  the  sliips  under  my  command,  and  at  a 
proper  season  of  the  year,  I  doubt  not  but  that  he  would  have  faithfvilly  put  his 
orders  in  force,  and  have  given  yon  the  same  assistance  I  can  possibly  do,  now  I  am 
come. 

I  have  ordered  Aaron,  the  negro,  to  be   brought  to  the  wharf,  agreeably  to  your 
summons,  Avho  will  be  dehvered  to  your  officer ;  and  I  am  to  desire,  when  you  have 
done  with  him,  the  civil  officers  may  be  directed  to  see  him  safe  to  the  boat  again. 
I  am,  gentlemen, 

Your  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

J.  MONTAGU. 
To  His  Majesty's  commissioners,  at  Ncw]3ort. 

The  commissioners  received  from  Admiral  Montagu,  the 
deposition  of  Patrick  Earle,  taken  the  16th  of  July  last,  before 
a  justice  of  the  peace,  in  the  town  of  Newport. 

The  commissioners  adjourned  till  to-morrow  morning,  at  10 
o'clock. 

Friday,  January  15. 
The  weather  being  extremely  cold  and  violently  stormy,  the 
commissioners  did  not  meet. 


1772.1  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANl'ATIONS.  141 


Sa  turd  a  I/,  January  16. 

The  commissioners  met,  according  to  adjournment. 

Present — Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Frederick  Smythe,  Esq., 
Peter  Oliver,  Esq.  and  Robert  Auchmuty,  Esq. 

Patrick  Earle,  a  mariner,  on  board  His  Majesty's  ship,  the 
Lizard,  pursuant  to  summons,  appeared  before  the  commis- 
sioners, and  was  examined  upon  oath  ;  which  examination 
was  taken  in  writing,  and  ordered  to  be  filed. 

Deposition  of  Patrick  Earle. 

The  examination  of  Patrick  Earle,  taken  on  oath,  this  16th  of  January,  1773  : 

Patrick  Earle,  of  full  age,  a  mariner,  on  board  His  Majesty's  ship  the  Lizard, 
commanded  by  Capt.  Inglis,  being  duly  sworn,  deposeth  and  saith : 

That  he  was  a  sailor  on  board  the  Gaspee  schooner  ;  on  the  1 0th  of  June  last 
when  she  was  run  aground  on  a  spit  of  land,  that  between  1  and  2  clock,  the  captain 
called  all  hands  on  deck ;  and  this  deponent  coming  up  with  the  rest  of  the  sea- 
men, when  he  saw  a  number  of  armed  men,  with  two  or  three  muskets  and  clubs ; 
that  he  saw  those  persons  break  open  the  arm-chest,  and  furnish  themselves  with 
cutlasses. 

Soon  after  this,  this  deponent  was  knocked  down  Avith  a  club,  and  pitched  into 
the  hold ;  and  in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  was  called  upon  deck,  where  his  arms 
were  tied  behind  him,  and  shoved  into  a  boat,  which,  with  about  six  others,  was 
laying  alongside  the  schooner  ;  that  as  soon  as  the  deck  was  cleared  of  all  the  officers 
and  sailors  belonging  to  the  Gaspee,  and  put  into  the  boats,  they  were  rowed  to  a 
small  village,  towards  Providence,  about  three  miles  distant  from  the  schooner, 
Ivhere  they  were  landed. 

This  deponent  further  saith,  that  Lieutenant  Dudingston  was  placed  in  the  stern 
of  the  same  boat,  in  which  he,  the  deponent,  came  on  shore ;  and  that  he,  in  their 
passage  to  the  shore,  contrived  to  unloose  his  arms,  and  took  an  oar  from  a  negro 
man,  at  the  bow  of  the  boat,  whom  he  verily  believes  to  be  the  negro  Aaron,  noAV 
on  board  the  Lizard,  and  helped  him  to  row  the  boat ;  and  that,  to  the  best  of  liis 
belief,  it  was  about  3  or  4  o'clock  in  the  morning,  when  he,  with  the  captain  and  the 
others,  were  landed. 

This  deponent  also  saith,  that  he  well  remembers,  that  while  the  persons  were  at- 
tacking the  sailors  on  board  the  gchooner,  he  heard  the  name  of  Potter  mentioned. 

That  one  of  the  people  said,  "  Potter,  it  is  the  best  way  to  set  the  men  on  shore  ; 
for  that  it  was  not  their  fault,  but  the  officers." 

To  which,  a  person,  then  standing  on  the  quarter-deck,  to  whom  the  above  ex- 
pression was  dii-ected,  who  was  a  tall,  shm  man,  with  a  long,  sharp  nose,  in  light 
colored  long  clothes,  liis  hair  tied  behind,  who  looked  more  like  a  shoreman,  than  a 
seaman,  answered,  "  Let  it  be  so." 

He  also  saith,  that  after  he  was  landed,  he  saw  the  boats  return  towards  the 


142  RECORDS    OP    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

schooner ;  and  in  about   half  an  hour  after,  he  saw  the  scliooner  on  fire,  and  the 
guns  blowing  off;  that  it  was  cloudy  and  calm  weather. 

And  this  deponent  further  sailh,  that  on  the  morning  after  the  negro  Aaron  came 
on  board  the  Beaver,  at  8  o'clock,  he  saw  him  in  irons,  in  the  galley,  and  immedi- 
ately recollected  him  as  the  same  person  whom  he  assisted  to  row  the  boat  as  above 
mentioned ;  but  did  not  speak  to  him,  but  directly  told  one  John  Johnson,  the  boat- 
swain of  the  schooner,  that  he  well  knew  the  negro  was  one  of  the  persons  Avho 
rowed  the  boat  on  shore  with  him. 

That  on  the  next  day,  Capt.  Linzee,  commander  of  the  Beaver,  gave  directions 
to  his  boatswain  to  get  some  spun-yarn,  to  tie  up  the  negro,  and  give  him  two  or 
three  dozen,  to  find  out  what  he  came  on  board  for,  or  if  he  knew  any  thing  con- 
cerning the  burning  the  schooner ;  that  he  was  stripped  in  order  to  be  punished ; 
upon  which,  the  boatswain  of  the  Gaspee  then  called  out,  "  One  of  the  men  knew 
him  to  be  one  of  the  persons  who  rowed  the  captain  on  shore,  and  was  concerned  in 
burning  the  schooner." 

Upon  which,  the  captain  asked  which  of  the  men  knew  him ;  that  he  called  out 
to  tliis  deponent,  and  asked  him  if  he  knew  any  thing  of  the  negi'o,  and  cautioned 
him  to  be  careful  in  his  answers. 

That  the  negro  was  then  ordered  in  irons  again,  and  the  deponent  called  into  the 
cabin  and  ordered  by  the  captain  to  describe  the  negro's  dress  when  on  board  the 
boat,  which  he  did,  to  wit : 

A  spotted  or  checked  handkerchief  round  his  head,  a  frock,  a  pair  of  long  trow- 
sers,  no  shoes,  and  his  hair  tied  behind  not  longer  than  an  inch,  or  an  inch  and  a 
half. 

Soon  after,  the  captain  sent  for  a  justice  from  the  town ;  which  justice  swore  him, 
and  he  confirmed  the  above  account  he  had  given  under  oath,  relative  to  the  negro. 

The  deponent  first  saw  the  schooner  on  fire  about  breakfast  time,  which  was  about 
6  o'clock,  when  he  was  ashore,  when  he  heard  the  guns  of  the  schooner  blow  ofi",  but 
did  not  see  her  from  the  time  he  first  left  her,  till  he  saw  her  on  fire. 

He  sat  alongside  of  the  negro  in  the  boat,  from  the  time  the  boat  put  off 
from  the  schooner,  until  she  struck  the  shore  where  he  landed;-  and  that 
while  rowing  ashore  he  was  cold,  and  asked  the  negro  to  let  liim  row  to  warm 
himself,  which  he  did ;  and  as  they  sat  together,  asked  him,  the  negro,  for  a  chew 
of  tobacco,  Avhich  he  gave  him. 

And  this  dejwnent  further  saith,  that  he  never  saw  the  said  negro,  before  he  saw 
him  in  the  boat.  •  his 

PATRICK  ^    EARLE. 
mark. 

Sworn  to,  at  Newport,  on  the  16th  day  of  January,  A.  D.  1773,  before— 

J.  WANTON,  .'  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER. 

ROBT.  AUCIESIUTY, 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  143 

A*  letter  was  delivered  to  the  commissioners,  by  the  ad- 
miral's clerk,  at  about  half  past  11  o'clock,  from  Admiral 
Montagu,  which  was  ordered  to  be  filed. 

Admiral  Montagu  to  the  Commissioners^  &c. 

Ills  Majesty's  ship  Lizard,  Kewport,  harbor,  -\ 
Ititli  January,  1773.  j" 

Gentlemen : — As  I  am  informed  there  is  a  ship  bound  to  England,  I  shall  em- 
brace the  opportunity  of  writing  to  my  lords  commissioners  of  the  admiralty,  ac- 
quainting them  of  my  proceedings  ;  as  also  of  the  improbability  of  my  remaining 
here,  to  assist  the  commissioners,  until  I  can  come  in  a  proper  manner,  and  at  a 
proper  season  of  the  year. 

I  shall  be  glad  if  you  will  inform  me,  whether  you  think  the  presence  of  Captain 
Dudingston  is  necessary,  that  I  may  apply  to  their  lordships  for  his  being  sent  out 
as  soon  as  convenient. 

As  the  business  of  the  naval  department  is  totally  at  a  stand,  and  cannot  be  car- 
ried on,  without  I  have  my  ships  here,  I  propose  returning  to  Boston  on  Wednesday 
next,  and  shall,  at  a  convenient  time  of  the  year  repair  to  this  place  again,  agreea- 
bly to  my  instructions  from  their  lordships. 

In  the  meantime,  I  shall  take  care  to  leave  such  orders  with  the  senior  officer  of 
His  Majesty's  ships,  as  will  answer  every  purpose  of  my  staying. 

I  shall,  before  I  go,  lay  before  you,  the  names  of  some  persons  who  can  give  you 
information,  relative  to  the  assembling  of  the  people  concerned  in  burning  the 
King's  schooner. 

I  must  beg  your  answer,  as  I  cannot  close  my  letter  to  the  admiralty  until  I  re- 
ceive it.  •  I  am,  gentlemen. 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

J.  MONTAGU. 

To  His  Majesty's  commissioners,  assembled  at  Newport. 

John  Andrew,  Esq.,  judge  of  the  court  of  vice  admiralty,  within  the  colony  of 
Ehode  Island ;  Mr.  Arthur  Fenner,  clerk  in  the  supreme  court,  in  the  county  of 
Providence ;  Messrs.  John  Cole,  George  Brown  and  Daniel  Hitchcock,  attor- 
neys at  law,  in  the  town  of  Providence ;  James  Sabin,  vintner,  in  the  town  of 
Providence. 

It  is  the  desire  of  Admiral  Montagu,  that  the  above  named  persons  may  be  siun- 
moned,  and  examined  before  the  commissioners,  relative  to  the  assembling  of  peo- 
ple in  the  town  of  Providence,  in  the  evening  of  the  9th  of  June  last,  as  a  measure 
necessary,  towards  the  discovery  of  the  persons  concerned  in  the  burning  of  His 
Majesty's  schooner,  the  Gaspee.  J.  MONTAGU. 


144  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

The  commissioners  immediately  agreed  to  an  answer,  as 
well  to  this  letter,  as  to  the  letter  received  from  the  admiral, 
on  the  14th  inst.,  in  the  following  words  : 

The  Commissioners,  ^c,  to  Admiral  Montagu. 

Council  Chamber,  Newjsort,  -» 
January  IG,  1773.  ^ 

Sir : — Yours,  of  the  14th  instant,  Ave  should  have  answered  yesterday,  but  the 
weather  was  so  extremely  bad,  as  to  prevent  the  commissioners  from  meeting. 

You  remark  to  us  your  coming  here  at  a  very  unseasonable  time,  and  not  in  the 
manner  as  you  are  directed  by  your  instructions  ;  to  which,  you  are  sensible  we 
are  not  utter  strangers,  nor  was  it  our  intention  in  writing  to  you,  to  infringe  in  the 
least,  upon  the  same. 

As  Ave  have  already  informed  you  Iioav  oiir  instructions  are  Avorded,  Ave  omit  a  re- 
petition of  the  same ;  but  beg  leave  to  refer  you  to  the  last  paragraph  in  the  com- 
mission, by  Avhich  you  will  perceive  that  we  are  expressly  charged  to  conduct  our- 
selves by  such  instructions  as  Ave  should  receive  under  the  signet  and  sign  manual, 
and  agreeably  to  which,  Ave  have  acted. 

We  have  no  doubt  but  that  Capt.  Keeler  would  have  punctually  obeyed  Aour  or- 
ders. The  difficulty  did  not  arise  on  that  head,  but  from  a  couAiction  of  the  irregu- 
larity of  departing  from  our  instructions. 

We  shall  be  much  obliged  to  you,  when  convenient,  if  you  Avould  attend  us  as  a 
board,  having  some  questions  to  ask  you,  relative  to  the  information  Lieutenant 
Dudingston  gave  you,  concerning  the  burning  and  destroying  the  Gaspee. 
We  are,  sir,  Avith  great  respect. 

Your  most  humble  and  obedient  servants, 
J.  WANTON,  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER. 

ROBT.  AUCHMUTY, 

Commissioners. 
To  the  Honorable  Admiral  Montagu,  commander  in  chief 
of  His  Majesty's  ships,  &c.,  in  North  America. 

The  Commissioners,  (^c,  to  Admiral  Montagu. 

Council  Chamber,  Newport,  ■\ 
January  IG,  1773.        j 
Sir : — After  repeatedly  informing  you  of  our  instructions  ;  and  also  in  our  last,  of 
a  certain  paragraph   in  our  commission,  copies  of  both  Avhich  you  have,  and  our 
sense  of  the  same,  we  submit  the  construction  of  your  orders  from  the  lords  commis- 
sioners of  the  admiralty,  entirely  to  you. 

In  our  last,  and  before  Ave  received  yours  of  this  day,  Ave  had  desired  your  at- 
tendance, in  order  to  give  us  an  account  of  Avhat  Lieutenant  Dudingston  had  related 
to  you,  concerning  the  burning  and  destroying  the  Gasi^ee. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  145 

We  shall  be  always  ready  to  ^ecei^'e  any  information  from  you,  relative  to  the 
business  we  are  met  on ;  and  are,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servants, 
J.  WANTON,  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER. 

ROBT.  AUCMUTY, 

Commissioners. 
To  the  Honorable  Admiral  Montagu,  commander  in  cliief 
of  His  Majesty's  ships  in  North  America. 

Which  letters  were  delivered  to  J.  Brenton,  Esq.,  one  of  the 
secretaries,  who  attended  the  admiral  with  them,  and  delivered 
them  to  the  admiral's  secretary,  the  admiral  being  abroad  ; 
with  the  following  message  from  the  commissioners,  that  they 
were  now  sitting,  and  would  be  glad  to  see  the  admiral  at  the 
board  at  any  time  this  day  before  2  o'clock,  in  the  afternoon  ; 
or  on  Monday  or  Tuesday  next,  if  convenient  to  him. 

At  2  o'clock,  a  message  was  received  by  the  commissioners, 
from  Admiral  Montagu,  acquainting  them  he  would  wait  on 
them  on  Monday  morning  next. 

[While  the  commissioners  were  in  session,  other  officers  of 
the  colony  were,  by  force  of  circumstances,  impelled  to  take 
certain  evidence,  and  hold  certain  correspondence,  which,  as 
the  papers  containing  them,  were  before  the  commissioners, 
are  here  inserted.] 

Deposition  of  Rufus  Greene,  Jr. 

I,  Rufus  Greene,  Jr.,  of  East  Greenwich,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  mariner, 
depose  and  say  : 

That  some  time  in  February  last,  I  was  on  board  of,  and  commanded  the  sloop 
Fortune,  lying  at  anchor  in  the  Nai'ragansett  Bay,  off  North  Kingstown  ;  having  a 
quantity  of  rum  on  board,  belonging  to  Nathaniel  Greene  &  Co.,  when  one  Dundas, 
an  officer  of  the  schooner  Gaspee,  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant  Dudingston, 
came  on  board,  and  asked  this  deponent  if  he  would  take  any  freight  on  board. 

To  which,  this  deponent  answered  no. 

He  then  ordered  this  deponent  to  unlay  the  hatches  ;  and  this  deponent  telling 
the  said  Dundas  that  said  hatches  were  unlaid,  he  then  ordered  him  into  the  cabin. 

And  being  demanded  by  what  authority  he  thus  did,  rephed : 

"  If  you  do  not  go  into  the  cabin,  I'll  let  you  know,"  drawing  his  sword.  He  then 
caught  this  deponent  by  the  collar,  and  pushed  him  into  the  cabin. 

This  deponent  then  came  out  of  said  cabin,  and  went  forward,  to  prevent  the  an- 
chor's being  weighed. 

VOL.  vn.         19 


146  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1772. 

He  then  clenched  upon  this  deponent  again,  thrust  him  into  the  cabin,  jammed 
the  companion  leaf  upon  his  head,  knocked  him  down  upon  a  chest  in  said  cabin, 
and  confined  him  there  for  a  considerable  time. 

After  this,  the  deponent  entreating  the  said  Duudas  to  let  kirn  free,  he  did  so 
and  made  a  seizure  of  said  vessel  and  cargo  (as  he  said),  and  put  the  letter  "B" 
upon  her  hatches  ;  then  towed  said  sloop  to  said  schooner  (it  being  calm),  with 
three  boats. 

This  deponent  being  commanded  aboard  the  schooner,  aforesaid,  obeyed ;  went 
before  said  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  and  after  some  conversation,  was  ordered  from 
his  presence,  and  confined  in  the  gangway. 

This  deponent  asked  said  Dudingston,  if  he  had  a  commission  to  seize,  &c. 

To  which,  said  Dudingston  answered,  that  he  liail  a  good  commission  from  His 
Majesty ;  but  showed  none. 

The  next  day,  this  deponent  was  put  on  board  another  vessel ;  and  further  saitli 
not.  RUFUS  GREENE,  JR. 

Kent,  ss.  East  Greenwich,  January  14,  1  773. 

Personally  appeared  the  above  deponent,  Rufus  Greene,  Jr. ;  and  being  cautioned 
to  speak  the  truth,  made  solemn  oath  upon  the  evangelists  of  Almighty  God,  that 
the  before  going  nari-ative  is  true  in  all  its  parts. 

Coram,  HOPKINS  COOKE, 

Justice  Peace. 

I  do  hereby  certify,  that  the  above  deponent  is  of  a  respectable  family,  sober  life, 
and  ought  to  be  credited.  H.  COOKE, 

Justice  Peace. 


Deputy   Governor    Sessions   to   Governor    Wanton,    relative    to 
Capt.  William  Thayer,  and  Saul  Ramsdale. 

Providence,  January  15,  1773. 

Sir : — This  forenoon  came  to  my  house,  Capt.  William  Thayer,  of  Mendon,  and 
informed  me  that  he  had  been  cited  by  the  honorable  commissioners  at  Newport, 
to  appear  before  them  this  day,  and  declare  what  he  knew  relative  to  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Gaspee. 

He  tells  me  he  is  near  seventy  years  of  age,  grievously  afHicted  with  the  rheuma- 
tism, attended  with  many  symptoms  of  a  paralysis ;  and  that  riding  yesterday  in  the 
cold,  stormy  weather,  has  revived  and  so  much  increased  his  disorder,  that  he  wpg 
unable  to  proceed  to  Newport,  but  must  endeavor  to  return  home  as  soon  as  possi- 
ble ;  besides,  he  declared  he  knew  nothing  of  the  aflfair  for  which  he  was  sum- 
moned and  soUcited  me  very  much  to  take  his  examination,  and  transmit  it  to  the 
commissioners. 

I  at  last  yielded  to  his  request,  and  have  enclosed  to  Your  Honors  his  deposition 
which,  if  vou  think  proper,  may  be  laid  before  the  commissioners. 

I  have  known  Mr.  Thayer  for  many  years  past,  and  have  always  understood  that 
he  was  a  man  of  good  character.  He  says,  if  the  gentlemen  who  cited  him,  had 
any  idea  of  the  villainy  of  the  fellows  who  informed  them,  neither  he,  nor  any  one 
else,  he  believes,  had  been  troubled  by  them. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  147 

And  this  evening,  another  person  (one  Ramsdale)  came  to  me,  who  said  he  also 
was  smnmoned  to  Newport,  upon  some  occasion,  and  that  he  knew  nothing  respect- 
ing the  matter  for  which  he  was  cited ;  and  urged  me  very  much  to  take  his  depo- 
sition to  that  purpose,  that  he  might  be  dismissed ;  but  as  he  appeared  to  be  a 
young,  healthy  man,  and  lest  the  commissioners  might  conceive  I  was  too  officious, 
in  previously  examining  their  witnesses,  I  advised  him  to  deliver  what  he  had  to 
say,  to  the  commissioners. 

I  am,  sir,  with  the  greatest  respect. 

Your  Honor's  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

DARIUS  SESSIONS. 
To  Governor  Wanton. 

P.  S.  Since  I  wrote  the  above,  I  received  a  deposition  from  Greenwich,  which 
I  have  also  enclosed  to  Your  Honors. 


Deposition  of  Capt.  William  Thayer,  of  Mendon. 

Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.  : 

The  examination  of  Capt.  William  Thayer,  of  Mendon,  in  the  county  of  Worces- 
ter, in  the  Province  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  innholder,  taken  in  Providence,  in  the 
colony  aforesaid,  this  15th  day  of  January,  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  His  Majesty's 
reign,  Anno  Domini  1773,  by  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor  of  said  colony. 

Question-^Do  you  know  any  circumstances  relative  to  the  attacking,  taking, 
plundering  and  burning  His  Majesty's  schooner,  called  the  Gaspee,  and  to  the  as- 
sembling, arming,  training,  and  leading  on  the  people  concerned  therein ;  and  to 
the  concerting  and  jireparing  said  attack  ? 

Answer — No. 

Q. — Where  was  you,  when  said  schooner  was  destroyed,  which  was  on  the  10th 
day  of  June  last '? 

A. — At  home,  in  Mendon. 

Q. — How  far  is  that  from  Providence  ? 

A. — About  twenty-two  miles. 

Q. — How  long  a  time  after  the  schooner  was  destroyed,  before  you  was  in 
Providence  ? 

A. — I  was  not  there  until  the  latter  end  of  June,  or  the  beginning  of  July. 

Q. — Did  you  hear  any  person  say,  when  you  was  in  Providence,  or  at  any  other 
time  or  place,  that  they  knew  any  of  those  persons  that  were  concerned  in  that 
affair  ? 

A.— No. 

Q. — Did  you  ever  hear  the  names  of  any  persons  suspected  to  be  concerned  in 
that  matter  ? 

A. — I  heard  the  names  of  one  Potter  and  Brown  or  Browns,  but  did  not  know 
them,  nor  where  they  lived.     I  don't  recollect  any  other. 

Q. — Do  you  remember  who  mentioned  those  names  ? 

A. — No ;  it  being  only  some  rumor  which  I  heard  among  the  people  in  my  house, 
it  being  a  pubUc  one.  WILLIAiM  THAYER. 


148  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

On  the  day  and  year  abovesaid,  William  Thayer,  the  subscriber  to  the  above  ex- 
amination, made  solemn  oath  to  the  truth  of  the  several  answers  annexed  to  the 
foregoing  interrogations,  before—  DARIUS  SESSIONS, 

Deputy  Governor. 

Deposition  of  Daniel  Vavglian. 

I,  Daniel  Yaughan,  of  Newport,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  being  of  lawful 
age,  do  depose  and  say  : 

That  some  time  in  the  summer  last  past,  being  in  a  sloop,  taking  out  some  old 
iron  from  the  wreck  of  the  Gaspee,  and  afterwards  going  down  to  Newport,  in  said 
sloop,  in  company  with  Capt.  Linzee,  in  His  Majesty's  ship,  the  Beaver,  one  morn- 
ing, not  far  from  the  island  of  Prudence,  I  saw  a  small  boat  alongside  the  Beaver, 
and  immediately  told  the  people  on  board  the  sloop,  that  somebody  had  gone  on 
board  the  Beaver  that  night. 

A  few  days  afterwards,  as  the  Beaver  lay  at  Newport,  near  the  fort,  I  was  oi'- 
dered  to  haul  the  sloop  I  was  in,  alongside  the  schooner,  which  then  lay  alongside 
the  Beaver,  in  order  to  take  out  some  sugar ;  and  going  on  board  the  Beaver,  I  saw 
a  mulatto  fellow  under  the  forecastle,  in  irons. 

I  said  unto  him,  "  So  you  are  one  of  the  rogues  that  have  been  burning  the 
Gaspee." 

He  rephed,  "  He  never  saw  her,  nor  knew  any  thing  about  her." 

I  then  asked  him  what  he  came  there  for. 

He  answered,  "  His  master  had  used  him  badly,  and  he  was  determined  to  leave 
him." 

Two  or  three  days  afterwards,  being  on  board  said  schooner,  I  heard  Capt. 
Linzee  order  said  mulatto  to  be  carried  out  of  the  Beaver,  on  board  said  schooner, 
and  then  to  be  tied  up  to  the  mast  and  whipped ;  and  after  he  was  laid  hold  on, 
and  they  were  about  to  tie  him  up  to  the  mast,  he  began  to  declare  he  knew  some 
of  the  people  that  burnt  the  Gaspee ;  and  that  Simeon  Potter,  John  Brown  and 
others  (whose  names  I  have  forgotten),  were  concerned  therein. 

Upon  this  confession,  he  was  released  from  a  whipping,  sent  on  board  the  Beaver, 
where  I  afterwards  saw  him  in  irons,  on  the  quarter  deck. 

DANIEL  VAUGHAN. 

Providence  sc.  Providence,  January  16,  1773. 

Daniel  Vaughan  appeared  in  person,  and  made  solemn  oath  to  the  truth  of  the 
foregoing  declaration,  unto  which  he  has  subscribed,  before — 

DARIUS  SESSINONS, 

Deputy  Governor. 

The  commissioners  then  adjourned  the  business  of  the  com- 
mission to  Monday  morning,  at  10  o'clock. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  149 

Monday,  January  18. 

The  commissioners  met,  according  to  adjournment. 

Present — Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Daniel  Horsmanden,  Esq. 
Frederick  Smythe,  Esq.,  Peter  Oliver,  Esq.,  and  Robert  Auch- 
muty,  Esq. 

The  Hon.  Admiral  Montagu  waited  upon  the  commissioners, 
agreeably  to  his  message  of  Saturday  last. 

The  admiral  laid  before  the  commissioners,  letters  which  he 
had  received  from  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  during  his  resi- 
dence at  Pawtuxet  and  Newport,  after  the  destroying  of  the 
schooner  Gaspee. 

The  admiral  also  delivered  to  the  commissioners,  a  list  of 
persons  who  reside  in  Providence,  as  material  witnesses,  rela- 
tive to  the  assembling  of  the  people,  prior  to  the  attacking  the 
Gaspee  ;  in  consequence  of  which,  they  ordered  a  summons  to 
be  issued  for  John  xindrews,  Esq.,  John  Cole,  Esq.,  Daniel 
Hitchcock,  Esq.  and  George  Brown,  attorneys  at  law,  and 
Arthur  Fenner  and  James  Sabin,  to  attend  on  Wednesday 
next,  at  11  o'clock,  which  was  issued  accordingly. 

The  summonses  were  delivered  to  Samuel  Clarke,  who  was 
sent  as  express,  by  the  commissioners,  at  twenty  minutes  after 
3  o'clock. 

Deputy  Governor  Sessions  to  Governor  Wanton,  relative  to 
Barzillai  Richmond,  Joseph  Brown,  John  Brown  and  Daniel 
Vaughan. 

Providence,  January  18,  1773. 

Sir : — In  consequence  of  an  application  made  unto  me,  in  writing,  signed  by  Bar- 
zillai Richmond,  Joseph  Brown  and  John  Brown,  I  summoned  Daniel  Vaughan, 
and  took  his  deposition  relative  to  what  he  knew  respecting  the  treatment  of  the 
mulatto  Aaron,  on  board  the  Beaver,  and  I  herewith  enclose  it  to  Your  Honor. 

I  had  not  done  it,  but  our  river  is  fast  shut  up,  and  it  is  very  uncertain  when  Mr. 
Vaughan  will  reach  Newport. 

I  choose  Mr.  Vaughan  should  give  his  deposition  before  the  commissioners,  if  he 
arrives  in  season  for  that  purpose ;  but  if  he  doth  not,  and  you  think  proper  to  make 
use  of  what  I  now  send,  you  have  liberty  to  improve  it  in  any  way  you  thinlc  it  may 
promote  truth  and  justice. 

I  am,  sir,  your  humble  servant,  DARIUS   SESSIONS. 

To  Governor  Wanton. 


150  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772, 

Deputy  Governor  Sessions  to  Governor  Wanton,  relative  to  the 
Deposition  of  the  Negro  Aaron  Briggs,  &c. 

Pro\-idenee,  January  18th,  1773. 

Sir : — Having  been  informed  by  a  person,  who  came  from  Newport  last  Satur- 
day, that  the  mulatto  had  been  examined,  and  that  a  report  prevailed,  that  his 
e-vidence  carried  many  marks  of  truth  with  it ;  and  as  it  is  impossible  (as  I  think,) 
that  there  can  be  a  word  of  truth  in  it,  and  as  I  look  upon  it  as  my  duty  to  protect 
the  innocent,  as  well  as  punish  the  guilty,  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  let  Your  Honor 
know  of  some  circumstances  that  may  throw  some  light  on  this  affair. 

I  took  notice  in  the  mulatto's  declaration  of  his  having  a  red  and  white  handker- 
chief about  his  head  at  the  time  he  was  on  board  the  Gaspee,  and  when  he  rowed 
the  boat  ashore. 

I  suppose  he  was  told  to  relate  this  circumstance,  that  some  of  the  Gaspee's  peo- 
ple might,  with  the  greater  a^Dpearance  of  truth,  swear  to  his  being  on  board  the 
schooner  that  night. 

The  day  after  the  Gaspee  was  destroyed,  I  examined  several  of  her  people,  viz. : 
Bartholomew  Cheever,  John  Johnson,  William  J.  Caple,  Joseph  Bowman,  Patrick 
Whaler,  Patrick  Earle  and  Patrick  Reynolds ;  who,  although  the  cjuestions  and 
answers  were  not  set  down  in  writing,  yet  I  can  depose  that  they  were  jDut  ver- 
bally. The  answers  given  by  some  of  them  (the  rest  agreeing  thereto),  are  as  fol- 
lows, viz. : 

Question — Was  the  moon  down  ? 

Answer — Yes. 

Q.— Was  it  dark  ? 

A.— Yes. 

Q. — Was  there  any  light  on  board  of  the  schooner,  when  she  was  boarded  by  the 
boats  •? 

A. — Yes  ;  but  it  was  immediately  put  out  before  we  got  on  deck. 

Q. — Was  there  no  other  light  afterwards  struck  up  ? 

A. — Xot  that  they  saw  ;  though  they  believe  there  was  one  lighted  up  in  the 
cabin,  to  dress  the  lieutenant's  wounds. 

Q. — Were  the  people  who  came  on  board  unmasked,  or  in  disguise  ? 

A. — Some  of  tliem  were  either  blacked  or  negroes  ;  but  It  Avas  so  dark,  we  could 
not  tell  which. 

The  above  questions  put  to  any  of  the  Gaspee's  people,  who  pretend  to  establish 
the  negi'o's  evidence,  by  swearing  to  the  identity  of  him,  I  think,  must  convince  any 
one,  that  then-  testimony  is  absolutely  false. 

The  midshipman  at  Boston,  swore  that  it  was  a  very  dark  night ;  and  how  is  it 
possible  that  the  features  and  dress  of  a  negro  could  be  sworn  to,  a  month 
afterwards  ? 

I  am  requested  by  some  persons  in  this  town,  to  Inform  Your  Honor,  that  one 
David  James,  a  young  man,  who  served  his  time  in  this  town,  and  Is  properly  an  in- 
habitant thereof,  was  last  week  Impressed  out  of  a  sloop  belonging  here,  Joseph  Til. 
hnghast,  master,  and  carried  on  board  the  schooner  Halifax. 

The  young  man  was  born  in ,  In  Virginia,  where  he  had  left  him,  by  his 

father,  some  estate  in  land  ;  which,  by  several  letters  of  a  late  date  from  his  brother, 
and  his  guardian,  appears  to  be  sold,  and  that  the  money  thereof,  will  be  sent  to  him 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  151 

very  soon,  by  a  schooner,  that  is  now  gone  there.     I  have  seen  the  letters  myself, 
tliis  day,  and  make  no  doubt  but  they  are  genuine. 

If  Your  Honor  will  interpose  so  far  as  to  use  your  endeavors  to  get  him  dis- 
charged, you  will  do  a  singular  favor  to  the  young  man,  and  to  his  actiuaintances 
here.     If  he  remains  in  confinement,  there  Avill  be  nobody  to  take  care  of  his  money 
or  goods  that  may  be  sent  him  from  his  jiatrimony,  which  will  be  his  total  ruin. 
I  am,  sir,  )'our  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

DARIUS  SESSIONS. 
To  Governor  Wanton. 

The  commissioners  adjourned  till  to-morrow,  at  10  o'clock. 

Tuesday^  January  19. 

The  commissioners  met,  according  to  adjournment. 

Present — Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Daniel  Ilorsmanden,  Esq., 
Frederick  Smythe,  Esq.,  Peter  Oliver,  Esq.,  and  Robert  Auch- 
muty,  Esq. 

Peter  May  attended  the  commissioners,  pursuant  to  sum- 
mons, and  was  examined  upon  oath  ;  which  examination  was 
reduced  to  writing,  and  ordered  to  be  filed. 

Deposition  of  Peter  May. 

The  examination  of  Peter  May,  taken  upon  oath,  this  19th  day  of  January, 
A.  D.  1773: 

Peter  May,  of  lawful  age,  being  duly  sworn,  deposoth  and  saith  : 

That  he  was  late  a  mariner  on  board  Plis  Majesty's  schooner  Gaspee  ;  and  that 
some  time  last  summer,  as  they  Avere  going  in  said  schooner,  towards  Providence, 
about  2  or  3  o'clock,  in  the  afternoon,  they  struck  aground,  upon  a  point  of  land, 
about  a  musket  shot  from  the  land  ;  that  she  lay  so  dry,  that  they  walked  around 
her,  and  scraped  her  bottom,  the  water  being  about  one  foot  on  one  side,  and  about 
two  feet  on  the  otber. 

That  they  got  an  anchor  out,  and  endeavored  to  get  her  off;  but  after  striving 
till  sunset,  they  desisted  from  any  further  attempts ;  all  but  the  watch,  which  con- 
sisted of  three,  were  ordered  by  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  to  go  to  sleep. 

That  between  12  and  1  o'clock,  the  schooner  was  attacked  by  a  number  of  boats 
with  people  on  board,  armed  some  with  clubs,  some  with  other  weapons. 

That  this  deponent  was  below  at  the  time  the  people  boarded  the  schooner ;  and 
■when  he  came  upon  deck,  he  saw  Lieutenant  Dudingston  discharge  a  jiistol ;  but 
whether  it  wounded  anybody,  he  cannot  tell ;  immecliately  after,  he  saw  a  man  in 
the  bow  of  one  of  the  boats  fire  a  musket,  and  wound  the  lieutenant ;  upon  which, 
the  lieutenant  cried  out,  "  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me  ;  I  am  done  for  !" 

That  immediately  after  this,  the  deponent  was  knocked  down  the  hatchway,  and 


152  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

recovering  himself,  went  into  the  steerage,  in  order  to  get  some  clothes,  and  from 
thence  stepped  into  the  cabin,  and  there  heard  the  lieutenant  desire  the  people  not 
to  haul  and  pull  him  about,  as  they  did,  but  to  assist  him  ;  on  which,  they  said  they 
had  no  doctors,  but  would  send  him,  as  soon  as  they  could,  to  a  place  where  they 
could  get  one. 

He  soon  after,  when  the  lieutenant  Avas  on  deck,  heard  several  people  ask  him 
whether  he  would  make  amends  for  the  rum  which  he  had  seized  out  of  the  sloop  ; 
and  if  he  would,  they  would  return  him  the  schooner ;  one  of  which  people,  was 
named  Greene,  whom  he  saw  in  the  cabin  of  the  Gaspec,  the  day  after  they  had 
seized  a  sloop,  of  which  he  appeared  to  be  the  owner,  and  out  of  which,  he  took 
some  rakes. 

This  deponent  saith,  that  the  said  Greene  is  a  tall,  slender  man ;  wearing  his  own 
hair,  of  a  brown  color. 

This  deponent  further  saith,  that  after  they  had  taken  possession  of  the  Gaspee, 
the  hands  belonging  to  the  Gaspee,  were  put  into  a  boat,  and  row£d  ashore  at  a 
place  about  a  mile  distant,  between  3  and  4  o'clock,  in  the  morning,  and  that  he  saw 
the  schooner  on  fire  when  they  were  about  half  way  to  the  shore,  and  the  fire  began 
upon  the  quarter  deck.     And  further  this  deponent  saith  not.  his 

PETER    y,  MAY. 
mark. 

Sworn  to,  at  Newport,  on  the  19th  day  of  Januai-y,  A.  D.  1773,  at  the  council 
chamber,  Newport,  before — ■ 

J.  WANTON,  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER, 

ROBT.  AUCHMUTY, 


Robert  Masters,  who  was  also  summoned,  appeared,  and 
upon  examination  on  oath,  there  appearing  nothing  material 
in  his  testimony,  he  was  discharged,  without  making  any  depo- 
sition. 

The  commissioners  received  a  letter  from  Admiral  Montagu, 
which  was  read,  and  ordered  to  be  filed. 

An  answer  was  immediately  ordered  ;  which  was  accord- 
ingly written  in  the  following  words,  and  delivered  to  the  ad- 
miral, by . 

Admiral  Montagu  to  the  Commissioners,  Sfc. 

Newport,  U»th  January,  1773. 

Gentlemen  :— As  an  opportunity  offers,  for  sending  to  England,  I  am  wiUing  to 
embrace  it,  to  inform  my  lords  commisioners  of  the  admiralty  of  my  arrival  and  pro- 
ceedings at  this  place. 

As  you  were  pleased  to  signify  to  me  your  intention  of  writing  upon  the   subject 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  153 

of  adjourning  your  court,  I  shall  be  glad  to  receive  it  as  soon  as  possible,  that  I  may 
close  my  public  letters,  as  I  pi-opose  leaving  this  place  to-morrow  morning. 
I  am,  with  respect,  gentlemen. 

Your  most  obedient,  and  most  humble  servant, 

J.  MONTAGU. 
To  His  Majesty's  commissioners,  &c.,  at  Newport. 


The  Commissioners,  ^c,  to  Admiral  Montagu. 

Council  Chamber,  Newport,  7 
January  19th,  1773.  ) 
Sir  : — In  our  last  conversation  with  you,  you  were  pleased  to  inform  us  that  by  re- 
port, Capt.  Dudingston  had  made  such  declarations  at  Boston,  relative  to  his  recollec- 
tion of  the  persons  concerned  in  the  destruction  of  the  Gaspee,  that  his  testimony  would 
be  very  material  in  our  present  inquiry  ;  and  from  the  language  of  Mr.  Dudingston's 
letter  to  you,  which  you  laid  before  us,  we  must  be  of  the  same  opinion,  as  it  is  our 
determined  resolution  to  do  all  in  our  power  faithfully  to  execute  the  commission 
His  Majesty  has  thought  fit  to  honor  us  with.  We  must  request  of  you  to  take  such 
measures  as  you  think  proper,  to  get  Capt.  Dudingston  to  America,  in  order  that  he 
may  be  examined. 

In  the  same  conversation,  you  also  informed  us,  that  at  this  inclement  season  ot 
the  year,  it  was  unpossible  for  you  properly  to  execute  your  orders  relative  to  the 
aifair  we  are  now  met  on,  and  that  the  other  duties  of  your  department  must  suffer 
if  you  did  not  very  soon  return  to  Boston  ;  and  and  therefore  it  was  your  determi- 
nation to  go  thither  to-morrow,  or  next  day,  if  possible. 

Your  absence  from  us,  you  are  sensible,  as  we  construe  our  instructions,  and  as 
we  yesterday  informed  you,  must  make  an  adjournment  of  this  board  necessary. 
Indeed,  without  this  difficulty,  it  is  highly  probable  we  should  soon  find  ourselves 
under  a  necessity  of  adopting  the  same  measure,  for  the  want  of  Capt.  Dudingston, 
and  from  the  extreme  rigor  of  the  season,  which  renders  it  almost  imjiossible  to  get 
witnesses  who  are  at  any  distance  from  us. 

We  are,  with  the  greatest  respect, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servants, 
J.  WANTON,  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER, 

ROBT.  AUCHMUTY, 

Commissioners. 
To  the  Honorable  Admiral  Montagu,  commander  in  chief 
of  His  Majesty's  ships,  &c.,  in  North  America, 

P.  S.  Though  the  time  to  which  the  commissioners  will  adjourn,  is  not  absolutely 
fixed,  yet  it  seems  to  be  their  opinion,  that  it  must  be  on  or  about  the  26th  of  May 
next ;  which,  they  hope,  will  be  agreeable  to  you. 

VOL.  VII.  20 


154  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

The  commissioners  also  received  another  letter  from  the  ad- 
miral, enclosing  the  deposition  of  Aaron  Briggs,  taken  the 
day  of ,  which  was  ordered  to  be  filed. 

[According  to  the  preceding  journal  of  the  commissioners, 
two  or  three  letters,  which  passed  betw^een  them  and  the  ad- 
miral, are  wanting,  to  complete  the  file  of  their  correspondence. 
During  their  session,  they  examined  several  witnesses,  and 
held  correspondence  with  several  others.] 

Arthur  Fenner  to  Governor  Wanton,  relative  to  the  Gaspee. 

rrovidcnco,  January  19,  1773. 
Honorable  Sir  : — I  received  a  citation,  signed  by  you,  and  a  number  of  other  gen- 
tlemen, commanding  my  attendance  at   the  colony  house,  in  Newport,  on  the  20th 
day  of  January  instant,  to  give  in  evidence  to  what  I  know  relative  to  the  attacking, 
taking  and  plundering  His  Majesty's  schooner,  called  the  Gaspee,  &c. 

In   consequence  of  which,  I  now  inform  you,  that  I   am  a  man  of  seventy-four 
years  of  age,  and  very  infirm ;  and  at  the  time  said  schooner  was  taken  and  plun- 
dered, I  was  in  my  bed,  and  I  knew  nothing  of  it  until  the  next  day  ;  and  as  for 
my  not  attending,  as  commanded,  I  must  plead  my  age  and  infirmity  in  excuse. 
From  your  most  obedient  friend  and  humble  servant, 

ARTHUR  FENNER. 
To  the  Honorable  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq. 

James  Sabin  to  the  Commissioners,  ^c. 

Providence,  January  19th,  1773. 
To  the  honorable  the  commissioners  appointed  to  inquire  into  the  circumstances 
relative  to  the  destroying  the  schooner  Gaspee. 

Gentlemen  : — I  now  address  you,  on  account  of  a  summons  I  received  from  you, 
requiring  my  attendance  at  the  council  chamber,  in  Newport,  on  Wednesday,  20th 
instant. 

Now,  gentlemen,  I  beg  leave  to  acquaint  you,  what  renders  me  incapable  of  at- 
tending. In  the  first  place,  I  am  an  insolvent  debtor ;  and  therefore,  my  person 
would  be  subject  to  an  arrest  by  some  one  or  other  of  my  creditors ;  and  my  health 
has  been  on  decline  these  two  months  past,  and  it  would  be  dangerous  should  I 
leave  my  house. 

And  further,  were  I  to  attend,  I  could  give  no  information  relative  to  the  assem- 
bling, arming,  training  and  leading  on  the  people  concerned  in  destroying  the 
schooner  Gaspee. 

On  the  9th  day  of  June  last,  at  night,  I  was  employed  at  my  house,  attending 
company  ;  who  were  John  Andrew,  Esq.,  judge  of  the  court  of  vice  admiralty,  John 
Cole,  Esq.,  Mr.  Hitchcock  and  George  Brown,  who  supped  at  my  house  and  stayed 


1112.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  155 


there  until  two  of  the  clock,  in  the  morning  following ;  and  I  have  not  any  know- 
ledge relative  to  the  matter  on  which  I  am  summoned ;  which  I  am  1-eady  to  make 
oath  to,  before  any  justice  of  the  peace. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  most  respectfully. 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

JAMES  SABIN. 
To  the  Honorable  Commissioners. 


The  commissioners  adjourned  till  to-morrow,  at  10  o'clock. 


Wednesday,  January  20. 

The  commissioners  met,  according  to  adjournment. 

Present — Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Daniel  Horsmanden,  Esq., 
Frederick  Smythe,  Esq.,  Peter  Oliver,  Esq.,  Robert  Auch- 
muty,  Esq. 

The  commissioners  directed  copies  of  the  several  letters 
which  have  passed'  between  them  and  Admiral  Montagu, 
to  be  made  out,  in  order  to  be  transmitted  to  the  Earl  of 
Dartmouth. 

George  Brown,  to  the  Commissioners,  ^c. 

East  Greenwich,  January  20th,  1773. 

May  it  please  Your  Honors  : — Late  last  night,  I  received  a  summons  from  Provi- 
dence, to  appear  at  the  council  chamber,  in  NeAvport,  before  Your  Honors,  there  to 
give  evidence  of  what  I  know  concerning  the  burning  of  the  schooner  Gaspee  ;  and 
I  should  have  waited  on  Your  Honors,  accordingly ;  but,  as  the  court  of  common 
pleas  was  then  sitting  in  the  county  of  Kent,  and  being  concerned  in  several  cases 
then  pending  in  said  court,  I  could  not  possibly  attend  according  to  summons  ; 
therefore,  I  hope  you  will  excuse  my  not  attending. 

It  has  long  been  a  custom  for  the  attorneys,  upon  the  concluding  evening  of 
filing  pleas  to  the  court,  to  meet  together,  to  spend  the  evening. 

That  night,  the  said  schooner  was  burnt,  happened  to  be  the  concluding  evening 
of  fihng  pleas ;  accordingly,  the  gentlemen  of  the  bar,  together  with  myself,  met 
at  the  house  of  James  Sabin,  in  Providence,  that  being  a  public  house  of  enter- 
tainment. 

Some  time  after,  I  being  there,  heard  a  drum  beat ;  I  asked  the  reason  of  said 
drum  beating ;  I  was  answered  by  some  one  of  the  companj^,  that  there  was  a  num- 
ber of  boys  met  together,  they  supposed,  to  divert  themselves. 

I  knowing  it  to  be  no  uncommon  thing,  thoiight  no  more  about  it ;  and  do  sol- 
emnly declare,  that  I  have  no  knowledge,  directly  or  indirectly,  of  any  plot  being 


156  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLO!^Y    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  1Y72. 

laid,  or  person  concerned  in  perpetrating  so  vile  a  crime,  and  shall  be  ready  at  all 
times,  when  in  ray  power,  to  appear  and  answer  any  question  relating  to  said 
affair,  if  required.  I  am,  gentlemen, 

Your  Honors'  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

G.  BROWN. 
To  the  Honorable  Commissioners. 


John  Andrews^  to  the  Commissioners,  ^c. 

Pro\'idence,  January  20,  1773. 
Gentlemen  : — I  this  day  received  a  sununons  at  12  o'clock,  requesting,  my  attend- 
ance at  11  o'clock,  this  day,  at  the  court  house,  in  Newport,  in  order  to  give  evi- 
dence before  Your  Honors  to  that  knowledge  I  have,  relating  to  the  burning  and 
destropng  His  Majesty's  schooner,  called  the  Gaspee  ;  and  to  the  assembling,  arm- 
ing, training  and  leading  the  people  concerned  therein. 

I  should  have  cheerfully  obeyed  said  summons,  had  my  health  permitted  ;  but  I 
have  been  confined  for  a  week  past,  with  a  swelling  in  my  hand,  which  hath  ren- 
dered me  unable  to  stir  out  of  doors. 

But  as  soon  as  I  am  able,  I  shall  wait  upon  Your  Honors,  and  inform  you  of  all 
I  know,  relating  to  that  matter,  which  Your  Honors  will  judge  just  nothing  at  all 
to  the  purpose. 

I  am,  with  great  regard. 

Your  Honors'  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant. 


JOHN  ANDREWS. 


To  the  Honorable  Commissioners. 


P.  S.  I  have  judged  proper  to  inform  Your  Honors  of  all  particulars  of  know- 
ledge I  have,  relating  to  the  burning  His  Majesty's  schooner,  called  the  Gaspee,  in 
the  Narragansett  River. 

I  was  in  Providence  town  the  evening  before  the  mischief  was  done,  and  in  com- 
pany with  a  number  of  gentlemen  ;  I  heard  a  disturbance  in  the  street,  and  in- 
quired into  the  cause,  and  was  answered  that  it  had  been  a  training  day,  and  they 
were  breaking  up  their  frolic  ;  and  I  heard  nothing  fui-ther  that  evening,  relative 
thereto,  but  went  to  bed ;  and  nigh  morning,  was  surprised  with  the  news  of  the 
said  schooner's  being  burned  and  destroyed. 

I  then  waited  upon  the  Deputy  Governor  immediately  ;  and  he,  with  me,  repaired 
to  the  spot,  where  we  found  ]VIi\  Dudingston  badly  wounded,  and  the  said  schooner 
appeared  at  a  distance  to  be  on  fire,  and  burned  down  to  the  water. 

And  the  Deputy  Governor  inquired  of  Mr.  Dudingston  if  he  had  any  knowledge 
of  any  of  the  trespassers. 

And  he  made  answer,  that  he  should  give  no  account  about  the  matter,  before  he 
■was  brought  before  the  court  martial,  where  he  expected  his  trial ;  but  was  willing 
that  his  people  should  declare  all  they  knew  of  the  matter  ;  and  were  sworn  before 
the  Deputy  Governor,  accordingly. 

I INli-.   Dudingston  afterwards,  and  desired  him,  if  he  had  any 

knowledge  of  any  of  the  persons  who  did  the  mischief,  he  would  inform  me  thereof, 


1772.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  157 

that  they  may  be  brought  to  condign  punishment ;  but  alwaj's  decHned  saying  any- 
thing at  all. 

And  this  is  the  substance  of  the  knowledge  I  have  of  the  matter ;  which  I  am 
ready  to  swear  to.  JOHN  ANDREWS. 

To  the  Honorable  Commissioners. 


Daniel  Hitchcock  to  the  Commissioners,  %-c. 


East  Greenwich,  January  20,  1773. 

May  it  please  Your  Honors : — Late  last  night,  I  had  a  citation  from  Providence, 
to  appear  before  you,  this  day,  at  11  o'clock,  in  the  forenoon,  to  give  evidence  with 
regard  to  the  burning  the  schooner  Gaspee. 

And  as  I  detest  all  such  open  violations  of  the  law,  should  have  been  willing  to 
have  waited  upon  Your  Honors,  to  let  you  know  every  thing  within  the  compass  of 
my  knowledge  relative  to  that  matter,  had  not  my  engagements  at  Kent  court,  in 
this  place,  absolutely  forbid  my  attendance  ;  and  therefore,  hope  Your  Honors  will 
pardon  me,  on  that  account ;  but  every  thing  I  know,  touching  that  matter,  I  am 
ready  to  relate. 

It  has  been,  may  it  please  Your  Honors,  a  long  custom  in  this  colony,  for  the  attor- 
neys at  the  concluding  of  filing  of  pleas  for  court,  to  meet  some  Avhere  together* 
and  spend  the  evening ;  that  night  the  schooner  was  burnt,  happened  to  be  the  con- 
cluding evening. 

We  met  at  Mr.  Sabins's,  by  ourselves  ;  and  about  8  o'clock,  I  went  to  the  door, 
or,  finally,  kitchen,  and  saw  a  number  of  people  in  the  sti-eet,  but  paid  no  attention 
to  them,  as  that  place  was  a  place  of  public  resort. 

Some  time  after  9  o'clock,  I  heard  a  drum  beat,  and  was  asked  by  somebody  in 
the  room,  what  was  the  occasion  of  the  beating  of  that  drum  ;  and  it  was  answered 
by  somebody,  that  it  was  beat  by  some  boys,  which  quieted  all  further  inquiry  by 
me ;  neither  did  I  imagine  that  anything  of  that  nature  was  about  being  perpe- 
trated, till  after  it  was  in  fact  done. 

This,  may  it  please  Your  Honors,  is  every  thing  that  I  know,  or  has  come  to  my 
knowledge,  relative  to  that  transaction,  and  which  I  am  willing,  on  solemn  oath,  to 
state  before  any  of  the  civil  authority  in  Providence  ;  to  which  place,  I  shall  in  a 
day  or  two,  return. 

I  am  Your  Honors's  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

D.  HITCHCOCK. 

To  the  Honorable  Commissioners. 


John  Cole  to  the  Commissioners,  ^c. 

East  Greenwich,  January  20th,  1773. 

May  it  please  Your  Honors : — Late  last  evening,  I  received  by  the  way  of  Provi- 
dence, a  citation  to  appear  before  Your  Honors,  at  1 1  o'clock,  this  forenoon,  to  give 
evidence  of  what  I  know  relative  to  the  burning  and  destroying  the  schooner 
Gaspee. 

As  the  court  of  common  pleas  is  now  sitting  here,  and  a  number  of  clients  depend- 
ing upon  my  assistance  in  their  several  cases,  I  hope  Your  Honors  will  dispense  with 


158  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

my  attendance  at  the  council  chamber  at  the  time  appointed.  I  am  disposed  to  give 
Your  Honors  all  the  information  that  has  come  to  my  knowledge  concerning  the 
affair,  which  is  extremely  small. 

The  evening  preceding  the  burning  of  the  Gaspee,  I  spent  at  Mr.  James  Sabius's 
tavern,  in  company  with  several  gentlemen  ;  about  7  or  8  o'clock,  hearing  a  noise  in 
the  street,  I  pulled  back  the  shutters  of  one  of  the  windows  next  the  street,  and  saw 
several  j^eople  collected  together,  but  did  not  know  any  of  them  ;  upon  which,  I 
made  inquiry  of  the  gentlemen  in  the  room  if  they  knew  the  occasion. 

And  w-as  answered  by  some  of  the  company,  but  by  whom  I  cannot  particularly 
recollect,  that  he  hoped  they  were  not  designed  for  mischief 

To  which,  I  replied,  I  believed  not ;  if  they  were,  they  would  not  be  so  public. 

Some  time  afterward,  a  drum  was  beating  along  the  street ;  upon  which,  I  again 
opened  the  shutter,  and  saw  three  or  four  boys  with  a  drum,  and  no  other  persons. 

And  this,  may  it  please  Your  Honors,  is  all  I  know,  relative  to  this  affair  ;  and 
which  I  am  ready  to  make  oath  to,  before  any  of  the  civil  authority  in  Providence, 
to  which  place  I  shall  return  to-morrow  or  next  day. 
I  am,  with  all  deference. 

Your  Honors's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

JOHN  COLE. 

To  the  Honorable  Commissioners. 


The  commissioners  adjourned  till  to-morrow,  at  10  o'clock. 

Thursday,  January  21. 

The  commissioners  met,  according  to  adjournment. 

Present — Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Frederick  Smythe,  Esq., 
Peter  Oliver,  Esq.  and  Robert  Auchmuty,  Esq. 

Samuel  Clarke,  who  was  charged  with  the  delivery  of  the 
several  summonses  issued  by  the  commissioners,  on  the  18th 
inst.,  made  return  upon  oath  of  his  service  thereof,  which 
was  ordered  to  be  filed. 

Samuel  Clarke  exhibited  his  account  to  the  commissioners, 
for  performing  two  journeys  for  them  ;   one  to  Mendon,  and 

the  other  to   Providence  ;   which  amounted  to ,  and  was 

paid  by  the  commissioners. 

The  commissioners  agreed  to  address  the  Earl  of  Dart- 
mouth ;  whereupon,  a  letter  was  drafted  in  the  following 
words : 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  159 


The  Commissioners,  ^c,  to  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth. 

Newport,  Rhode  Island,  \ 
January  21,  1773.  3 
My  Lord  : — In  obedience  to  His  Majesty's  commands,  signilied  to  us,  by  Your 
Lordship's  letter  of  the  14th  of  September  last,  we,  with  the  utmost  dispatch  in  our 
power,  repaired  to  Newport,  where,  on  the  5th  day  of  January  inst..  His  Majesty's 
commission,  under  the  great  seal  of  Great  Britain,  was  delivered  to  us  in  the  council 
chamber,  at  Newport,  by  Capt.  Keeler,  commander  of  His  Majesty's  ship,  the  Mercury, 
and  the  commanding  officer  in  the  naval  department  at  tliis  place  ;  upon  which,  we 
immediately  ordered  the  same  to  be  publicly  read  and  proclaimed ;  which  was  ac- 
cordingly done,  before  a  great  concourse  of  j^eople,  who,  on  the  occasion,  behaved 
ynt\\  great  decency. 

This  being  done,  we  proceeded,  with  all  the  dispatch  in  our  power,  to  business  ;  and 
found  in  the  last  clause  in  our  commission,  that  in  the  execution  and  performance 
of  the  power  and  authority  thereby  given  us,  we  are  strictly  charged  and  com- 
manded carefully  to  observe  and  conform  ourselves  to  such  instructions  as  Ave  should 
receive  in  writing,  under  the  King's  sign  manual. 

Whereupon,  we  applied  ourselves  to  the  careful  examination  of  those  instructions ; 
in  one  of  which,  are  the  words,  "  To  the  end  that  they  may  accordingly  be  arrested 
and  delivered  to  the  custody  of  the  commander  in  chief  of  our  ships  and  vessels  in 
North  America,  pursuant  to  such  directions  as  we  have  thought  fit  to  give  for  that 
purpose." 

Being  convinced  that  the  above  charge  given  us  by  His  Majesty,  in  our  commis- 
sion, referring  to  the  instructions  under  the  sign  manual,  could  not  be  dispensed 
with,  we  wrote  to  Rear  Admiral  Montagu,  that  we  were  fully  of  opinion  that  his 
attendance  at  Newport  was  necessary,  in  order  if  there  should  appear  evidence 
against  any  person  sufficient  to  arrest  him  upon,  he  must  be  delivered  to  the  ad- 
miral, according  to  our  instructions,  from  which  we  could  not  depart,  notwithstand- 
ing Your  Lordship's  letter  of  the  4th  of  September  last,  to  Governor  Wanton, 
wherein  you  inform  him  that  "  such  offenders  as  may  have  been,  or  shall  be  arrested 
and  committed  witliin  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  be  delivered  to  the  care  and  cus- 
tody of  Rear  Admu-al  Montagu,  or  the  commander  in  chief  of  His  Majesty's  ships  in 
North  America,  for  the  time  being,  or  to  such  officer  as  he  shall  appoint  to  receive 
them." 

We  here  beg  leave  to  assure  Your  Lordship,  that  we  had  not  the  least  inclination 
to  deviate  from  Your  Lordship's  letter,  had  we  not  been  fully  convinced  that  the 
express  words  of  our  commission,  obliged  us  to  do  it. 

Several  letters  passed  between  us  and  the  admiral,  on  this  subject ;  wherein  we 
explained  to  him  the  necessity,  according  to  our  commission  and  instructions,  of  his 
being  here  in  person. 

Though  we  did  not  agree  on  tliis  head,  he  thinking  that,  according  to  his  instnic- 
tions  and  Your  Lordship's  last  mentioned  letter,  his  presence  was  not  at  all  neces- 
sary; yet  he  was  polite  enough  to  come  to  Newport  on  the  14th  day  of  the  month; 
and  meeting  us  at  the  council  chamber  on  the  I8th  inst.,  he  informed  us  that  he 
believed  from  the  information  he  had  received  from  others,  Capt.  Dudingston  would 
be  able  to  make  such  declaration  relative  to  the  business  we  are  on,  as  would  prove 
very  material ;  and  at  this  inclement  season  of  the  year,  it  was  impossible  fqr  him 


160  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

properly  to  execute  his  orders  from  the  lords  commissioners  of  the  admiralty,  rela- 
tive to  the  business  we  are  now  upon  ;  also,  that  the  other  duties  of  his  department, 
at  this  time,  absolutely  required  his  attendance  at  Boston,  and  therefore,  in  a  very 
days  he  must  return. 

Taking  all  these  matters  into  consideration,  and  the  extreme  rigor  of  the  season, 
which  renders  it  almost  impossible  to  procure  Avitnessess  who  are  at  any  distance 
from  us,  without  waiting  a  very  unreasonable  time  for  them,  we  thought  an  ad-' 
jdurnment  to  May  next,  necessary  for  His  Majesty's  service  ;  and  accordingly  no- 
tified Admiral  Montagu  that  we  should  adjourn  to  on  or  about  the  26th  of  that 
month,  when  he  will  undoubtedly  be  here. 

Copies  of  the  lettei's  passing  between  the  admiral  and  us,  on  these  subjects,  are 
herewith  transmitted  to  Your  Lordship. 

We  have  jiroceeded  to  examine  such  witnesses  as  we  could  obtain ;  and  also  care- 
fully to  look  into  all  papers  which  Governor  Wanton  has  laid  before  us,  relative  to 
the  conduct  of  the  magistrates  of  this  government,  in  the  business  we  are  upon  ;  but 
find  it  totally  impossible  at  jjresent  to  make  a  report,  not  having  all  the  evidence 
we  have  reason  to  expect.  We  therefore  hope,  for  these  reasons,  that  our  omitting 
it,  will  not  be  disagreeable. 

In  short,  we  have  hitherto,  My  Lord,  exerted  ourselves  to  our  utmost  abilities  in 
the  execution  of  our  trust.  His  Majesty  has  been  pleased  to  honor  us  with  ;  and 
Your  Lordship  may  rely  on  our  future  endeavors  to  discharge  ourselves  with  that 
fidehty  which  the  nature  of  so  important  a  commission  demands. 
We  are,  with  the  utmost  respect.  My  Lord, 

Your  Lordship's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servants, 

J.  WANTON,  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER. 

ROBT.  AUCHMUTY, 

To  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth. 

Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Governor  of  the  colony,  made  oath  of 
what  he  knew  respecting  the  Gaspee,  &c. 

Deposition  of  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Governor  of  the  English  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  on  oath 
declares  and  says : 

That  at  an  interview  he  had  with  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  late  of  the  schooner 
Gaspee,  he  asked  him  whether  he  had  any  authority  from  the  commissioners  at  Bos- 
ton, or  from  Admiral  Montagu. 

To  which,  he  repUed,  he  had  not ;  but  received  liis  authority  from  the  lords 
of  the  admiralty ;  and  that  he  was  come  into  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  by  virtue 
of  that  power,  and  no  other,  whatever. 

The  deponent  then  asked  how  long  it  was  probable  he  should  continue  in  the 
colony. 

To  which,  he  answered,  at  present  he  was  in  the  colony  ;  but  how  long  he  should 
continue,  was  uncei-tain. 

And  this  deponent  saith,  that  he  does  not  remember  that  he  hath  since  that  time, 
seen  the  said  Lieutenant  Dudingston. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  161 

On,  or  about  the  20th  of  March  last,  a  complaint  was  transmitted  to  the  depo- 
nent, by  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  colony,  signed  by  sundry  persons,  residing  in 
and  near  the  town  of  Providence,  that  an  armed  schooner  was  cruising  in  the  Nar- 
ragansett  Bay,  interrupting  their  legal  commerce,  by  searching  and  unnecessarily 
detaining  the  freight  boats,  &c. ;  and  therefore,  requested  the  deponent  to  make 
such  inquiry  as  was  necessary,  for  obtaining  information,  whether  the  persons  be- 
longing to  said  schooner,  were  duly  authorized  to  exercise  that  power,  within  the 
body  of  the  colony. 

Upon  receiving  the  complaint,  the  deponent  conceived  it  was  his  duty,  in  order  to 
satisfy  the  complainants,  and  at  the  same  time  to  give  the  persons  complained  of,  an 
opportunity  of  exculpating  themselves  from  the  several  charges  and  accusations 
which  were  exhibited  against  them,  to  pursue  such  measures  as  were  prudent  and 
legal ;  and  thereupon,  wrote  a  letter  to  the  commanding  officer  of  said  schooner,  ad- 
vising him  of  the  information  the  deponent  had  received,  respecting  his  conduct, 
and  proceedings,  since  his  arrival  within  this  colony,  and  requesting  that  he  would 
produce  his  commission  and  authority. 

This  letter  was  answered  by  Lieutenant  Dudingston  ;  which,  not  being  satisfac- 
tory, the  deponent  wrote  him  another  letter,  on  the  23d  of  March. 

In  consequence  whereof.  Lieutenant  Dudingston  sent  to  the  deponent,  by  one  of 
his  officers,  Avhose  name  was  Dundas,  an  order  from  the  lords  of  the  admiralty,  for 
his  commanding  the  schooner  Gaspee ;  also,  their  letter  to  the  commissioners  at  Bos- 
ton, requiring  them  to  give  a  deputation  from  the  commissioners  at  Boston,  directed 
to  the  said  Dundas ;  all  which,  the  deponent,  after  he  had  read  and  examined,  re- 
turned to  the  said  Dundas,  who  had  the  charge  of  them,  without  the  least  delay  or 
interruption,  whatever. 

The  deponent  took  this  opportunity  to  remonstrate  to  the  officer  against  the 
impropriety  of  Mr.  Dudlngston's  jji-oceedings.  In  sending  a  quantity  of  rum,  he 
had  seized  in  the  county  of  Kent,  within  this  colony,  for  Illegal  importation,  to 
Boston,  for  trial ;  It  being,  in  the  deponent's  opinion,  repugnant  to  an  act  pf  Par- 
liament, made  and  passed  in  the  eigth  year  of  His  Majesty's  reign,  as  there  was  a 
court  of  vice  admiralty  established  within  this  colony ;  and  that  if  he  persevered  in 
such  measures,  he  must  expect  that  a  process  would  be  issued  against  him. 

A  short  time  after  this,  another  complaint  was  brought  against  Mr.  Dudingston, 
by  one  Faulkner,  of  Portsmouth,  In  this  colony,  and  proprietor  of  a  certain  island, 
called  Gould  Island,  within  the  said  colony,  who  alleged  that  the  people  belonging 
to  said  schooner  Gaspee,  had  been  upon  said  island,  and  committed  a  trespass  and 
waste  thereon,  by  cutting  down  thirty  or  more  trees,  and  carrying  the  same  from  off 
said  island. 

The  deponent  recommended  to  the  complainant  to  make  application  to  said  Dud- 
ingstom  and  demand  such  satisfaction  as  was  adequate  to  the  damage  he  had  sus- 
tained, and  If  possible,  to  avoid  a  law  suit,  which,  he  said,  he  had  been  urged  to 
commence. 

After  which,  he  was  Informed  by  said  Faulkner,  that  lylejatenant  Dudingston  had 
paid  him  about  fifteen  dollars  on  account  of  the  above  named  trespass  and  waste  ; 
with  which  he  appeared  satisfied. 

On  the  11th  of  June,  the  deponent  received  from  Dariys  Sessions,  Esq.,  of  Provi- 
dence, and  Deputy  Governor  of  the  colony,  an  account  of  the  destruction  of  His 
Majesty's  schooner,  the  Gaspee  ;  upon  which,  he  immediately  called  together  such 
of  His  Majesty's  Council  and  members  of  the  General  Assembly  as  could  be  seasoua' 

VOL.  vii.         21 


162  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

bly  notified,  and  communicated  to  them  the  disagreeable  intelHgence,  who  unani- 
mously recommended  a  proclamation,  with  a  projaer  reward,  for  discovering  the  of- 
fenders ;  which  was  thereupon  issued,  and  sent  into  the  several  towns,  within  the 
colony. 

Admiral  Montagu,  on  the  8th  of  July,  transmitted  to  the  deponent  the  declaration 
of  a  mulatto  lad,  called  Aaron,  impeaching  several  persons  therein  named,  with 
being  concerned  in  burning  the  aforesaid  schooner. 

As  this  declaration  Avas  not  made  before  any  of  the  civil  authority,  either  in  this 
or  any  other  colony,  the  deponent  was  of  opinion,  that  it  was  highly  necessary  that 
Aaron  should  be  taken  into  custody  ;  and  therefore  directed  one  of  the  judges  of 
the  Superior  Court,  to  issue  his  warrant  for  Aaron,  that  he  might  be  legally  ex- 
amined ;  and  as  he  was  then  in  the  care  of  Capt.  Linzee,  wrote  him  a  letter,  dated 
the  16tli  of  July  (which  letter  accompanied  the  warrant),  requesting  that  he  would 
deliver  the  said  Aaron  to  the  sheriff,  that  he  might  be  examined  respecting  what  he 
knew  of  attacking  and  burning  the  Gaspee. 

But  Capt.  Linzee  refused  to  deliver  up  the  witness,  and  treated  the  letter  and 
warrant  with  the  highest  contempt,  as  the  deponent  was  informed  by  James  Bren- 
ton,  Esq.,  who  waited  upon  Capt.  Linzee,  with  the  letter,  at  the  deponent's  request. 
If  Aaron  had  any  knowledge  of  burning  the  said  schooner,  it  was  out  of  the  power 
of  the  deponent  to  obtain  it,  through  the  unjustifiable  conduct  of  the  said  Capt. 
Linzee. 

The  deponent  communicated  to  Admiral  Montagu,  in  a  letter,  dated  the  23d  of 
July,  the  steps  he  had  taken  for  obtaining  Aaron's  declaration,  in  full  expectation 
that  he  would  have  given  jiositive  orders  for  the  delivery  of  Aaron  into  the  custody 
of  the  civil  authority ;  especially,  as  the  deponent  had  assured  Capt.  Linzee  that 
after  his  examination,  he  should  be  returned  on  board  the  King's  ship. 

The  dejionent  cited  Mi-.  Samuel  Thurston  and  Mr.  Samuel  Tompkins,  of  the 
island  of  Prudence,  the  gentlemen  with  whom  Aaron  had  lived  as  an  indented  ser- 
vant, to  give  evidence  of  what  they  knew  of  the  destruction  of  the  Gaspee,  &c. ;  and 
also  two  servants,  who  lived  in  the  same  house  with  Aaron,  at  the  time  the  said 
schooner  was  burnt,  who  agreed  in  their  several  testimonies,  that  Aaron  was  a  run- 
away, and  could  not,  for  the  reasons  given  in  their  depositions,  have  any  knowledge 
of  that  transaction ;  coj^ies  of  which  testimonies,  the  deponent  transmitted  to  Ad- 
miral Montagu. 

This  deponent  further  declares,  that  the  several  letters  and  papers  he  has  deliv- 
ered to  the  commissioners,  contain  a  full  and  particular  account  of  all  the  knowledge 
he  hath  of  the  destruction  of  the  said  schooner  Gaspee,  and  the  measures  which 
have  been  pursued  for  discovering  the  offenders.  J.  WANTON. 

To  His  Majesty's  commissioners,  at  Rhode  Island. 

Sworn  to,  at  Newport,  on  the  25th  day  of  January,  1773,  before  us, — 

FRED.  SMYTHE, 
PETER  OLIVER, 
ROBT.  AUCm^IUTY. 

An  adjournment*  being  determined  upon,  Mr.  Auchmuty  and 
Mr.  Oliver  signified  their  intention  of  returning  liome,  and  took 
leave  of  the  other  commissioners,  accordingly. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  163 

Friday,  January  22. 

The  commissioners  met,  according  to  adjournment.  ^ 

Present — Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  Daniel  Horsmanden,  Esq. 
and  Frederick  Smythe,  Esq. 

Samuel  Clarke,  who  was  charged  with  the  service  of  sum- 
mons on  the  12th  inst.,  for  two  persons  at  Mendon,  made  re- 
turn upon  oath  of  his  service  thereof,  which  was  ordered  to  be 
filed. 

The  commissioners  received  a  letter  from  Arthur  Fenner,  at 
Providence,  excusing  his  attendance  in  obedience  to  a  sum- 
mons of  the  18th.* 

Also,  a  letter  from  James  Sabin,  excusing  his  attendance 
in  obedience  to  a  summons  of  the  same  date  ;  which  were  or- 
dered to  be  filed. 

The  commissioners  adjourn  all  further  proceedings,  until  the 
26th  day  of  May  next,  then  to  meet  at  Newport. 

The  commissioners  accordingly  adjourned  to  meet  on  the 
26th  day  of  May,  1773,  at  Newport.  The  journal  of  their  pro- 
ceedings, if  any  was  kept,  is  not  among  the  papers. 


*  See  page  154.  The  letters  of  Arthur  Fenner,  James  Sabin  and  others,  addressed  to  the 
commissioners,  excusing  their  non-attendance,  not  referred  to  in  the  journal  of  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  commission,  are  inserted  in  their  chronological  order  elsewhere  in  this 
volume. 


164  RECORDS    OP    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE    ISLAND  [1772. 


PROCEEDINGS    OF    THE  COMMISSIONERS    OF 
INQUIRY,  &c.,  CONTINUED. 


To"  remove  the  difBculties  between  Admiral  Montagu  and 
the  commissioners,  relative  to  his  personal  attendance  at  New- 
port, the  board  of  admiralty  in  England,  dispatched  him  spe- 
cial orders,  as  follows  : 

The  Lords  of  the  Admiralty  to  Admiral  Montagu,  relative  to 
his  personal  attendance  upon  the  Commissioners,  ^c,  at 
Newport. 

By  the  Commissioners  for  executing  tlie  office  of  Lord  High  Admiral  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland,  &c. 

Whereas,  you  represented  to  us,  by  your  letter  of  the  19th  of  January  last,  from 
Rhode  Island,  as  the  season  of  the  year  was  so  far  advanced  as  to  render  it  hazard- 
ous for  you  to  proceed  thither  with  the  ships  under  your  command,  agreeably  to  our 
instructions  of  the  7th  of  September  last,  you  had  given  Capt.  Keeler,  of  the  Mer- 
cury, the  senior  officer  of  the  King's  ships  at  that  island,  to  whom,  you  had  before 
dispatched  His  Majesty's  commission  for  inquiring  into  the  circumstances  relative  to 
the  burning  of  the  Gaspee  schooner,  orders  to  aid  and  assist  the  commissioners 
therein  named,  in  the  same  manner  as  you  should  have  done,  had  you  been  there  ; 
but,  as  the  said  commission  expressly  directs  the  prisoners  to  be  delivered  to  you, 
the  commissioners  did  not  choose  to  proceed  to  business  until  your  arrival. 

That,  in  consequence  of  receiving  such  information,  you  had  proceeded  thither 
by  land,  and  had  hoisted  your  llag  on  board  the  Lizzard ;  and  that  the  commis- 
sioners had  examined  some  few  persons. 

And  whereas,  you  further  represented  to  us,  by  jour  said  letter,  that  if  you  are 
obliged  to  attend  the  commissioners  at  Rhode  Island,  the  naval  business  at  Halifax 
and  Boston  will  be  greatly  retarded,  as  it  will  be  impossible  for  you  to  attend  to 
those  and  your  other  duties ;  and  have  therefore  desired,  the  senior  officer  of  His 
Majesty's  ships  at  Rhode  Island,  who  will,  in  your  opinion,  in  every  respect,  answer  the 
purposes  there,  as  well  as  yourself,  that  you  may  receive  our  directions  to  remain  at 
Boston,  with  your  flag,  unless  there  appears  to  be  an  absolute  necessity  for  your 
being  at  Rhode  Island. 

And  whereas,  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  one  of  His  Majesty's  principal  secretaries 
of  state,  to  whom  we  sent  an  extract  of  so  much  of  your  letter,  as  related  to  this 
business,  for  His  Majesty's  information,  hath,  by  his  letter  of  the  20th  instant,  ac- 
quainted us  that  His  Majesty  is  pleased  to  approve  that  the  execution  of  His  Maj- 


1772.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  165 

esty's  orders  respecting  the  service  at  Rhode  Island,  should  be  entrusted  to  the 
senior  captain  of  such  of  his  ships  of  war  as  may,  from  time  to  time  be  stationed  at 
that  colony. 

You  are  therefore,  hereby  required  and  directed  to  entrust  the  execution  of  His 
Majesty's  said  orders  to  such  senior  captain,  accordingly. 

Given  under  our  hands,  the  26th  day  of  March,  1773.  SANDWICH, 

J.  BULLER, 

LISBURNE. 
By  command  of  their  lordships  : 
CHAS.  STEPHENS. 

To  John  Montagu,  Esq.,  Rear  Admiral  of  the  Blue,  and 
commander  in  chief  of  His  Majesty's  ships  and  vessels 
in  North  America,  at  Boston. 

Previous  to  the  reception  of  these  orders,  the  following  let- 
ters passed  between  the  commissioners  and  the  officers  of  the 
navy,  stationed  in  New  England  : 

Admiral  Montagu  to  the  Commissioners.,  Sj-c. 

Boston,  24th  May,  1773. 

Gentlemen  : — As  I  understood  you  are  soon  to  meet  to  proceed  on  business,  I  am 
to  inform  you,  I  have  ordered  to  Capt.  Keeler,  of  His  Majesty's  ship  Mercury,  Wil- 
liam Dickinson,  late  midshipman  of  the  Gaspee,  and  Bartholomew  Cheever,  one  of 
her  seamen,  two  evidences  sent  out  of  England,  by  the  right  honorable  the  lords 
commissioners  of  the  admiralty. 

As  they  were  on  board,  when  Captain  Dudingston  was  wounded,  these  people  (if 
the  men  called  the  head  sheriff  and  captain  can  be  found),  can  swear  to  their  per- 
sons. You  will  be  the  best  judges  what  use  to  make  of  them,  when  they  appear 
before  you. 

I  -expect  the  Captain  man-of-war  will  return  from  Halifax  in  ten  days,  when  I 
shall  lose  no  time  in  repairing  to  Rhode  Island  ;  but  if,  in  the  meantime,  you  should 
think  my  presence  absolutely  necessary,  I  will  set  out  by  land,  although  it  will  be 
attended  with  great  inconvenience  to  me. 

Capt.  Keeler  has  my  orders  to  give  you  every  assistance  in  his  power ;  and  I 
doubt  not  but  that  he  will  faithfully  execute  them. 
I  am,  gentlemen. 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

J.  MONTAGU. 

To  His  Majesty's  Commissioners,  at  Newport. 


166  RECORDS    OF   TEE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 


Capt.  Robert  Keeler  to  the  Commissioners,  (^c. 

His  Majesty's  sliip  Mercury,  Kbode  Island  Harbor,  ] 
May  27,  1773.  I 

Sir : — Admiral  ]\Iontagu  finding  the  King's  commissioners  meeting  at  Newport, 
he  has  sent  me  an  officer  and  one  seaman,  lately  belonging  to  the  Gaspee,  and  just 
arrived  from  England,  to  give  information  of  the  persons  that  were  concerned  in 
the  burning  of  said  schooner. 

Likewise  a  letter,  directed  to  His  Majesty's  commissioners  at  Rhode  Island,  with 
du'ections  to  me,  to  deliver  to  you,  when  sitting. 

But,  as  I  am  detained  on  board,  on  account  of  a  writ  being  issued  out  against  me, 
I  am  to  desire  you  will  give  me  notice  in  writing,  when  you  meet,  that  the  letter 
may  be  sent  by  a  proper  officer ;  and  of  the  time  you  choose  to  have  the  evidences 
on  shore,  to  be  examined.  I  am,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

R.  KEELER. 
To  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  president  of  His  Majesty's 
commission,  at  Newport. 

The  Commissioners,  ^c,  to  Capt.  Keeler. 

Newport,  May  27,  1773. 
Sir : — Though  there  are  three  commissioners  met  at  Newport,  yet,  as  the  other 
two  gentlemen  are  daily  expected,  it  is  thought  most  conducive  to  His  Majesty's  ser- 
vice, not  to  proceed  on  business  till  they  join  us  ;  at  which  time  we  shall  acquaint 
you,  when  the  witnesses  yon  mention  to  us,  may  be  examined,  and  Admiral  Mon- 
tagu's letter  delivered,  and  in  the  interim,  are, 

Yom-  most  obedient,  humble  servants, 
J.  WANTON, 
PETER  OLIVER, 
ROBT.  AUCIBIUTY, 

Commissioners. 
To  Capt.  Robert  Keeler. 

The  Commissioners,  ^c,  to  Capt.  Keeler. 

Newport,  May  31,  1773. 
Sir  : — The  gentlemen  commissioners  are  now  arrived  from  the  southward  ;  there- 
fore we  are  ready  to  receive  Admiral  Montagu's  letter,  mentioned  in  yours  of  the 
27th  inst. ;  and  to-mon-ow  morning  shall  also  be  ready  to  take  the  depositions  of 
those  witnesses  you  inform  us  are  arrived  from  England. 

The  commissioners  will  attend  such  examination  to-morrow  morning,  at  10 
o'clock ;  and  are.  Your  most  obedient  and  humble  servants, 

J.  WANTON, 
PETER  OLIVER, 
ROBT.  AUCHIVIUTY, 

Commissioners. 
To  Capt.  Robert  Keeler. 


1772.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  167 


The  Commissioners,  SfC,  to  Admiral  Montagu. 

Newport,  June  2,  1773. 
Sir  : — Three  of  the  commissioners  met  at  this  place  on  the  26th  ult.  ;  but  as  the 
gentlemen  from  the  southward  Avere  not  arrived,  and  daily  expected,  it  was  thought 
by  those  present,  most  conducive  to  His  Majesty's  service,  to  delay  entering  on  busi- 
ness till  they  were  joined  by  their  brethren.  Your  not  receiving  an  answer  sooner, 
to  your  favor  of  the  24th  of  last  month,  was  owing  to  that  reason. 

The  gentlemen  being  now  on  the  spot,  beg  leave  to  observe  to  you,  that  the  wit- 
nesses you  mention,  have  been  examined ;  and  that  it  will  be  very  agreeable  to  them 
to  have  the  pleasure  of  your  comjjany  at  Newport,  whenever  it  will  comport  with 
His  Majesty's  service  in  general ;  but  at  present,  see  no  immediate  occasion  for  your 
coming  without  your  shijjs ;  and  are,  with  the  greatest  respect,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servants, 
J.  WANTON,  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER, 

ROBT.  AUCHMUTY, 

Commissioners. 
To  John  Montagu,  Esq. 

Admiral  Montagu  to  the  Commissioners ,  ^c. 

Boston,  14th  June,  1773. 
Gentlemen  : — In  answer  to  your  letter  of  the  2d.  which  I  received  the  12th,  I  beg 
leave  to  inform  you,  that  as  the  service  will  not  admit  of  my  being  at  Rhode  Island, 
this  summer,  I  have  sent  orders  to  Capt.  Keeler,  of  His  Majesty's  ship  INIercury,  to 
render  you  every  service  in  his  power,  in  the  execution  of  your  commission,  agree- 
ably to  His  Majesty's  directions,  signified  to  me,  by  my  lords  commissioners  of  the 
admiralty,  by  their  order  of  the  26th  of  March,  1773,  a  duplicate  of  which,  I  here- 
with enclose  to  you ;  and  am,  with  respect,  gentlemen. 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

J.  MONTAGU. 
To  His  Majesty's  Commissioners,  at  Rhode  Island. 

The  following  evidence  was  submitted  to  the  commissioners, 
at  this  session  : 


Deposition  of  William  Dickinson. 

The  examination  of  William  Dickinson,  late  midshipman  of  His  Majesty's 
schooner,  taken  on  oath,  at  Newport,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  this  1st  day  of 
June,  A.  D.  1773,  who  saith  : 

That  on  the  10th  day  of  June,  in  the  year  1772,  between  the  hours  of  12  and  1, 
in  the  morning,  the  said  schooner,  then  working  in  her  dock,  on  Namquit  Pointy 
about  two  miles  below  Pawtuxet,   and  not  able  to  get  off ;  the  watch  being  on 


168  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772- 

deck,  as  he  supposed,  ga\e  the  alarm  that  a  number  of  boats  were  coming  down  the 
river. 

Upon  which,  Lieutenant  Dudingston  went  on  deck,  and  hailed  the  boats,  and  or- 
dered them  to  keep  off,  or  he  would  fire  into  them ;  but,  as  they  refused  to  keep  off, 
we  fired  at  them,  and  they  returned  the  fire,  whereby  Lieutenant  Dudingston  was 
wounded  in  the  left  arm,  and  in  the  groin. 

They  then  boarded  us,  and  used  us  very  ill,  by  beating  and  knocking  down  the 
people ;  and  afterwards  by  tying  them,  and  throwing  them  into  their  boats,  the  cap- 
tain of  the  gang  swearing  he  would  give  no  quarters. 

The  captain  of  the  gang  ordered  Lieutenant  Dudingston  on  his  knees,  and  to  beg 
his  fife. 

He  said  he  could  not,  he  was  wounded. 

Whereupon,  the  said  captain  answered,  "  D — n  your  blood,  you  are  shot  by  your 
own  people." 

Then  thej'  took  him  into  the  cabin,  where  two  men  dressed  his  wounds ;  who,  by 
their  behavior,  appeared  to  have  some  skill  in  surgery. 

And  this  examinate  further  saith :  that  while  Lieutenant  Dudingston's  wounds 
were  dressing,  those  two  persons  who  assumed  to  be  the  head  sheriff  and  the  captain, 
demanded  the  papers  belonging  to  the  vessel,  which  he  delivered  by  Lieutenant 
Dudingston's  order  to  them ;  consisting  of  the  lieutenant's  commission  from  the  lords 
of  the  admiralty  ;  Admiral  JNIontagu's  instructions,  letters,  and  other  papers ;  and 
upon  his  particularizing  those  papers  as  he  dehvered  them,  they  damned  him,  and 
told  him  they  did  not  come  there  to  receive  any  instructions  from  liim,  but  would 
examine  the  papers  at  their  leisure,  which  they  put  into  their  pockets,  and  then 
carried  Lieutenant  Dudingston  on  shore,  about  two  miles  from  the  schooner. 

The  examinate  after  this  continued  on  board  said  schooner  about  three  quarters  of 
an  hour ;  and  was  told  by  the  captain  of  the  gang,  that  unless  he  quitted  the 
schooner,  he  would  throw  him  overboard ;  during  this  time,  they  continued  plun- 
dering the  schooner. 

The  examinate  was  landed  in  one  of  their  boats  on  the  shore  opposite' to  the 
schooner,  where  he  remained  some  time  ;  and  that  within  an  hour  after  he  was  landed, 
he  saw  the  said  schooner  on  fire  ;  and  it  being  then  daylight,  he  saw  three  of  their 
boats  put  off  from  the  schooner,  full  of  men ;  one  of  which,  landed  the  people  at 
Pawtuxet,  and  the  other  two,  rowed  towards  Providence. 

This  examinate  further  saith :  that  the  schooner  when  she  was  burnt,  lay  about 
eight  or  ten  miles,  to  the  best  of  his  judgment,  from  the  north  end  of  the  island  of 
Prudence  ;  and  that  several  negroes  were  on  board  the  said  schooner ;  and  also 
rowed  the  boats  which  boarded  the  schooner ;  but  he  does  not  know  their  names ; 
and  he  cannot  recollect  that  he  saw  any  of  those  negroes  enter  the  cabin. 

And  he  also  saith,  that  he  does  not  know  the  names  of  any  of  the  persons  who 
boarded  and  destroyed  said  schooner,  or  wounded  Lieutenant  Dudingston ;  but  that 
the  captain,  who  was  called  the  captain  of  the  gang,  was  a  well  set  man,  of  a  swar- 
thy complexion,  full  face,  hoarse  voice,  and  wore  a  white  caji,  was  well  dressed,  and 
appeared  rather  above  the  common  rank  of  mankind ;  and  that  the  greater  part  of 
those  he  saw  on  board  the  schooner,  and  in  the  cabin,  were  persons  well  dressed ; 
many  of  them  with  ruffled  shirts,  and  appeared  as  store-keejiers,  merchants  or  mas- 
ters of  vessels. 

The  person  who  was  called  the  head  sheriff,  was  a  tall,  genteel  man,  dressed  in 
blue  clothes,  his  hair  tied  behind,  and  had  on  a  ruffled  shirt. 


1772.]         AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  169 

One  of  the  jDersons  who  acted  as  surgeon  in  dressing  Lieutenant  Dudingston's 
wounds,  appeared  to  be  about  eighteen  years  of  age,  very  much  marked  with 
the  small  pox  ;  light  brown  hair,  tied  behind ;  about  five  feet,  five  or  six  inches 
high. 

The  other,  was  a  very  genteel  man  ;  appeared  to  be  about  twenty-two  years  of 
age  ;  his  hair  tied  behind,  a  thin  person,  and  about  five  feet,  eight  or  nme  inches 
high. 

This  examinate  further  saith :  that  after  he  returned  from  Boston  to  Providence, 
a  few  days  after  the  schooner  Avas  destroyed,  the  first  described  surgeon  met  him  in 
one  of  the  streets  in  Providence,  and  asked  him  whether  he  knew  how  Lieutenant 
Dudingston  did  ;  but  the  examinate  did  not  know  his  name  ;  and  further  saith  not. 

W.  DICKINSON. 

Sworn  to,  at  Newport,  on  the  daj'  and  year  abovesaid,  before — 

J.  WANTON,  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER, 

Commissioners. 

Deposition  of  Bartholomew  Cheever. 

The  examination  of  Bartholomew  Cheever,  mariner,  and  late  a  seamen  on  board 
His  Majesty's  schooner,  the  Gaspee,  taken  on  oath,  at  Newport,  in  the  colony  of 
Rhode  Island,  on  the  1st  day  of  June,  1773,  who  saith: 

That  on  the  9th  day  of  June  last,  the  schooner  Gaspee  run  aground,  on  her  pas- 
sage to  Providence,  on  a  point  of  land  about  two  or  three  miles  below  a  small  town, 
and  about  five  miles  from  the  town  of  Providence. 

That  about  three-quartei-s  after  12  o'clock,  the  next  morning,  being  the  10th  of 
June,  he  was  standing  upon  the  quarter  deck  of  said  schooner,  as  a  sentry ;  every 
other  person  belonging  to  said  schooner,  being  below,  he  saw  a  number  of  boats 
coming  towards  said  schooner,  which  he  hailed,  but  no  answer  was  returned ;  he 
then  immediately  gave  notice  to  Lieutenant  Dudingston  and  the  midsliipman,  who 
instantly  came  upon  deck. 

The  boats  were  again  hailed,  and  the  answer  returned  by  some  of  the  people  in 
said  boats  was,  "  D — n  your  blood,  we  have  you  now  !" 

The  captain  ordered  them  to  keep  off";  and  told  them  if  they  did  not,  he  would 
fire  into  them. 

They  answered,  they  did  not  care  ;  they  would  be  aboard  directly. 

The  captain  then  ordered  all  hands  on  deck ;  but  the  people  who  were  in  the 
boats,  boarded  the  schooner  ;  and  as  they  were  entering  said  schooner,  they  shot  the 
captain ;  and  afterwards  tied  the  people  belonging  to  said  schooner,  and  carried 
them  on  shore,  nearly  opposite  to  the  schooner ;  they  then  broke  open  the  arm- 
chest,  and  took  possession  of  the  small  arms. 

And  after  they  had  landed  all  the  Gaspee's  people,  he  saw  the  said  schooner  on 
fire ;  but  he  knoweth  not  the  names  of  any  of  the  persons  who  were  concerned  in 
destroying  said  schooner ;  and  that  those  who  acted  as  principals,  were  called  the 
head  sheriff  and  the  captain  ;  and  one  of  them  was  called  constable. 

And  this  examinate  further  saith :  that  while  he  was  attending  upon  Lieutenant 

VOL.  vii.        22 


170  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

Dudingston  at  a  town  cailed  Pawtuxet,  he  saw  two  of  the  persons  who  were  concerned 
in  destroying-  said  schooner  ;  but  did  not  know  their  names.         his 

BARTHOLOMEW  'A    CHEEVER. 
mark. 

Sworn  to,  at  New2:)ort,  on  the  day  and  year,  abovesaid,  before— 

J.  WANTON,       '  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER, 

Commissioners. 

Deposition  of  John  Cole. 

The  examination  of  John  Cole,  of  Providence,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island, 
Esq.,  taken  on  oath  in  Newport,  in  said  colony,  this  3d  day  of  June,  A.  D.  1773, 
■who  saith  : 

That  the  evening  preceding  the  burning  the  Gaspee,  I  spent  at  Mr.  James  Sa- 
bins's  tavern,  in  Providence,  aforesaid,  in  company  with  several  gentlemen. 

About  7  or  8  o'clock,  hearing  a  noise  in  the  street  of  said  town,  I  pulled  back  the 
shutter  of  one  of  the  windows  next  the  street,  and  saw  several  men,  about  twelve, 
as  I  apprehend,  but  did  know  one  of  them,  collected  together.  Upon  which,  I  made 
inquiry  of  the  gentlemen  in  the  room,  if  they  knew  the  occasion  ;  and  was  answered 
by  one  of  the  company,  but  whom,  I  cannot  particularly  recollect,  that  he  hoped 
they  were  not  upon  any  design  of  mischief 

To  which,  I  replied,  "  I  believed  not ;  if  they  v.-ere  on  such  a  design,  they  woidd 
not  be  so  public." 

Some  short  time  after,  I  heard  a  drum  beat  in  the  street ;  upon  which,  I  again 
opened  the  shutter,  saw  three  or  four  boys  passing  along  with  the  drum,  and  no 
other  persons. 

Between  11  and  12  o'clock,  in  the  same  evening,  I  left  the  said  tavern  ;  at  which 
time,  I  found  the  street  clear  and  still ;  I  then  observed,  that  I  believed  if  any  mis- 
chief was  intended,  they  had  thought  better  of  it,  and  gone  home. 

Early  in  that  evening,  and  before  I  first  opened  the  shutter,  I  heard,  but  whether 
after  I  joined  the  company  or  in  the  street  going  to  said  tavern,  I  cannot  recollect, 
that  the  Gaspee  was  then  run  on  shore  ;  neither  do  I  remember  the  person  giving 
me  that  information ;  I  never  heard  any  intimation  of  an  intention  to  burn  the  Gas- 
pee ;  nor  do  I  know  any  person  or  persons  concerned  in  that  transaction,  or  ever 
heard  who  they  were. 

The  place  where  the  said  Gaspee  was  burnt,  was  in  the  township  of  Warwick,  in 
the  county  of  Kent,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island. 

From  the  cove  near  ]\Ir.  Samuel  Tompkins's  house,  to  the  place  where  the  Gaspee 
schooner  was  burnt,  is,  according  to  the  best  judgment  I  can  form,  near,  if  not  quite, 
four  leagues  ;  and  further,  this  deponent  saith  not.  JOHN  COLE. 

Taken,  and  sworn  to,  at  Newport,  on  the  dav  and  year  before  written,  before — 
J.  WANTON,         '  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER, 

ilOBT.  AUCHMUTY, 

Commissioners. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  171 


Deposition  of  John  Andreius. 

The  examination  of  John  Andrews,  Esq.,  of  Cranston,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Is- 
land, taken  on  oath,  at  Newport,  in  said  colony,  on  the  5th  day  of  June,  1773,  who 
declares  and  says  : 

That  he  was  in  the  town  of  Providence  the  night  that  the  schooner  Gaspee  was 
destroyed,  at  a  tavern,  where  he  spent  the  evening  with  a  number  of  gentlemen  i 
and  after  supper,  he  heard  a  drum  beat  in  the  street,  and  inqviired  into  the  cause 
thereof;  and  received  for  answer,  that  it  had  been  training  day,  and  the  people 
were  breaking  up  their  frolic  ;  about  12  o'clock,  he  repaired  to  his  lodgings,  it  being 
very  dark,  and  went  to  bed. 

The  next  morning,  the  sun  about  half  an  hour  high,  was  surprised  with  hearing 
some  persons  say  to  each  other,  that  the  said  schooner  was  burnt ;  upon  which,  he 
opened  the  Avindow,  and  saw  on  the  other  side  of  the  street,  Uvo  lilack  fellows  and 
one  white  man,  talking  together. 

I  inquired  what  was  the  matter ;  and  received  for  an  answer  from  the  Avhite  man, 
that  some  people  in  the  night  had  burned  the  man-of-war  schooner. 

Upon  which,  he  immediately  dressed  himself,  and  waited  upon  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor ;  and  he  informed  him  he  had  heard  the  news,  and  sent  for  his  horse,  in  order 
to  repair  to  the  spot,  and  inquire  of  Capt.  Dudingston  and  his  people,  and  find,  if 
possible,  the  persons  that  had  done  the  mischief. 

We  j^rocured  a  horse,  as  soon  as  possible,  and  went  to  Pawtuxet,  where  we  found 
Mr.  Dudingston  badly  wounded  ;  and  we  saw  the  said  schooner  on  shore,  about  a 
mile  and  a  half  distant,  wdiich  appeai-ed  by  the  smoke,  to  be  on  fire,  and  burnt  down 
almost  to  the  water's  edge. 

The  Deputy  Governor,  in  his  hearing,  inquired  of  JNIr.  Dudingston,  if  he  had  any 
knowledge  of  the  persons  that  committed  this  trespass. 

He  made  answer,  that  he  should  render  no  account  about  the  matter,  until  he 
appeared  before  a  court  martial,  where  he  expected  to  be  tried,  if  he  survived  his 
wounds,  and  such  account  might  be  made  use  of,  to  his  advantage  ;  but  was  willing 
that  his  people  should  be  sworn ;  and  had  them  called  in,  and  cautioned  them  to 
swear  to  the  truth. 

He  then,  as  His  Majestj^'s  commissary  for  the  colony,  conferred  wtth  Mr.  Dud- 
ingston, concerning  saving  such  guns  and  stores  as  could  be  saved,  and  agreed  to 
save  all  that  was  possible  to  be  saved,  and  procured  a- man  to  undertake  the 
business. 

And  he  likewise  requested  that  his  people  might  be  taken  ^  care  of,  and  sent  on 
board  His  Majesty's  sloop,  called  the  Beaver,  then  at  Newport,  and  procured  a  small 
vessel,  to  carry  them  on  purpose. 

He  visited  Mr.  Dudingston,  several  times,  and  requested  of  him,  if  he  had  any 
knowledge  of  such  persons  as  had  done  the  mischief,  that  he  would  inform  him  there- 
of, that  the  persons  might  be  brought  to  condign  punishment ;  but  he  always  de- 
chned  saying  anything  in  the  affair. 

And  further,  that  early  in  the  morning,  after  the  said  schooner  was  destroyed,  he 
met  with  Daniel  Jenckes,  Esq.,  chief  justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,  in  the 
county  of  Providence,  who  said  that  he  had  informed  the  Deputy  Governor  of  what 
had  happened  the  preceding  night,  respecting  the  Gaspee  ;  and  then  urged  that  the 


172  KECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE    ISLAND  [1772. 

Deputy  Governor  and  tkis  examinate,  -n-ould  repair  immediately  to  Pawtuxet,  and 
examine  such  of  the  Gaspee's  men  as  could  be  found,  while  it  was  fresh  in  their 
memories,  that  the  villains  miirht  be  discovercjd,  and  not  the  whole  colony  blamed, 

JOHN  ANDREWS. 

The  foregoing  examination  was  taken  and  sworn  to,  at  Newport,  on  the  day  and 
year  afore  written,  before — 

J.  WANTON,  PETER  OLIVER, 

DAN.  IIORSMANDEN,  ROBT.  AUCHMUTY, 

Commissioners. 


Deposition  of  Justice  Helme. 

The  examination  of  James  Helme,  Esq.,  of  South  Kingstown,  in  the  county  of 
•Kings  county,  and  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,  taken  on  oath,  at  Newport,  in  said 
colony,  this  5th  day  of  June,  A.  D.  1773,  who  saith : 

That  in  October  following  the  burning  the  schooner  Gaspee,  the  superior  court 
of  judicature,  &c.,  for  said  colony,  sat  at  East  Greenwich,  in  the  county  of  Kent,  at 
■which  court  I  presided,  being  the  eldest  justice  of  the  same,  present. 

Before  the  sitting  of  said  court,  I  had  heard  of  the  said  schooner's  being  burnt,  and 
of  Lieutenant  Dudingston's  being  wounded.  I  did  not  give  any  charge  to  the  grand 
jury  at  that  court ;  nor  is  it  usual  in  this  colony  to  give  either  general  or  special 
charges  to  grand  juries. 

But  before  the  meeting  of  said  com^t,  I  informed  my  brethren,  that  if  I  presided 
at  said  court,  I  fully  intended  to  give  the  affair  of  burning  the  said  schooner  and 
wounding  the  lieutenant,  in  charge  to  the  jury  ;  but  having  been  nearly  two  months 
on  the  circuit,  it  entirely  went  out  of  my  mind,  when  the  grand  jury  was  emjjan- 
nelled  ;  and  there  being  no  business  laid  before  said  jury,  they  were  soon  dismissed. 
Immediately  after,  I  recollected  the  omission  of  what  I  intended ;  and  then  men- 
tioned to  some  of  the  other  judges  of  the  court,  that  I  had  entirely  forgotten  to  give 
the  business  of  destroj-ing  the  Gaspee  and  wounding  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  in 
charge  to  the  grand  jury,  which  I  had  designated ;  and  further,  this  deponent  saith 
not.  JAMES  HELME. 

Taken,  and  sworn  to,  at  Newport,  on  the  day  and  year  first  within  written,  before — ■ 
J.  WANTON,     '  ERED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER, 

ROBT;  AUCIBIUTY, 

Commissioners. 


Deposition  of  George  Brown. 

The  examination  of  George  Brown,  of  Providence,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island, 
Esq.,  taken  on  oath,  at  Newport,  in  said  colony,  this  5th  day  of  June,  A.  D.  1773, 
who  saith : 

That  the  evening  preceding  the  burning  of  the  schooner  Gaspee,  he,  with  several 
other  gentlemen,  met  at  the  house  of  JVIr.  James  Sabin,  in  Providence,  aforesaid,  it 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  173 

being  a  public  house,  to  spend  the  evening  together.  Abgut  10  o'clock,  as  I  sup- 
pose, I  heard  a  drum  beat  in  the  street ;  I  asked  the  reason  of  said  drum  beating  ; 
on  Tsvhich,  some  one  of  the  company,  but  whom,  I  do  not  recollect,  answered,  that 
there  were  some  boys  beating  the  drum,  which  was  common  for  two  or  three  years 
past,  in  summer  evenings,  in  said  town  ;  it  is  also  usual  for  the  young  people  to  as- 
semble, to  learn  to  beat  a  drum,  and  other  military  exercises. 

Before  sunset,  that  evening,  I  had  heard  that  the  said  schooner  was  aground  ;  but 
had  not  then  the  least  suspicion  that  any  mischief  was  intended  to  be  done  to  said 
schooner,  or  any  body  on  board  of  her ;  not  having  heard  any  intimation  to  that 
purpose. 

And  I  further  declare,  that  I  have  not  any  knowledge,  directly  or  indirectly,  of 
any  plans  being  laid,  to  burn  or  otherwise  destroy  said  schooner,  or  of  any  person 
concerned  in  so  vile  a  crime,  or  wounding  Lieutenant  Dudingstou. 

Some  time  after  I  heard  the  drum,  I  had  occasion  to  go  to  the  door,  when  1 
plainly  saw  about  ten  or  a  dozen  boys,  with  a  drum ;  and  am  confident  there  was 
not  at  that  time  one  man  among  them;  nor  had  I,  during  that  evening,  any  concep- 
tion of  any  mischief  intended. 

The  place  where  said  schooner  was  burnt,  is  in  the  township  of  Warwick,  in  the 
county  of  Kent,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations.  From 
the  dwelling  house  of  Mr.  Samuel  Tompkins  to  the  place  where  said  schooner  was 
burnt,  is,  according  to  my  judgment,  about  nine  miles  ;  and  further,  this  deponent 
saith  not.  G.  BROWN. 

Taken,  and  sworn  to,  at  Newport,  on  the  day  and  year  above  written,  before^ 
J.  W^ ANTON,  '  FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER, 

ROBT.  AUCHMUTY, 

Commissioners. 


Deposition  of  Samuel  Faulkner,  relative  to  the  Negro  Aaron 
Briggs. 

The  examination  of  Samuel  Faulkner,  of  Bristol,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island, 
and  laborer,  taken  upon  oath,  at  Newport,  the  11th  day  of  June,  1773,  who  saith: 

That  he  lived  with  ]\Ir.  Samuel  Tompkins,  of  the  island  of  Prudence,  in  said 
colony,  from  the  1st  of  April,  1772,  to  the  last  of  July,  following,  and  knoweth  a 
negro  fellow  named  Aaron,  who  lived  with  said  Tompkins  part  of  said  time ;  and,  as 
he  understood,  was  an  indented  servant  to  said  Tompkins. 

That  several  persons  came  over  from  Bristol,  to  said  island,  and  said  that  the 
Gaspee  schooner  was  burnt  two  or  three  days  before,  which  was  the  first  time  he 
heard  of  it. 

That  he  never  requested  the  said  Aaron  to  go  with  him  from  Prudence  to  Bristol, 
in  any  part  of  the  aforementioned  time  of  his  living  with  the  said  Samuel  Tompkins, 
having  then  no  occasion  to  go  to  Bristol. 

That  when  the  people  of  Bristol  gave  an  account  of  the  burning  of  said  schooner, 
Aaron  was  present ;  ^and  did  not  either  at  that  time,  or  at  any  other  time  after- 
wards, discover  that  he  had  any  knowledge  of  the  destroying  of  said  schooner. 

That  when  the  people  from  Biistol  gave  said  account,  they  mentioned  the  par- 


174  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  1772. 

ticular  niglit  on  which  said  schooner  was  burnt ;  and  to  the  best  of  his  recollection, 
Aaron  milked  the  cows  after  sunset  that  night,  and  was  at  home  early  the  next 
morning ;  and  therefore  concluded  that  Aaron  was  at  his  master's  house  the  whole 
of  that  night. 

That  he  does  not  remember  his  telling  the  said  Aaron  he  would  a?k  his  master  to 
let  him  go  with  him  to  Bristol,  in  any  part  of  the  above  mentioned  time  of  his  living 
with  said  Tompkins ;  but  well  remembers  that  tlie  summer  before,  when  he  also 
lived  with  the  said  Tompkins,  that  he  asked  him  once  or  twice  to  let  Aaron  go  with 
him  to  Bristol. 

That  he  ne'\  er  was  in  company  with  Aaron,  when  Mr.  Potter,  of  Bristol,  was 
present ;  but  has  been  in  Mr.  Potter's  rope-walk  in  Bristol,  in  company  with  Aaron  ; 
neither  was  he  ever  on  a  wharf  in  Bristol,  with  Aaron,  nor  at  any  time  pointed  out 
Mr.  Potter  to  said  Aaron ;  and  he  does  not  recollect  that  when  he  was  in  ]\Ir. 
Potter's  rope-walk,  as  aforesaid,  that  he  told  said  Aaron  whose  it  was;  and  that 
when  they  went  to  Bristol  together  the  summer  before  the  Gaspee  was  burnt,  they 
landed  on  the  shore. 

That  when  Aaron  ran  away  from  his  said  master,  he  stole  his  small  boat,  which 
lay  on  the  shore,  and  went  away  in  her ;  and  that  when  the  peojjle  from  Bristol 
brought  the  said  news  of  the  Gaspee's  being  burnt,  she  was  then  lying  on  the  shore, 
with  her  seams  much  opened  ;  that  some  time  after  this,  and  before  Aaron  stole  her, 
she  was  repaired. 

That  he  does  not  remember  that  the  people  from  Bristol  mentioned  any  persons's 
names  of  being  concerned  in  destroying  said  schooner ;  and  he  does  not  know  any 
of  the  persons  who  burnt  said  schooner. 

And  this  examinate  further  saith  :  that  the  said  Aaron  was  looked  upon  by  the 
people  where  he  worked,  as  a  person  much  addicted  to  lying. 

SAMUEL  FAULKNER. 

Taken,  and  sworn  to,  at  Newport,  on  the  day  and  year,  above  mentioned, 
before—  J.  WANTON, 

FRED.  SMYTHE, 
ROBT.  AUCmiUTY', 

Commissioners. 

Deposition  of  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

Darius  Sessions,  Esq.,  of  Providence,  on  oath  declares  and  says  : 

That,  in  the  month  of  March,  A.  D.  1772,  or  thereabouts,  sundry  of  the  principal 
inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Pro-s-idence,  made  application  to  the  deponent,  in  writing, 
representing  that  there  was,  and  had  been  for  some  time  past,  a  schooner  crusing  in 
the  Narragansett  River,  that  disturbed  all  the  vessels  and  boats  that  were  passing 
therein,  by  chasings  firing  at  and  searching  them ;  and  often  treating  the  people 
aboard  of  them,  Avith  the  most  abusive  language  ;  and  that  the  commander  showed 
no  commission,  to  support  such  proceedings. 

They  therefore,  requested  me  to  inform  the  Governor  thereof,  that  if  he  knew  not 
who  he  was,  or  if  he  had  not  been  acquainted  with  his  commission  and  authonty,  he 
would  be  pleased  to  make  inquiry  therein. 

Soon  after   I  received  said  writing,  hearing  that    the   Chief  Justice  was  in  the 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  175 

court  house,  near  by,  I  wrote  a  line  on  the  back  of  said  paper,  and  sent  it  to  him, 
desiring  his  opinion  in  the  afFair  ;  it  was  soon  returned,  with  something  written  under 
mine,  to  this  pin-pose,  viz. :  that  it  was  his  opinion,  that  for  any  person,  whatever,  to 
come  into  the  colony,  and  in  the  body  thereof,  to  exercise  any  authority  by  force  of 
arms,  or  otherwise,  without  showing  his  commission  to  the  Governor  ;  and  (if  a  cus- 
tom house  officer,)  without  being  sworn  into  his  office,  was  guilty  of  a  trespass,  if  not 
piracy ;  all  which  proceedings,  to  the  best  of  my  remembrance,  I  afterwards  sent  to 
the  Governor. 

And  to  the  best  of  his  remembrance,  the  aforesaid  complaint  was  signed  by  the 
following  persons :        JOHN  BROWN,  AMBROSE  PAGE, 

NATHAN  ANGELL,  DARIUS  SESSIONS, 

JOSEPH  NIGHTINGALE,     JAMES  LOVETT, 
JOB  SMITH,  NICHOLAS  BROWN. 

THOMAS  GREENE, 
Newport,  June  12th,  1772. 

Sworn  to,  before—  J.  WANTON,  Governor. 

On  the  7th  of  June,  the  commissioners  requested  the  per- 
sonal attendance  of  the  justices  of  the  Superior  Court,  of  the 
colony. 

The  design  of  the  commissioners,  will  appear  in  the  follow- 
ing papers  : 


The  Justices  of  the  Superior   Court   of  the   Colony  of  Rhode 
Island^  to  the  Commissioners,  ^c. 

The  honorable  the  commissioners,  appointed  by  royal  commission,  for  examining 
into  the  attacking  and  destroying  His  Majesty's  armed  schooner,  the  Gaspee, 
commanded  by  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  and  wounding  the  said  lieutenant,  having 
laid  before  us,  justices  of  the  Superior  Court  of  Judicature,  court  of  assize,  &c., 
within  and  throughout  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  two  examinations  of  Aaron 
Briggs,  two  examinations  of  Patrick  Earle,  the  examination  of  Peter  May, 
the  examination  of  William  Dickinson,  the  deposition  of  Samuel  Tompkins, 
Samuel  Thurston ;  and  of  Somerset  and  Jack,  indented  servants,  for  our  advise- 
ment thereon  : 

It  appeareth  to  us,  from  our  consideration  had  thereupon,  that  no  particular  per- 
son or  persons  are  made  mention  of,  as  being  concerned  in  that  atrocious  crime, 
except  in  the  examination  of  Aaron  Briggs,  a  negro  ;  and  of  Peter  May,  one  of  the 
Gaspee's  people. 

The  confession  of  the  said  Aaron,  upon  his  first  examination,  was  made  in  conse- 
quence of  illegal  threats  from  Capt.  Linzee,  of  hanging  him  (the  said  Aaron)  at  the 
yard  arm,  if  he  would  not  discover  who  the  persons  were,  that  destroyed  the  Gas- 
pee  ;  and  besides,  most  of  the  circumstances  and  facts  related  in  both  of  his  exam- 
inations, are  contradictions  repugnant  to  each  other ;  and  many  of  them,  impossible 
in  their  nature.  . 


176  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

It  is  e\'ident  from  the  depositions  of  Tompkins,  Thurston  and  Aaron's  two  fellow 
servants,  that  he  was  at  home  the  whole  of  that  night  on  which  the  Gaspee  was  at- 
tacked ;  especially,  as  there  was  no  boat  on  that  part  of  the  island,  in  which  he 
could  possibly  pass  the  bay,  in  the  manner  by  him  described. 

In  short,  another  circumstance  which  renders  the  said  Aaron's  testimony  ex- 
tremely suspicious,  is  Capt.  Linzee's  absolutely  refusing  to  deliver  him  up  to  be  ex- 
amined by  one  of  the  justices  of  the  Superior  Court,  when  legally  demanded. 

Peter  May,  in  his  deposition,  mentions  one  person  only  by  the  name  of  Greene ; 
whom,  he  saj's,  he  saw  before,  on  board  the  Gaspee ;  but  the  family  of  Greene  being 
verv  numerous  in  this  colonj^,  and  the  said  Peter  not  giving  the  Christian  name,  or 
describing  him  in  such  a  manner  as  he  could  be  found  out,  it  is  impossible  for  us  to 
know,  at  present,  the  person  referred  to. 

Upon  the  whole,  we  are  all  of  opinion,  that  the  several  matters  and  things  con- 
tained in  said  depositions,  do  not  induce  a  probable  suspicion,  that  the  persons  men- 
tioned therein,  or  either  or  any  of  them,  are  guilty  of  the  crime,  aforesaid. 

It  is,  however,  the  fixed  determination  of  the  Superior  Court  to  exert  every 
legal  aflfort  in  detecting  and  bringing  to  condign  punishment,  the  persons  concerned 
in  destroying  the  schooner  Gasjiee. 

And  if  the  honorable  commissioners  are  of  a  different  sentiment,  we  should  be 
glad  to  receive  their  opinion,  for  our  better  information.  S.  HOPIvINS, 

Chief  Justice. 

J.  HELME,  -)   ^    ■  ,     ^ 

^  Assistant 


M.  BOWLER, 
J.  C.  BENNETT, 

To  the  Honorable  His  Majesty's  Commissioners. 
Pvhode  Island,  June  11,  1773. 


(    Justices. 


The  Commissioners,   &c.,  to  the  Justices  of  the  Superior  Court 
of  Rhode  Island. 

Newport,  June  12,  1773. 
Gentlemen  : — We,  the  commissioners,  appointed  by  His  Majesty  for  inquiring  into 
the  attacking,  plundering  and  burning  His  Majesty's  schooner,  called  the  Gaspee, 
and  wounding  the  lieutenant,  late   commandant  of  said  schooner,  received  your  re- 
port on  the  examinations  by  us  laid  before  you. 

In  the  conclusion  of  the  same  report,  you  are  pleased  to  say,  if  Ave  differ  from  you 
in  sentiment,  you  should  be  glad  to  receive  our  opinion,  for  your  better  information. 
As  by  our  instructions,  we  are  required  to  lay  before  the  civil  magistrates  all  such 
informations  as  we  shall  receive  ;  and  as  it  is  your  proper  office  to  judge  and  act 
thereupon,  in  such  manner  as  you  conceive  most  likely  to  answer  the  ends  of  pubfic 
justice,  therefore,  we  decline  giving  any  sentiment  or  ojiinion  in  the  mattter ;  and 
are,  with  much  respect,  gentlemen, 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servants, 

J.  AVANTON,  FRED.  SMYTHB, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  PETER  OLIVER, 

ROBT.  AUCHMUTY, 

Commissioners. 
To  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  and  the  three  assistant  justices. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  177 

The  following  request  of  Chief  Justice  Smythe,  was  thought 
worthy  of  preservation  : 

-  Chief  Justice  Smijthe  to  the  Commissioners,  &jc. 

Newport,  June  23d,  1773. 
Gentlemen  : — I  desire  the  enclosed,  may  be  inserted  in  the  journal  of  our  proceed- 
ings.    I  am  sorry  it  is  not  iii  my  power  to  meet  you,  this  morning.     As  this  minute 
contains  only  the  plain  facts,  I  hope  there  will  be  no  objection  to  the  request  of — 

Gentlemen,  youi-s,  most  heartily,     • 
FRED.  SMYTHE. 
To  the  commissioners.  Gov.  Wanton,  Mr.  Horsmanden  and  Mr.  Auchmuty. 

"  June  21. — Chief  Justice  Smythe  requested  the  board  that  some  particulars  of  an 
attack  of  an  ai-med  schooner,  called  the  St.  John,  by  the  gunner  of  Fort  George,  in 
this  colony,  in  consequence  of  an  order  signed  by  two  magistrates,  dated  July, 
1764, had  been  imparted  to  him  on  Saturday  last;  and  conceiving  that  great  irregu- 
larltjr,  violence  and  disorder,  accompanied  that  transaction,  and  might  be  considered 
as  a  leading  cause  to  the  destruction  of  the  Gaspee,  requested  the  board  to  take  the 
affair  into  consideration,  and  receive  such  information  as  might  be  procured  on  the 
subject. 

Whereupon,  Gov.  Wanton  accjuainted  the  board  that  his  son  was  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor of  the  colony  at  the  time  of  the  above  transaction,  and  could  fully  explain  the 
affair ;  that  the  said  gunner  of  the  fort  was  in  town,  and  might  be  called  upon  ;  then 
the  board  agreed  to  take  the  matter  into  consideration  to-morrow  morning. 

June  22. — The  board  being  reminded  by  Mr.  Smythe  of  his  motion  yesterday, 
produced  the  original  order,  signed  by  the  magistrates ;  and  inquiring  if  the  Gov 
ernor's  son,  or  the  gunner,  had  been  applied  to,  for  information  on  the  subject. 

Mr.  Auchmuty  proposed  that  the  sense  of  the  board  should  first  be  taken  whether 
the  affair  should  be  at  all  inc|uired  into,  or  not. 

Whereupon,  Gov.  Wanton  and  Chief  Justice  Horsmanden  were  of  opinion,  that 
no  notice  whatever  of  the  attack  of  the  schooner  St.  John,  ought  to  be  taken  by  this 
board. 

Mr.  Smythe,  on  the  contrary,  was  of  opinion,  that  a  strict  Inquiry  ought  to  be 
made  on  the  subject,  and  inserted  in  the  repoi-t.     Mr.  Auchmuty  doubted." 

The  commissioners  probably  closed  their  labors  on  the  23d  of 
June  ;  on  which  the  following  letter,  enclosing  the  report  of 
their  proceedings,  was  sent  home  : 


The  Commissioners  ^-c,  to  Lord  Dartmouth. 

Newport,  June  22,  1773. 
My  Lord : — So  much  time  being  necessarily  spent  in  the  business  of  His  Maj- 
esty's royal  commission,  renders  our  return  to  our  several  colonies  highl_y  expedient;, 

VOL.  VII.         23 


178  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

and  having  executed  the  same  to  the  utmost  of  our  abilities,  we  beg  leave  to  enclose 
to  Your  Lordship,  a  report  thereon. 

Your  Lordship  is  very  sensible  that  for  the  execution  of  the  trust  His  Majesty  hath 
been  graciously  pleased  to  honor  us  with,  it  was  strictly  necessary  to  have  the  assist- 
ance of  secretaries,  messengers  to  summon  witnessess,  or  go  express  on  the  business? 
some  constant  attendants  and  station^y.  No  particular  mode  having  yet  been 
pointed  out  to  us,  for  defrajing  these  expenses  by  government,  Ave  have  discharged 
the  same,  except  the  secretaries,  Mr.  Brenton  and  Clarke  ;  but  at  this,  our  second 
meeting,  we  found  one  of  those  gentlemen  sufficient  for  the  same. 

Mr.  Oliver  would  have  joined  us  in  the  report  to  His  Majesty,  if  the  duty  of  his 
office  had  not  indispensably  recpiired  him  to  take  his  leave  of  us  a  few  days  since. 

i\Iy  Lord,  as  we  have  used  the  utmost  assiduity,  and  made  the  strongest  possible 
efforts  to  the  thorough  accomplishment  of  the  end  and  design  of  the  commission  f 
though  not  attended  with  that  success  most  ardently  wished  for  by  all,  yet  we  hum- 
bly hope  His  Majesty  will  be  graciously  pleased  to  accept  of  our  services  and  en- 
deavors therein,  which  will  reflect  the  greatest  honor  on — 

Your  Lordship's  most  respectful,  and  most  obedient  humble  servants, 
J.  WANTON,  FRED.  SMYUTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  ROBT.   AUCHMUTY, 

Commissioners. 

To  the  Eai-1  of  Dartmouth. 


The  Report  of  the  Commissioners^  c^^c,  to  the  King, 

"  To  the  King's  Most  Excellent  Majesty  : 

May  it  please  Y'our  Majesty  : — In  obedience  to  your  royal  commission  and  in- 
structions, and  from  a  due  sense  of  the  duty  therein  enjoined  on  us,  we  have  used 
our  utmost  care  and  diligence  for  the  purpose  of  inquiring  into,  and  reporting  to 
Your  Majesty,  all  the  circumstances  relative  to  the  attacking,  ijlundering  and  burn- 
ing the  schooner  Gaspee,  wounding  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  and  all  other  matters 
in  the  same  commission  and  instructions  contained. 

We  now  beg  leave,  most  humbly,  to  report  to  Your  Majesty,  that  on  the  earliest 
intelligence  of  Your  jMa.jesty's  commands,  Ave,  Avith  the  utmost  dispatch  in  our 
poAver,  repaired  to  NeAvport,  where,  on  the  otli  of  January  last,  Y'our  Majesty's 
royal  commission  was  ijublished  in  the  jiresence  of  a  large  number  of  people  ;  Avho, 
on  the  occasion,  behaved  with  great  j^ropriety. 

We  next  proceeded  to  give  public  notice  of  the  subject  matter  of  the  commission, 
and  our  being  assembled  for  the  execution  thereof;  requesting  all  persons  Avho 
could  give  us  any  information  relative  to  such  matters,  forthwith  so  to  do. 

We  beg  leave  to  obserA^e  to  Your  Majesty,  that  the  place  Avhere  the  Gaspee  Avas 
destroyed,  is,  at  least,  tAventy-three  miles  from  Newport,  and  the  accident  of  her 
running  aground  but  a  fcAv  hours  before  the  attack,  takes  away  all  possibility  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  toAvn  being  instrumental  in,  or  priA-y  to,  the  destruction  of  her ; 
nor  have  we  any  evidence,  even  of  the  slightest  kind,  to  induce  suspicion  to  the 
contrary. 

We  further  beg  leave  humbly  to  represent  to  Your  Majesty,  that  in  the  jiart  of 
our  duty  contained  under  the  inquiry  ipto  the  assembling,  arming  and  leading  on 
the  people  to  attack  the  Gaspee  ;  also,  the  concerting  and  preparing  the  same,  Ave 
have  been  particularly  attentive. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  179 

But  after  our  utmost  efforts,  we  are  not  able  to  discover  any  evidence  of  either  ; 
and  therefore,  are  humbly  of  opinion,  both  from  the  unforeseen  event  of  the  Gas2)ee's 
running  on  shore,  the  suddenness  of  the  undertaking  and  its  accomplishment,  and 
total  want  of  evidence  of  even  an  intention  to  destroy  her,  though  many  witnesses 
of  credit,  as  well  inhabitants  of  Providence  as  other  places,  were  strictly  examined 
on  this  head,  that  the  Avhole  was  conducted  suddenly  and  secretly. 

On  the  lOtli  of  June  last,  about  1  in  the  morning,  a  number  of  armed  people, 
many  of  whom,  by  their  dress,  appeared  much  above  the  rank  of  common  people, 
and  were  accompanied  by  several  negroes  and  others,  boarded  the  schooner  Gaspee, 
then  on  shore,  on  a  point  of  land,  called  Namquit,  which  is  within  the  township  of 
Warwick,  and  county  of  Kent,  in  this  colony,  and  about  six  miles  from  the  town  of 
Pro\4dence ;  and  after  wounding  the  lieutenant,  and  using  the  crew  with  great  bar- 
barity, first  plundered  and  then  burnt  the  schooner,  taking  the  lieutenant  and  his 
people  on  shore,  to  a  place  called  Pawtuxet,  about  two  miles  distant. 

With  respect  to  the  conduct  of  the  magistrates,  on  the  morning  of  the  11th  of 
June.  The  Deputy  Governor,  being  infoi-med  of  the  destruction  of  the  GasjDec,  the 
lieutenant  being  wounded  on  shore,  at  Pawtuxet,  first  inquired  if  any  of  the  offend- 
ers were  known;  and  receiving  no  information  of  such,  immediately  lepaired  to  the 
place,  and  finding  the  heutenant  in  a  dangei'ous  condition,  oftered  him  every  proper 
assistance ;  to  which  the  lieutenant  replied,  he  wanted  no  favors  for  himself,  but  de- 
sired his  people  might  be  taken  care  of,  and  sent  on  board  the  Beaver ;  which  was 
accordingly  done. 

The  Dejiuty  Governor  then  told  the  lieutenant  the  design  of  his  visit,  was  not 
only  to  afford  him  any  assistance,  but  to  procure  such  a  declaration  from  his  own 
mouth,  respecting,  the  transaction,  that  the  offenders  might  be  brought  to  justice. 

To  which,  the  lieutenant  answered,  he  Avould  not  give  him  any  account  of  the 
matter.  First,  because  of  his  indisposition ;  and,  secondly,  it  was  his  duty  to  forbear 
any  thing  of  that  nature,  until  he  had  done  it  unto  a  court  martial. 

The  Deputy  Governor  then  asked  the  lieutenant  if  he  was  willing  that  his  ofiicers 
and  men  should  be  examined ;  to  which,  after  some  refusal,  he  consented.  They 
were  accordingly  examined  on  oath,  but  were  not  able  to  give  information  against 
an}'  person  in  particular. 

]Mr.  Andrews,  judge  of  the  court  of  vice  admiralty,  in  this  colony,  attended  the 
Dejiuty  Governor,  and  behaved  very  properly  on  the  occasion. 

The  same  day,  the  Dejiuty  Governor,  by  letter,  informed  the  Governor  of  what 
had  happened,  and  of  every  step  he  had  taken  as  a  magistrate,  and  sent  him  all  the 
depositions.  In  another  letter,  of  the  12th  of  June,  he  further  informed  the  Gov- 
ernor, it  was  the  unanimous  opinion  of  a  great  number  of  the  most  respectable  in- 
habitants of  Providence,  that  a  proclamation,  with  a  proper  reward,  should,  by  the 
Governor  be  issued,  for  the  apprehending  and  bringing  to  justice  the  persons  con- 
cerned ;  which  was  accordingly  done. 

In  July,  following,  a  warrant  was  granted,  for  apprehending  one  Aaron  Briggs,  a 
negro,  then  on  board  Your  Majesty's  ship,  the  Beaver,  commanded  by  Capt.  Linzee, 
for  being  concerned  in  burning  the  Gaspee,  and  wounding  the  lieutenant.  The  same 
was  delivered  to  a  sheriff;  who,  after  making  his  business  known,  was  refused  ad- 
mittance into  said  ship  ;  but  the  captain  was  not  then  on  board.  Very  soon  after 
such  refusal,  the  captain  was  informed  of  said  warrant,  and  requested  to  deliver  up 
the  negro,  whom  he  acknowledged  was  on  board ;  but  treated  the  civil  authority  in 
a  most  contemptuous  and  unjustifiable  manner. 


180  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1772. 

Here  the  civil  magistrates  ceased  their  endeavors  to  discover  the  oftenders  ;  for, 
though  there  was  a  superior  court,  held  in,  and  for  the  county  of  Kent,  in  October 
following  the  burning  the  Gaspee,  at  which  the  second  justice  presided,  the  chief 
justice  being  absent,  not  any  charge  was  given  to  the  grand  jury,  to  inquire  into 
that  atrocious  breach  of  law,  nor  any  information  thereof,  by  the  then  acting  attor- 
ney general ;  nor  was  any  thing  done  thereon,  that  we  can  discover. 

Having  now  laid  before  Your  Majesty,  the  substance  of  the  proofs  relative  to  the 
destruction  of  the  Gaspee,  the  barbarity  and  insolence  exercised  upon  the  com- 
mander and  seamen  belonging  to  her,  with  other  necessary  matters,  we  proceed,  in 
obedience  to  Your  Majesty's  directions,  to  assign  some  probable  causes,  which  we 
conceive,  might  lead  to  so  bold  a  violation  of  Your  Majesty's  lav/s  and  authoi'ity. 

The  great  impatience  of  some  people,  in  this  colony,  under  any  restraint  of  trade, 
however  illicit ;  the  check  ^vhich  Your  Majesty's  navy  officers  have  put  to  such 
trade,  by  the  necessary  aid  and  assistance  which  they  have  aiiorded  the  revenue  of- 
ficers ;  the  plundering  and  burning  a  slooj),  called  the  Liberty,  in  this  harbor,  in 
July.  1769,  then  employed  in  Your  Majesty's  revenue  service,  and  commanded  by 
William  Reid,  liberating  a  vessel  and  cargo,  then  under  seizure  by  said  commander, 
and  in  a  violent  and  outrageous  manner  assaulting  and  detaining  him  in  this  town, 
in  duress,  till  the  accomplishment  of  the  above  facts ;  the  same  night,  dragging  two 
boats,  belonging  to  said  sloop,  through  the  streets,  and  burning  them  ;  and  the  per-  . 
petrators  of  the  above  outrage,  escaped  with  impunity ;  not  one  person  being  so 
much  as  apprehended  on  this  occasion. 

It  must  be  further,  with  humble  submission  to  Your  Majesty,  remarked,  that  it 
does  not  appear  to  us,  that  any  complaint  or  information  Avas  given  to  any  peace 
officer  or  other  magistrate,  against  any  person,  Avhatever,  as  concerned  in  the  above 
transaction,  excepting  four  depositions,  taken  before  a  single  magistrate  ;  and  which 
do  not  appear  to  have  been  laid  before  the  Governor  and  Council,  or  to  have  had 
any  effect. 

Certain  persons,  principal  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Providence,  in  March,  pre- 
ceding the  biu-ning  of  the  Gaspee,  complained  to  the  Deputy  Governor,  also  an  in- 
habitant of  that  place,  against  the  conduct  of  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  for  disturbing 
and  obstructing  their  vessels  and  boats,  firing  at  and  searching  them,  without  show- 
inof  any  commission  for  so  doing  ;  and  requested  the  Deputy  Governor  to  inform 
the  Governor  thereof,  that  he  might  inquire  into  the  said  lieutenant's  authority ; 
on  which,  the  Deputy  Governor  laid  the  same  before  the  Chief  Justice,  also  an  in- 
habitant of  the  town  of  Providence,  for  his  opinion,  how  to  conduct  in  the  affair  ;  to 
which,  he  soon  returned  an  answer,  to  the  following  purpose  :  it  was  his  opinion, 
"  that  for  any  person,  whatever,  to  come  into  this  colony,  and  in  the  body  thereof,  to 
exercise  any  authority  by  force  of  arms,  or  otherwise,  without  showing  his  commis- 
sion to  the  Governor,  and  if  a  custom  house  officer,  without  being  sworn  into  his  of- 
fice, was  guilty  of  a  trespass,  if  not  piracy." 

But  what  effect  such  opinion  might  have  on  the  minds  of  the  perpetrators  of  the 
crime,  we  must  most  humbly  submit.  If  Lieutenant  Dudingston,  on  his  first  arrival 
in  the  harbor  of  Newport,  had  waited  on  the  Governor,  acquainting  him  with  his 
power  and  authority,  and  thereby  early  made  his  duty  a  matter  of  notoriety,  he 
would,  at  least,  have  acted  a  prudent  part ;  but  whether  his  duty  obliged  him  so  to 
do,  we  do  not  presume  to  determine. 

There  is  also  too  much  reason  to  believe,  that  in  some  instances  Lieutenant  Dud- 
ingston, from  an  intemperate,  if  not  a  reprehensible  zeal  to  aid  the  revenue  service, 
exceeded  the  bounds  of  his  duty. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  181 

After  exerting  ourselves  to  the  utmost  of  our  abilities,  to  collect  evidence  against 
the  persons  concerned  in  burning  the  Gaspee,  and  wounding  the  lieutenant,  and 
judging  that  we  had  got  all  there  was  any  probability  of  obtaining,  we  laid  such  be- 
fore the  Deputy  Governor,  the  Chief  Justice  of  the  colony,  and  three  of  his  asso- 
ciates ;  among  which  testimonies,  was  Aaron's,  the  negro ;  Avherein,  some  persons 
are  expressly  named  and  charged  as  guilty  ;  and  Mv.  Dickinson's,  late  midshipman 
of  the  Gaspee,  and  on  board  at  the  time  she  was  destroyed,  very  particularly  de-- 
scribed  others. 

The  justices  were  then  informed,  that  the  same  witness  was  now  present,  and 
might  be  by  them  re-examined. 

Soon  afterwards,  at  the  request  of  the  judges,  we  also  delivered  them  otlier  depo- 
sitions, which  had  been  laid  before  us 'by  the  Governor,  and  which  tended  to  dis- 
credit the  testimony  of  said  Aaron.  The  day  following,  we  received  their  report  in 
the  words  following : 

"  The  honorable  the  commissiouers,  appointed  by  royal  commission,  for  examining  into 
the  attacking  and  destroying  His  Majesty's  armed  schooner,  tlie  Gaspee,  commanded  by 
Lientenant  Dudingston,  and  wounding  the  said  lieutenant,  having  laid  before  us,  justices 
of  the  Superior  Court  of  Judicature,  court  of  assize,  &c.,  within  and  throughout  the  colony 
of  Rhode  Island,  two  examinations  of  Aaron  Briggs,  two  examinations  of  Patrick  Earle,  the 
examination  of  Peter  May,  the  examination  of  William  Dickinson,  the  depositions  of  Samuel 
Tompkins,  Samuel  Thurston,  and  of  Somerset  and  Jack,  indented  servants,  for  our  advise- 
ment thereon : 

It  appeareth  unto  us,  from  due  consideration  had  thereupon,  that  no  particular  person  or 
persons  are  made  mention  of  as  being  concerned  in  that  atrocious  crime,  except  in  the  ex- 
amination of  Aaron  Briggs,  a  negro,  and  of  Peter  May,  one  of  the  Gaspee's  people. 

The  confession  of  the  said  Aaron,  upon  his  first  examination,  was  made  in  consequence 
of  illegal  threats  from  Capt.  Linzee,  of  hanging  him  (the  said  Aaron)  at  the  yard  arm,  if  he 
would  not  discover  who  the  persons  were,  that  destroyed  the  Gaspee  ;  and  besides,  most  of 
the  circumstances  and  facts  related  in  both  of  his  examinations,  arc  contradictions  repug- 
nant to  each  other,  and  many  of  them  impossible  in  their  nature. 

It  is  evident  from  the  depositions  of  Tompkins,  Thurston,  and  Aaron's  two  fellow  ser- 
vants, that  he  was  at  home  the  whole  of  that  night  on  which  the  Gaspee  was  attacked  ;  es- 
pecially, as  there  was  no  boat  on  that  part  of  the  island,  in  which  he  could  pass  the  bay  in 
the  manner  by  him  described. 

In  short,  another  circumstance  which  renders  the  said  Aaron's  testimony  extremely  sus- 
picious, is  Capt.  Linzee's  absolutely  refusing  to  deliver  him  up  to  be  examined  by  one  of 
the  justices  of  the  said  Superior  Court,  when  legally  demanded. 

Peter  May,  in  his  deposition,  mentions  one  person  only,  by  the  name  of  Greene,  whom,  he 
says,  he  saw  before  on  board  the  Gaspee  ;  but  the  family  of  Greene  being  very  numerous  in 
this  colony,  and  the  said  Peter  not  giving  the  Christian  name,  or  describing  him  in  such  a 
manner  as  he  could  be  found  out,  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  know  at  present,  the  person 
referred  to. 

Upon  the  whole,  we  are  all  of  opinion,  that  the  several  matters  and  things  contained  in 
said  depositions,  do  not  induce  a  probable  suspicion,  that  the  persons  mentioned  therein, 
or  either  or  any  of  them,  are  guilty  of  the  crime,  aforesaid. 

It  is,  however,  the  fixed  determination  of  the  Superior  Court,  to  exert  every  legal  effort  in 
detecting  and  bringing  to  condign  punishment,  the  persons  concerned  in  destroying  the 
schooner  Gaspee. 

And  if  the  honorable  commissioners  are  of  a  different  sentiment,  we  should  be  glad  to  re- 
ceive their  opinion,  for  our  better  information." 

To  the  latter  part  of  which,  we  answered  : 

"  That,  by  our  instructions,  we  were  commanded  to  lay  before  the  civil  magistrates  all 
such  information  as  we  should  receive ;  and  as  it  was  their  proper  office  to  act  thereupon,  in 
such  manner  as  they  conceive  most  likely  to  answer  the  ends  cf  public  justice,  we  declined 
giving  any  sentiment  or  opinion  in  the  matter." 


182  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1772. 

Touching  the  depositions  of  Aaron,  the  negro,  we  humbly  conceive  it  our  duty  to 
declare  to  Your  Majesty,  that  the  conduct  of  Capt.  Linzee  tended  too  strongly  to 
extort  from  a  weak  or  wicked  mind,  declarations  not  strictly  true ;  that  some  parts 
of  said  depositions  falsify  others  ;  that  allowing  the  account  he  gave  of  the  time  he 
left  the  island  called  Prudence,  the  place  of  his  residence,  on  the  night  the  Gaspee 
Avas  burnt,  and  his  return  thither,  to  be  true,  or  even  near  the  truth,  must  render 
his  being  at  the  taking  and  destroying  her,  totally  impossible ;  the  distance  being  so 
great  between  Namquit  Point  and  said  island. 

In  addition  to  all  which,  there  is  full  and  satisfactory  evidence,  to  prove  him,  the 
whole  of  that  night,  to  have  been  at  home ;  and  the  request  which  he  deposed  was 
made  him,  to  carry  a  person  off  said  island  that  night,  and  which  he  declared  was 
the  occasion  of  his  going  from  home,  jjroved,  on  the  examination  of  the  very  person, 
to  be  an  absolute  falsehood;  and  therefore,  we  are  most  humbly  of  opinion,  no  credit 
is  due  to  said  Aaron's  testimony. 

May  it  please  Your  Majesty,  the  civil  magistrates  being  entrusted  with  the  power 
of  apprehending  and  committing ;  and  having  determined  against  both,  upon  the 
evidence  before  them,  and  there  being  no  probability  of  our  procuring  any  further 
light  on  the  subject,  determines  our  inquiry. 

All  which,  is  submitted  to  Your  Majesty's  ro}-al  wisdom. 

J.  WANTON,  '        FRED.  SMYTHE, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN,  ROBET.  AUCHMUTY, 

To  His  Majesty.  Commissioners. 

Newport,  Rhode  Island,  June  22,  1773. 


Chief  Justice  Horsmanden  to  the  Eart  of  Dartmouth, 

New  York,  20th  February,  1773. 

My  Lord: — On  the  21st  of  January  hist,  I  had  the  honor  of  addressing  Your 
Lordship,  in  conjunction  with  the  rest  of  the  commissioners,  at  Rhode  Island,  giving 
some  account  of  our  proceedings,  and  the  reasons  that  induced  us  to  adjourn  to  the 
26th  of  May  next. 

On  my  arrival  at  that  i)lace,  on  the  31st  of  December,  I  was  sui-prised  to  find 
that  the  main  object  of  our  errand  was  become  public,  Avhich,  in  prudence,  was  to 
be  kejit  secret ;  nevertheless.  Your  Lordship's  letter  to  Governor  Wanton,  was  pub- 
lished in  the  Boston  weekly  paper,  and  spread  industriously  over  all  New  England. 

However  amazing  to  us,  upon  inquiry,  it  came  out,  that  the  Governor  had  commu- 
nicated it  to  his  Assembly,  who  had  got  it  printed  ;  upon  expostulating  with  the 
Governor  upon  it,  he  said,  he  by  law  was  obliged  to  communicate  all  dispatches 
from  the  ministry  to  liis  corporation,  and  sworn  so  to  do  ;  that  such  dispatches  were 
usually  directed  to  the  Governor  and  Company. 

Upon  inquiry  how  Your  Lordship's  packet  was  directed,  neitlicr  he,  nor  his  sec- 
retary could  inform  us ;  the  superscription,  they  said,  was  mislaid,  and  not  to  be 
found ;  but  that  this  was  not  so  directed,  as  the  Governor  said,  I  inferred  from  its 
being  addressed  to  him  (sir). 

My  Lord,  as  to  the  Government  (if  it  deserves  that  name),  it  Is  a  downright  de- 
mocracy ;  the    Governor  is  a  mere  nominal  one,  and  therefore  a  cipher,  without 


1772.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  183 


power  or  authority ;  entirely  controlled  by  the  populace,  elected  annually,  as  all  other 
magistrates  and  officers  whatsoever. 

The  Governor  treated  the  commissioners  Avith  great  decency  and  respect ;  and  to 
do  that  gentleman  justice,  behaved  with  great  propriety,  as  a  commissioner,  except 
his  communicating  Your  Lordship's  letter  to  the  corporation  ;  which,  indeed,  he 
seemed  constrained  to  do,  under  the  above  circumstances. 

To  show  that  the  Governor  has  not  the  least  power  or  authority,  he  could  not 
command  the  sheriff  or  constable  to  attend  us ;  he  prevailed  Avith  them,  indeed  ! 
but  in  expectation  of  being  paid  their  daily  wages  by  the  commissioners,  so  that  they 
were  hired  for  this  service,  at  our  expense ;  and  even  for  expresses  sent  to  summon 
witnesses,  the  commissioners  found  it  necessary  to  advance  their  own  money  ;  also  for 
the  very  fire-wood  expended  for  our  accommodation  in  the  council  chamber,  on  this 
occasion.  This,  My  Lord,  we  readily  disbursed,  and  all  other  contingences,  relying 
upon  the  honor  of  government. 

We  found,  My  Lord,  that  the  Governor,  upon  the  first  notice  of  this  piece  of  ^nl- 
lainy,  had  issued  a  proclamation,  offering  £100  rewai'd,  for  a  discovery,  but  without 
effect. 

My  Lord,  it  is  suggested  in  the  commission,  that  the  people  assembled  upon  this 
adventure,  in  the  town  of  Newport,  and  the  places  adjacent,  by  beat  of  drum,  the 
which  was  intimated,  doubtless,  through  misinformation  ;  for  it  comes  out,  that  it  was  at 
Providence,  on  the  Narragansett  River,  about  thirty  miles  from  Newport,  and  seven 
or  eight  from  the  place  Avhere  the  Gaspee  was  aground.  The  news  of  which,  was 
soon  communicated  to  that  town  ;  and  there  it  is  supposed,  the  people  asscmljled  and 
soon  formed  their  scheme,  to  man  six  or  seven  boats  on  purpose  to  attack  her  at 
that  disadvantage. 

My  Lord,  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  is  branched  out  into  three  divisions  ;  New- 
port, on  Rhode  Island  ;  Providence  and  Warwick,  more  inland,  adjoining  to  the 
Massachusetts  colony.  At  these  three  places,  the  Assembly  is  held,  alternately ; 
but  Newport  is  reputed  the  seat  of  government ;  between  the  two  former,  there  is 
an  emulation,  with  respect  to  their  trade,  and  a  kind  of  enmity,  likewise ;  so  that 
they  do  not  generally  correspond  cordially.  Providence  is  thirty  miles  distant  from 
it,  so  that  it  seems  most  unlikely  that  the  people  of  Newport  could  be  concerned  in 
so  sudden  and  precipitate  an  enterprise  ;  nor  was  the  fact  known  at  Rhode  Island, 
till  the  day  after  the  treason  was  committed. 

My  Lord,  as  to  the  negro  evidence,  which  seems  to  be  the  foundation  of  this  in- 
quiry, it  is  much  to  be  suspected,  though  his  story  is  told  with  much  plausibility,  and 
he  pertinaciously  repeated  it  upon  examination  before  the  commissioners ;  and  a 
sailor  of  the  crew  of  the  Gaspee,  swore  he  was  one  of  the  negroes  after  the  attack, 
that  rowed  the  boat  wliich  landed  part  of  the  Gaspee's  crew,  near  ProAidence. 

But  to  countervail  this  information,  it  was  asserted,  that  the  master  of  this  negro, 
from  whom  he  had  escaped  on  board  the  man-of-war,  with  intent  to  run  away,  who 
is  a  person  of  undoubted  credit,  would  swear  that  about  9  o'clock  that  night  the 
Gaspee  was  destroyed,  he  ordered  this  negro  to  bed,  and  that  he  saw  him  go,  ac- 
cordingly, with  his  two  other  negroes,  with  whom  he  usually  slept ;  and  it  was  said 
that  these  negroes  would  also  depose,  that  he  lay  with  them  all  night,  till  his  master 
called  hira  up  in  the  morning,  on  business. 

My  Lord,  the  commissioners  did  not  enter  upon  counter  evidence,  though  I,  my- 
self, was  inchned  to  do  it,  as  we  proceeded ;  and  bring  the  witnesses  face  to  face, 


184  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

considering  tho  commission  required  we  should  report  all  the  circumstances  attend- 
ing the  affair. 

Captain  Dudingston  had  been  plying  upon  his  business  in  the  Narragansett  Eiver, 
for  some  time ;  he  had  not  communicated  his  commission  to  the  Governor,  on  his 
arrival,  as  Mr.  Wanton  informed  us  ;  Mr.  Dudingston  had  made  several  seizures  of 
prohibited  goods  on  that  station ;  and  on  seizing  their  traffic,  might  probablj-  have 
treated  the  boatmen  with  severity,  roughness  and  scurrillous  language,  by  which, 
the  people  of  that  place  might  be  provoked  to  this  daring  insult  and  resentment ; 
and  not  knowing  Dudingston  bore  the  King's  commission  of  what  he  had  done,  they, 
as  they  gave  out,  looked  upon  him  as  pirate,  and  treated  him  as  such.  For,  as  the 
Governor  informed  us,  upon  complaint  of  his  abuses,  as  they  pretended,  he  exiDOS- 
tulated  with  Mr.  Dudingston,  and  demanded  he  would  satisfy  him  as  to  the  commis- 
sion upon  which  he  acted,  wdiich  at  length  he  did. 

From  these  three  different  branches  of  government.  My  Lord,  there  arise  three 
different  factions  ;  their  election  of  the  chief  officers  being  annual,  sometunes  one 
party  ])revails,  perhaps  the  next  year,  a  different. 

1  was  told  by  a  gentleman  of  the  law  there,  he  had  known  a  land  cause  of  consid- 
erable value  that  had  judgment  reversed  different  ways  seven  or  eight  times;  pro- 
perty being  thus  rendered  wholly  insecure,  no  wonder  that  persons  of  property  and 
best  sense  and  most  sincerity,  among  them,  have  long  wished  for  a  change  of  gov- 
ernment, and  to  be  under  His  Majesty's  more  immediate  protection. 

Though  by  their  charter,  they  are  inhibited  from  passing  laws  contrary  to  those 
of  England,  but  to  be  near  as  may  be,  agreeable  to  them,  yet  they  seem  to  have  paid 
little  regard  to  that  injunction,  as  may  sufficiently  appear  upon  inspection  of  the 
printed  book  of  them  ;  they  have  never  transmitted  them  for  the  royal  approbation 
nor  indeed,  by  their  charter  were  they  obhged  to  do  so. 

Under  these  circumstances.  Your  Lordship  will  not  wonder  that  they  are  in  a 
state  of  anarchy  ;  and  I  assure  Your  Lordship,  that  their  sister  colony  Connecticut, 
is  in  the  same  condition  in  all  respects  ;  justice  has  long  since  fled  that  coun- 
try. I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  being  more  intimately  acquainted  with  the  people 
of  that  colony  for  about  thirty  years  past ;  having  bad  the  honor  of  attending  there 
twice,  upon  two  i-oyal  commissions  for  determining  a  controversy  between  the  cor- 
poration and  a  tribe  of  Lidians  and  the  family  of  the  Masons. 

Major  Mason,  a  gallant  officer  of  the  army,  a  principal  person  among  the  first  of 
the  Eno-lish,  who  first  landed  in  these  parts,  fought  their  battles  with  the  savages, 
conquered  several  tribes,  became  the  foster  father  to  the  colony ;  acted  with  so 
much  generosity,  humanity  and  j^i'udence  towards  the  natives,  and  so  conciliated 
their  friendship  and  esteem,  that,  after  they  had,  through  his  persuasion,  granted 
away  great  tracts  of  their  lands,  to  form  the  newly  proposed  colony,  and  to  make  a 
sufficient  plantation  or  settlement,  the  natives  prudently  thought  of  falling  upon 
a  method  of  reserving  and  secviring  for  the  future,  a  sufficiency  for  the  subsistence 
of  their  tribe ;  and  putting  entire  confidence  ip  Major  Mason,  as  their  patron  and 
friend  (who  had  treated  them  with  great  generosity  and  humanity),  requested  that 
corporation  or  government,  that  they  might,  with  their  approbation,  invest  the  re- 
mainder of  their  lands  in  Major  Mason  and  his  heirs,  as  the  guardians  and  trustees 
of  the  INIohegan  tribe ;  and  that  in  future,  they  should  be  restrained  from  seUing 
more  of  their  lands  without  the  advice  and  consent  of  that  family. 

Some  were  afterwards,  from  time  to  time,  sold,  with  the  consent  of  the  Masons ; 


1772.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  185 


■and  to  preserve  the  fidelity  of  the  ^Mason?,  tlie  family  was  to  have  an  interest  In  the 
lands  so  to  be  conveyed,  coupled  with  the  trust. 

For  this  purpose,  My  Lord,  a  deed  was  executed  with  solemnity,  and  by  the  de- 
K^lared  approbation  of  the  corporation,  entered  upon  their  records. 

Notwithstanding  this  solemn  engagement,  so  recorded,  the  heads  of  tliis  corporation, 
■did,  from  time  to  time  afterwards,  unknown  to  the  Masons,  inveigle  the  Indians  to  con- 
vey to  them  several  tracts  of  very  valuable  reserved  lands,  without  the  consent  of 
the  Masons,  and  divided  them  among  themselves  ;  and  this  was  the  ground  of  their 
complaint,  upon  which  those  special  commissions  Issued. 

Upon  the  whole.  My  Lord,  I  was,  and  am  still  of  opinion,  that  the  devices  in  con- 
sequence of  them,  In  favor  of  the  corporation,  were  unjust;  for  It  appeared  to  me, 
that  the  corporation  had  most  shamefull}'  prostituted  the  good  faith  and  honor  of 
government,  by  ungratefully  and  fraudulently  wresting  many  large  and  valuable 
tracts  from  that  tribe,  and  the  Masons ;  and  becoming  the  Instruments  of  Impover- 
ishing that  honest  and  worthy  family  (whose  ancestors  first  founded  the  colony),  in 
prosecuting  and  maintaining  their  rights,  at  their  own  expense,  for  thirty  years  past, 
and  hitherto  in  vain  ;  for  the  matter  still  lies  before  His  Majesty  and  Council,  waiting 
a  determination. 

Those  two  colonies.  My  Lord,  commenced  their  settlements  nearly  at  the  same 
time ;  their  charters  bear  date  one  year  after  the  other  ;  and  they  adjoin  each  other ; 
the  charters  are  similar  ;  each  has  a  grant  of  "  all  royal  mines,  minerals  and  precious 
stones,"  which  may  be  thought  a  privilege  of  too  much  Importance  for  a  subject  to 
enjoy. 

My  Lord,  these  colonies  united,  which  as  times  are  so  alike  in  featiu-es,  temper 
and  disposition,  that  it  were  a  pity  they  should  remain  separate.  For,  from  my 
knowledge  of  the  people,  and  credible  information  from  many  In  each,  I  am  fully 
persuaded,  that  the  better  sort  of  them  have  long  groaned  under  their  motley  admin- 
istrations, and  wish  for  a  deliverance  ;  to  be  taken  more  immediately  under  the 
protection  of  the  crown.  These  two,  consolidated,  might  become  as  respectable  a 
royal  government,  as  any  on  the  continent.  The  country  in  both,  has  a  rich  soil, 
abounds  in  timber  lit  for  ship-building ;  the  country,  upon  the  whole,  in  my  esteem, 
Is  superior  to  any  I  have  seen  in  my  travels,  from  Boston  to  Virginia. 

But  it  must  be  confessed,  as  to  the  people,  it  Avould  require  a  gentleman  of  very 
extraordinary  qualifications  and  abilities,  to  adventure  upon  the  first  arduous  task, 
for  modeUIng  them  into  due  subordination  and  decorum. 

I  humbly  entreat  Your  Lordship's  pardon  for  trespassing  thus  much  upon  Your 
Lordship's  time  and  patience.  I  flattered  myself  that  some  account  of  the  present 
as  well  as  former  temper  and  circumstances  of  these  two  colonies,  might  not  be  un- 
acceptable to  you,  in  Your  Lordship's  high  department ;  and  conclude  with  the  as- 
surance that  I  am,  with  the  most  profound  respect.  My  Lord, 

Your  Lordship's  most  obedient  and  obliged  humble  servant, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN. 

To  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth. 

VOL.  VII.         24 


186  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 


The  Earl  of  Dartmouth  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island, 

Whitehall,  April  10,  1773. 

Sir:— I  have,  received  your  letters  to  me,  of  the  ir»th  of  October,  and  30th  of 
January-  last. 

I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you.  for  the  favorable  sentiments  you  are  pleased  to 
express  for  me,  in  the  first  of  those  letters ;  but  I  must  not  omit  to  observe  to  you, 
that  the  publication  in  the  common  newspapers,  of  j^arts  of  my  secret  and  confiden- 
tial dispatch,  of  the  4th  of  September  last,  addressed  personally  to  yourself,  cannot, 
I  fear,  be  considered  as  entirely  corresponding  with  those  assurances  you  give  me, 
of  paying  the  strictest  attention  and  defierence  to  such  orders  as  you  shall  receive 
from  me. 

I  am  sensible,  that  you  could  not  do  otherwise  than  communicate  the  substance  of 
that  dispatch  to  the  other  parte  of  jour  corporation  ;  but  I  refer  it  to  your  candor, 
whether  it  was  proper  to  give  copies  of  it. 

I  sincerely  hope  that  it  will  appear  by  the  report  of  the  commissioners  for  in- 
quiring into  the  aifair  of  the  Gaspee  schooner,  that  no  part  of  the  corporation  of  the 
colony  of  Rhode  Island  has  tailed  in  obedience  due  to  the  laws  and  authority  of  this 
kingdom ;  in  the  meantime,  the  King  is  graciously  pleased  to  approve  of  the  respect 
shown  to  his  royal  commission,  and  the  decency  and  order  with  which  it  was  pro- 
claimed. T  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

DARTMOUTH. 

To  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Chief  Justice  Horsmanden  to  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth* 

New  York,  23d  July,  1773,. 

My  Lord : — Your  Lordship's  favor  of  the  10th  of  April  last,  I  was  honored  with, 
on  my  return  hither,  on  the  13th  inst. ;  after  the  close  of  our  commission,  at  Rhode 
Island,  concerning  the  affair  of  the  Gaspee. 

It  gives  me  gi-eat  pleasure,  that  my  representation  of  the  20th  of  February,  has 
the  honor  of  Your  Lordship's  approbation ;  and  now  beg  leave  to  observe  to  Your 
Lordship,  what  has  occurred  to  me,  after  finishing  our  report.  For  waiting  some 
days  at  Newport,  tor  a  passage,  wind  and  weather,  I  was  accidentally  inforRied  of  a 
piece  of  evidence,  which,  had  it  come  to  light  sooner,  would  most  probably  have  cut 
our  business  shorter. 

An  officer  of  a  man-of-war,  stationed  at  Newport,  to  Avliom  the  negro  Aaron  was 
turned  over,  informed  me  that  upon  liis  examining  the  fellow  one  day,  before  his 
master,  and  his  two  negrges  who  came  on  board,  and  interrogating  face  to  face,  the 
fellow  prevaricated  much  ;  but  still  persisted  in  the  main  of  his  story,  notwithstand- 
ing confronted  by  the  master,  and  his  two  negroes,  who  declare  that  he  slept  wthi 
them  all  that  night,  on  which  the  Gaspee  was  destroyed. 

The  master  and  his  negroes  being  dismissed,  the  otficer,  upon  what  he  had  heard, 
from  the  master  and  bis  negroes,  and  had  observed  from  the  conduct  of  Aaron,  upon 
the  occasion,  concluded  he  was  an  impostor,  and  charged  him  home,  as  guch,  and 

*  New  York  Colonial  Documents,  Vol.  VIH. ;  from  British  State  Paper  Office,  165. 


1772.]  AND    TROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  187 

told  him  he  was  convinced  lie  was  no  more  concei-ned  in  that  affair  than  he  himself 
was ;  and  conjured  him  to  tell  the  truth ;  and  at  length,  he  confessed  it  was  all  a 
fiction,  which  he  was  constrained  to,  for  saving  himself  fronl  the  punishment  thi'eat- 
ened  him  on  board  the  other  man-of-war,  as  they  had  charged  him  so  positively  with 
being  one  concerned ;  and  therefore  thought  he  must  confess  himself  guilty,  and 
name  some  principal  people  as  accessories. 

My  Lord,  a  few  days  after  the  Gaspee  was  burnt,  one  of  the  shi]is  stationed  at 
Newport,  went  and  anchored  close  by  the  island  called  Prudence,  where  the  master  o( 
Aaron  lived,  about  seven  miles  from  where  the  Gaspee  lay,  and  Aaron  jjurposing 
to  run  away  from  his  master,  Went  on  board  in  a  small  canoe ;  and  they  rightly 
guessed  of  his  intention,  and  threatened  to  whip  him ;  but  on  second  thoughts, 
charged  him  as  a  confederate  in  destroying  the  Gaspee  ;  and  if  he  did  not  confess 
and  make  discovery,  they  would  whip  him,  and  hang  him  up  at  the  yard  arm. 

And  thus.  My  Lord,  this  forced  confession  of  the  negro  Aaron  has  Ijeen  held  up  by 
the  marine,  as  a  hopeful  and  sure  clue  to  unravel  this  mystery  of  iniquity.  The  fellow 
might  probably  have  heard  the  names  of  the  most  noted  and  principal  traders  at 
Providence,  and  other  trading  towns  in  that  neighborhood,  though  he  might  not 
know  their  pei-sons ;  and  one  Dr.  Weeks,  inserted  in  hi?  list,  he  might  know  per- 
sonally, as  an  attendant  upon  his  master's  fariiil} . 

But  my  sentiments  upon  the  whole  are,  that  this  daring  insult  was  committed  by 
a  number  ol!'  bold,  daring,  rash  enterprising  sailors,  collected  suddenly  from  the 
neighborhood,  who  banded  themselves  together,  upon  this  bold  enterpriz,;  •  by  whom 
stimulated  for  the  purpose,  I  cannot  conjecture.  They  clmningly  calculated  the  at- 
tack at  a  time  of  night,  under  the  Gaspee's  disadvantage,  agi-oiind,  when  it  was 
probable  the  crew  would  be  below  deck,  and  asleep  ;  as  was  the  case,  only  one  seii'- 
try  on  deck  ;  and  thus,  by  surprise,  easily  boarded  and  jilundered  her. 

My  Lord,  I  have  been  twovdyages  of  four  hundred  nliles  each,  upon  this  occasion, 
at  great  expense  ;  and  no  small  fatigue,  for  a  person  of  my  age,  viz. ;  seventy-six ; 
and  I  assure  Your  Lordship,  I  am  already  upwards  of  £  200,  out  of  pocket ;  and  am 
still  liable  for  my  proportion  with  the  other  commissioners,  for  the  pay  of  the  clerks 
we  found  necessary  to  attend  us  upon  the  service  ;  and  though  we  have  not  had 
the  wished  lx)r  success,  we  hope  His  Majesty  will  graciously  accept  our  sincere 
endeavors. 

My  Lord,  I  have  lately  received  advice  that  His  Majesty  has  been  graciouslv 
jfileased  to  sign  a  warrant  for  my  salary,  as  chief  justice,  which  further  adds  to  the 
obligations  Your  Lordship  has  conferred  upon  me,  which  I  cannot  but  esteem  with 
the  utmost  gratitude. 

I  am,  with  profound  respect.  My  Lord, 

Your  Lordship's  most  obliged  and  dutiful,  humble  servant, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN. 

To  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth. 


The  following  letter ,  which  is  printed  in  the  New  York  colo- 
nial documents,  is  here  inserted  to  show  that  Chief  Justice 
Horsmanden,  of  New  York,  one  of  the  royal  commissioners,  to 
inquire  into  the  destruction  of  the  Gaspee,  had  not,  in  1777,  or 


188  Records  of  the  colony  of  rhode  island       [1772. 

five  years  after  the  commission  was  held  in  Newport,  been  paid 
his  expenses  for  that  service. 


Chief  Justice  Horsmandm  to  Governor  Tnjon. 

!Xew  York,  19th  April,  177  7, 

Honored  Sir  : — Your  Excellency  -vvell  remembers  what  circumstances  you  found 
me  in,  on  your  arrival  in  this  government ;  that  I  was  then  chief  justice  of  the  pro- 
vince, and  had  been  so  for  eight  or  ten  years  (as  my  memory  serves  me),  and  had 
no  other  allowance  on  the  Assembly  for  the  support  of  the  dignity  of  that  office, 
than  a  miserable  pittance  of  £300  a  year,  this  currency,  and  the  fees  of  the  office, 
triffing  and  insignificant ;  but  upon  Your  Excellency's  recommendation  home,  His 
Majesty  was  pleased  to  allow  me  £oOO,  sterling,  a  year,  which  I  was  to  receive  half 
yearly,  on  the  commissioners  of  trade  at  Boston  ;  which  I  did.  to  the  time  of  theii- 
removal  to  Halifax ;  since  which,  has  incurred  one  year  and  a  half,  the  beginning  of 
this  month  :  but  I  am  much  at  a  loss  how  to  apply  for  it ;  but  as  the  commissioners 
are  now  in  London,  I  have  written  to  them  for  information. 

When  the  duties  arisen  by  trade,  fell,  the  commissioners  had  directions  from  the 
lords  of  the  treasury,  to  give  drafts  upon  them  for  the  salaries  of  the  officers  of  gov- 
ernment, of  which  I  have  had  two,  the  salaries  being  payable  half  yearly. 

Your  Excellency  well  remembers  that  three  or  four  years  ago  (I  think),  the 
King's  special  commission  was  sent  over  by  Lord  Dartmouth,  then  secretary  of  state, 
empowering  the  persons  therein  named  (of  which  I  was  one),  to  inquire  into  the 
aifair  of  the  destruction  of  His  Majesty's  schooner,  the  Gaspee,  at  Rhode  Island. 

Your  Excellency  knew  the  state  of  health  I  was  in,  at  the  time  I  embarked  for 
Newport,  much  enfeebled  by  the  rheumatism,  the  time  of  year  in  December,  when 
it  is  generally  expected  the  river  is  full  of  ice.  Myself  unable  to  walk  without  he>pf 
and  at  a  time  of  life  drawing  near  to  four-score  ;  but  as  Lord  Dartmouth's  directioiis 
were  to  proceed  immediately  to  that  place,  in  order  to  execute  that  commission,  I 
did  not  hesitate  to  undertake  it;  but  was  obliged  to  take  with  me  my  wife,  carriage 
and  two  horses,  without  Avhich,  I  could  have  been  of  no  use. 

After  passing  several  Aveeks  there,  and  doing  little  to  the  purpose,  the  commis- 
sionei-s  found  it  necessary  to  adjourn  over  to  the  next  year,  which  occasioned  a 
second  voyage,  under  the  like  circumstances ;  and  at  length  the  commissioners  were 
obliged  to  close  the  commission,  having  not  been  able  to  make  any  discovery,  to  an- 
swer the  intent  of  the  commission  ;  upon  which  occasion,  I  expended  upwards  of 
£200,  of  my  own  money,  which  remains  out  of  pocket  to  this  day:  and  hitherto,  my 
trouble  for  nothing. 

Upon  the  proceedings  of  the  commissioners  being  sent  home.  Lord  Dartmouth  di- 
rected the  commissioners  to  send  home  their  accounts  of  the  expenses  they  had  been 
at.  It  was  imagined  with  a  view  to  compel  Rhode  Island  government  to  discharge 
them;  but  if  that  was  the  intent,  the  alterations  of  the  circumstances  of  that  government 
in  this  time  of  confusion,  that  expectation  is  at  an  end;  and  in  the  anarchy  and  dis- 
traction which  now  surrounds  us,  and  the  great  difficulty  in  getting  money  amongst 
us,  which  is  our  due,  Your  Excellency  knows  how  needful  it  is  to  be  solicitous  for  it, 
where  it  is  due  in  other  quarters. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  189 

I  must  humbly  entreat  Your  Excellency  to  represent  my  caJsC  to  Lord   George 
Germain,  hoping,  from  his  clemency  and  goodness,  to  have   a  iifethod  pointed  out, 
by  which  I  may  have  satisfaction  made  in  the  foregoing  particulars. 
I  am,  with  the  greatest  respect,  sir, 

Your  Excellency's  most  devoted,  obedient,  humble  servant, 

DAN.  HORSMANDEN. 
(Referred  to  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  George  Germain, 
"  by  William  Tryon). 


The  meeting  of  the  royal  commission  at  Newport,  the  pro- 
ceedings of  which  have  been  given,  attracted  great  attention 
throughout  the  English  colonies.  The  extracts  we  have  print- 
ed from  the  Boston  newspapers,  but  speak  the  minds  of  the 
whole  people. 

The  House  of  Burgesses,  of  the  colony  of  Virginia,  took  of- 
ficial notice  of  it,  and  on  the  ]2th  of  March,  1773,  passed  resolu- 
tions appointing  "a  committee  of  correspondence  and  in- 
quiry," consisting  of  eleven  persons  ;  among  which,  were 
Thomas  Jefferson,  Patrick  Henry,  Peyton  Randolph  and  Rich- 
ard Henry  Lee. 

The  preamble  sets  forth  that  "  His  Majesty's  faithful  sub- 
jects have  been  much  disturbed  by  various  rumors  and  reports  of 
proceedings,  tending  to  deprive  them  of  their  ancient,  legal  and 
constitulional  rights."  The  committee  were  instructed;  "  to 
obtain  the  most  early  and  authentic  intelligence  of  all  such  acts, 
and  resolutions  of  the  British  Parliament,  or  proceedings  of  the 
administration,  as  may  relate  to,  or  affect  the  British  colonies 
in  America  ;  and  to  keep  and  maintain  a  correspondence  with 
our  sister  colonies,  respecting  these  important  considerations  ; 
and  the  result  of  such  their  proceedings  from  time  to  time,  to 
lay  before  the  House." 

They  were  further  instructed  "  to  inform  themselves  particu- 
larly of  the  principles  and  authority  on  which  was  constituted  a 
court  of  inquiry,  said  to  have  been  lately  held  in  Rhode  Island, 
with  power  to  transport  persons  accused  of  offences  committed 
in  America,  to  places  beyond  the  sea,  to  be  tried." 


190  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  1772. 

The  resolutions  were  transmitted  by  Peyton  Randolph,  by  or- 
der of  the  House  of  Burgesses,  to  Metcalfe  Bowler,  speaker  of 
the  House  of  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island.  Mr.  Randolph  asks 
that  they  be  laid  before  that  body  at  an  early  day,  with  the 
request  that  they '•  appoint  some  of  their  body  to  communi- 
cate from  time  to  time  with  the  corresponding  committee  of 
Virginia."* 

Rhode  Island,  in  May,  1773,  passed  a  resolution,  appointing 
the  following  persons,  viz.  :  Stephen  Hopkins,  Metcalfe  Bow- 
ler, Moses  Brown,  John  Cole,  William  Bradford,  Henry  Mar- 
chant  and  Henry  Ward,  as  their  committee  of  correspondence. 
The  General  Assembly  requested  the  Governor  to  furnish  the 
committee  with  a  copy  of  his  commission,  as  one  of  the  judges 
of  the  court  of  inquiry  ;  and  of  all  other  papers  which  were 
laid  before  that  court.  The  Assembly  further  requested  the 
speaker  to  write  to  all  the  legislative  assemblies  in  North 
America,  informing  them  of  the  proceedings  of  the  colony^ 
*'  reLiting  to  the  preservation  of  the  rights  of  the  colonies." 

The  other  British  colonies  acted  promptly  in  the  matter  ; 
appointed  their  committees  of  correspondence,  and  passed 
resolutions  similar  to  those  of  Virginia.  Among  the  colonies 
which  responded,  was  that  of  Nova  Scotia. 

We  close  this  publication,  with  the  remarks  of  Judge  Sta- 
ples, inasmuch  as  they  contain  the  legal  opinion  of  an  eminent 
jurist,  who  had  carefully  examined  the  testimony  ;  and  who, 
as  a  diligent  historian,  is  familiar  with  all  the  events  connected 
with  the  Gaspee  afl'air  : 

"  In  reviewing  the  report  of  the  commissioners,  our  surprise  is  not  so  much  excited 
at  the  conclusion  to  which  they  came  from  the  evidence  before  them,  as  at  the  small 
amount  of  testimony  they  collected. 

It -would  be  doing  great  injustice  to  the  memories  and  characters  of  Governor 
Wanton,  Judges  Horsmanden,  Oliver  and  Auchmuty,  to  suppose  that  they  sup- 
pressed any  evidence,  or  did  not  exert  themselves  to  the  utmost  to  procure  testi- 
mony. The  course  they  afterwards  took  in  the  war  of  the  revolution,  when  they 
joined  the  ministerial  party  in  the  country,  is  a  sufficient  guaranty  thst  they  were, 


*  The  correspondence  of  the  several  colonies,  together  with  the  resolutions,  passed  by 
them,  in  accordance  with  the  desires  of  Virginia,  is  printed  at  length  in  this  volume. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  191 

by  no  means,  lukc-warm  in  the  service  of  His  Majesty.  They  were  surrounded,  too, 
at  the  time  of  their  sessions,  by  the  oIKcers  of  the  crown,  and  individuals  hijjjh  in 
rank  and  standing,  who  were  eager  in  the  chase  of  those  who  insulted  their  sover- 
eign, in  the  person  of  liis  representative,  Lieut.  Dudingston. 

Under  these  circumstances,  it  is  passing  strange,  that  no  persons  could  be  found, 
who  could  identify  those  engaged  in  the  enterprise,  or  that  the  great  reward  offered 
on  the  occasion,  should  not  have  induced  some  one  to  have  turned  informer.  That 
the  enterprise  was  suddenly  conceived,  there  can  be  no  doubt  ;  but  every  circum- 
stance shows,  that  no  great  care  was  used  to  preserve  secresy.  They  were  called 
together  by  the  beating  of  a  drum  in  the  streets.  The  collecting  of  the  ])oats,  the 
assembling  at  a  public  house,  the  embarking  from  a  public  wharf,  all  must  have  at- 
tracted the  notice  of  the  inhabitants,  The  parties  assumed  no  disguise  of  any  kind, 
but  went  in  their  usual  dress. 

Among  them,  were  some,  little  conscious  of  the  crime  they  were  committing,  and 
the  penalty  they  were  incurring.  Mr.  John  Howland  says,  that  on  the  morning 
after  the  affair,  Justin  Jacobs,  a  young  man,  was  parading  himself  on  "  the  Great 
Bridge,"  then  the  usual  place  of  resort,  with  Lieutenant  Dudingston's  gold  laced 
beaver  on  his  head,  detailing  to  a  circle  around  him,  the  particulars  of  the  transac- 
tion, and  the  manner  in  which  he  obtained  the  hat  from  the  cabin  of  the  Gaspee. 
It  required  sharp  words  to  induce  him  to  retire  and  hold  his  peace.  There  Avere 
others,  probably,  equally  indiscreet;  and  yet  not  an  individual  could  be  found,  who 
knew  anything  about  the  affair." 

The  following  song,  composed  afc  the  time,  on  the  occasion, 
is  attributed  to  Capt.  Swan,  of  Bristol. 

"  He  richly  deserves  the  thanks,  not  only  of  his  cotempora- 
ries,  but  of  posterity  ;  not  so  much  for  the  sweet  poetry  of  his 
song,  as  for  the  ballad  shape  in  which  he  invested  the  transac- 
tion. Undoubtedly  some  tune  was  found,  at  the  time,  to  match 
it,  notwithstanding  the  limping  gait  of  some  of  the  stanzas  ; 
and  as  it  was  sung  in  the  circle  of  boon  companions,  they  re- 
called the  light  of  the  burning  Gaspee  to  their  recollection,  and 
hailed  it  as  being,  what  subsequent  events  have  shown  it  to  be, 
the  dawning  light  of  freedom,  whose  mid-day  effulgence  now 
overspreads  the  land." 

SON  Gr. 

'Twas  in  the  reign  of  George  the  Third, 
Our  public  peace  was  much  disturbed 
By  ships  of  war,  that  came  and  laid 
Within  our  ports,  to  stop  our  trade. 
Seventeen  hundred  and  seventy-two, 
In  Newport  harbor  lay  a  crew, 
That  played  the  part  of  pirates  there, 
The  sons  of  freedom  could  not  bear, 


192  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

Sometimes  they  weighed  and  gave  them  chase. 

Such  actions,  sure  were  very  base. 

No  honest  coaster  could  pass  by 

But  what  they  would  let  some  shot  fly  ; 

And  did  provoke,  to  high  degree. 

Those  true  born  sons  of  liberty  ; 

So  that  they  could  not  longer  bear 

Those  sons  of  Belial  staying  there. 

But  'twas  not  long  'fore  it  fell  out. 

That  William  Dudingston,  so  stout, 

Commander  of  the  Gaspee  tender. 

Which  he  has  reason  to  remember, ' 

Because,  as  people  do  assert, 

He  almost  had  his  just  desert ; 

Here,  on  the  tenth  day  of  last  June, 

Betwixt  the  hours  of  twelve  and  one. 

Did  chase  the  sloop,  called  the  Hannah, 

Of  whom,  one  Lindsay,  was  commander. 

They  dogged  her  up  Pro\ndence  Sound, 

And  there  the  rascal  got  aground. 

The  news  of  it  flew  that  very  day. 

That  they  on  Namquit  Point  did  lay. 

That  night,  about  half  after  ten 

Some  Narragansett  Indian  men, 

Being  sixty-four,  if  I  remember. 

Which  made  the  stout  coxcomb  surrender ; 

And  Avhat  was  best  of  all  their  tricks, 

They  in  his  breech  a  ball  did  fix  ; 

Then  set  the  men  upon  the  land. 

And  burnt  her  up,  we  understand ; 

Which  thing  provoked  the  King  so  high 

He  said  those  men  shall  surely  die ; 

So  if  he  could  but  find  them  out. 

The  hangman  he'll  employ,  no  doubt ; 

For  he's  declared,  in  his  passion. 

He'll  have  them  tried  a  new  fashion. 

Now,  for  to  find  these  people  out, 

King  George  has  offered  very  stout ; 

One  thousand  pounds  to  find  out  one 

That  wounded  William  Dudingston. 

One  thousand  more,  he  says  he'll  spare, 

For  those  who  say  the  sheriffs  were ; 

One  thousand  more,  there  doth  remain 

For  to  find  out  the  leader's  name  ; 

Likewise,  five  hundred  pounds  per  man. 

For  any  one  of  all  the  clan. 

But  let  him  try  his  utmost  skill, 

I'm  apt  to  think  he  never  will 

Find  out  any  of  those  hearts  of  gold, 

Though  he  should  offer  fifty  fold. 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  193 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantation^  at  Pr evidence , 
on  the  last  Wednesday  in  October,  1772. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wj^nton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  the  deputies  of  the  town  of  Hopkinton,  by  order 
and  in  behalf  of  said  town,  preferred  a  petition,  and  repre- 
sented unto  this  Assembly,  that  some  years  ago,  there  was  an 
highway  laid  out  in  said  town,  by  order  of  the  General  Assem- 
bly, beginning  at  an  highway  which  runs  across  said  town  from 
Richmond,  westward  to  the  colony  line  ;  and  from  said  high- 
way, southerly,  to  Benjamin  Maxson's  Mills ;  and  further 
southerly,  to  Crandall's  Mills,  at  the  lower  end  of  the  said  town 
of  Hopkinton. 

And  that  the  said  highways  hath  not  been  cleared  or  mend- 
ed, nor  can  be,  without  doing  great  damage  to  several  of  the 
proprietors  of  the  lands  through  which  it  passeth  ;  and  there- 
fore prayed  this  Assembly  to  empower  the  town  council  of  the 
said  town  of  Hopkinton,  to  alter  or  exchange  the  said  high- 
way, so  that  the  public  may  be  better  served,  and  the  owners 
of  said  land  suffer  less  damage  ;  and  the  said  petition  being 
duly  considered,-— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
granted. 

Whereas,  a  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  East  Greenwich, 
of  said  denomination  of  Christians  called  Presbyterians,  or  Con- 
gregationalists,  preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this 
Assembly,  that  they  have,  for  a  long  time,  labored  under  the 
disadvantage  of  having  no  house  to  meet  in,  for  the  public  wor- 
ship of  God  ;  and  that  they  are  unable  of  themselves,  to  build 
one  ;  but  have  great  encouragement  from  their  brethren,  in 

VOL.  VII.         25 


194  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

the  neighboring  governments,  that  they  will  assist,  in  case  they, 
the  petitioners,  can  ol)tain  the  grant  of  a  lottery  for  that  pur- 
pose ;  and  therefore,  prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  them  a 
lottery,  for  raising  the  sum  of  §1,500,  for  building  a  Presby- 
terian or  Congregational  meeting  house  in  said  town  ;  and 
that  Messrs.  William  Johnston,  Gideon  Mumford,  James  Searle 
and  Archibald  Crarey,  may  be  appointed  managers  or  direc- 
tors of  the  same  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  aforesaid  petition  be,  and 
the  same  is  hereby,  granted  under  the  usual  restrictions. 

Provided,  that  the  said  lottery  do  not  take  place  until  the 
1st  day  of  May,  A.  D.  1773  ;  and  that  the  colony  incur  no 
expense  thereby. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  gunner  of  Fort  George, 
be,  and  he  is  hereby,  directed  to  fire  a  royal  salute  (at  the 
expense  of  the  colony,)  on  each  of  the  following  days,  to  wit : 
on  the  birth  day  of  Ilis  Majesty  ;  on  the  birth  day  of  his  royal 
consort  ;  on  the  day  of  His  Majesty's  accession  ;  on  the  day 
of  coronation  ;  and  on  the  day  of  the  election  of  general  offi- 
cers for  this  colony. 

Whereas,  a  petition,  signed  by  a  great  number  of  subscrib- 
ers, was  presented  to  this  Assembly,  setting  forth,  that  there 
is  an  highway  laid  out  in  the  north  part  of  the  town  of  Glo- 
cester,  from  the  colony  line,  at  a  place  known  by  the  name  of 
Allum  Pond  Hill  ;  and  leading  thence  southerly,  to  the  mills^ 
called  Cook's  Mills  ;  about  the  distance  of  five  miles,  crossing 
the  river,  called  Clear  River  ;  and  at  the  north  end,  meeting 
an  highway  laid  out  in  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  which  leads 
from  Oxford  to  Providence.  That  if  the  said  road  be  put  into 
good  order,  it  will  be  greatly  beneficial  to  the  public  ;  and 
that  there  are  but  few  inhabitants  in  that  part  of  the  town, 
who  are  unable  to  make  and  keep  the  said  road  good  ;  and 
praying  this  Assembly  to  grant  a  lottery,  to  raise  the  sum  of 
$400,  to  be  appropriated  to  the  building  a  bridge  over  the 
said  river,  and  the  clearing  the  said  highway,  and  making  it 
good  for  traveling ;  and  that  Messrs.  Jonathan  Harris,  Enoch 
Whipple,  Thomas  Herrenden,  William  Ross  and  John  How- 


1772.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  195 

land,  Jr.,  may  be  appointed  directors  of  the  said  lottery  ;  on 
consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  aforesaid  petition  be,  and 
and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  restrictions. 

Provided,  that  the  said  lottery  do  not  take  place  until  the 
1st  day  of  April,  A.  D.  1773  ;  and  that  no  expense  accrue  to 
the  colony,  thereby. 

Whereas,  a  petition,  signed  by  a  great  number  of  subscrib- 
ers, was  preferred  to  this  Assembly,  representing  that  the 
meeting  house  in  the  town  of  Johnston,  is  indebted  upwards  of 
c£l,500,  old  tenor,  for  what  hath  already  been  done  upon  it  ; 
which  sum  hath  been  due  ever  since  the  year  1764  ;  and  that 
the  said  meeting  house  is  yet  unfinished,  and  unfit  for  the  pur- 
pose for  which  it  was  designed  ;  and  praying  this  Assembly  to 
grant  a  lottery,  for  raising  $500,  agreeably  to  a  scheme 
with  the  said  petition  presented,  to  be  appropriated  for  the 
purposes  of  paying  the  said  debt,  and  finishing  the  said  meet- 
ing house  ;  and  that  Messrs.  Andrew  Aldrich  and  Jeduthnu 
Belknap,  may  be  appointed  directors  and  managers  of  the  said 
lottery  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  aforesaid  petition  be,  and 
the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  restrictions. 

Provided,  that  the  said  lottery  do  not  take  place  until  the 
1st  day  of  February,  A.  D.  1773  ;  and  that  the  colony  incur 
no  expense  thereby. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  petition  now  before  this 
Assembly,  praying  that  a  duty  may  be  imposed  upon  ship 
timber,  exported  out  of  this  colony,  in  shipping  called  rafts, 
be  referred  to  the  next  session  ;  and  that  in  the  mean  time 
public  notice  be  given  thereof,  in  the  Newport  Mercury  and 
Providence  Gazette. 

Whereas,  at  the  General  Assembly,  held  in  October,  A.  D. 
1771,  an  act  was  passed,  granting  a  lottery  for  raising  the 
sum  of  $600,  for  building  a  steeple,  and  purchasing  a  clock, 
for  the  use  of  King's  Church,  in  Providence  ;  which  lottery 
hath  been  since  drawn,  and  the  steeple  built. 


t> 


196  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

And  whereas,  the  congregation  of  said  church,  have  repre- 
resented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  the  sum  raised  by  said  lot- 
tery, is  by  no  means  adequate  to  the  expenses  they  have  been 
at,  and  must  still  be  at  ;  and  prayed  that  another  class  of  a 
lottery  may  be  granted  them,  for  the  raising  a  further  sum 
of  $1,000  ;— 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  another  lottery  be 
granted,  for  raising  the  said  sum  of  $1,000,  for  the  finishing 
said  church,  under  the  same  regulations  as  the  former  lottery 
ranted  them  ;  and  that  Messrs.  John  Smith,  John  Innis 
Clarke,  Ebenezer  Thompson  and  John  Updike,  all  of  said 
Providence,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  directors 
thereof. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  James  Barker,  Esq.,  the  Hon. 
Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  Mr.  Moses  Brown,  Mr.  Benjamin 
West,  Mr.  William  EUery,  and  the  secretary  be,  and  they  are 
hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  inspect  the  accounts  of 
Doctor  Thomas  Moffatt  and  Martin  Howard,  Jr.,  Esq.,  this 
day  exhibited  to  this  Assembly,  relative  to  the  losses  respec- 
tively sustained  by  them  in  the  riots,  in  the  town  of  Newport, 
in  the  year  1765  ;  that  they  expunge  any  charges  made  by 
the  said  sufferers,  or  either  of  them,  for  expenses  upon  their 
voyage  to,  while  at,  and  in  their  return  from,  Great  Britain  ; 
and  for  any  consequential  damages  they  may  have  charged  ; 
that  they  make  deductions  from  their  respective  accounts,  for 
the  value,  as  nearly  as  may  be,  of  such  books,  goods  and  ef- 
fects, as  may  appear  to  have  been  saved,  and  may  be  in  the 
hands  of  the  said  sufferers,  their  friends  or  others,  according 
to  the  best  light  the  said  committee  may  obtain,  from  any  de- 
positions heretofore  taken,  by  order  of  this  Assembly,  or  from 
such  other  depositions  and  proofs  as  they  may  obtain. 

That  the  said  committee  be,  and  hereby  are,  empowered  to 
summon  any  persons  before  them,  and  to  examine  them,  upon 
oath,  for  the  obtaining  the  best  knowledge  of  the  real  loss  sus- 
tained by  said  sufferers,  during  the  said  riot  ;  that  they  con- 
sider no  charge,  but  for  such  effects   as  were  absolutely  lost, 


1772.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  197 

damaged  or  destroyed,  during  the  said  riot  ;  and  that  they 
make  report  of  their  doings  to  this  Assembly,  as  soon  as 
may  be. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  attorney  gen- 
eral attend  upon  the  said  committee,  to  assist  them  in  their  in- 
spection and  examination  of  the  said  accounts. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  appointed  at 
this  session,  to  inspect  the  accounts  of  Doctor  Thomas  Mof- 
fatt  and  Martin  Howard,  Jr.,  Esq.,  do  not  take  into  consider- 
ation the  account,  at  this  session  exhibited  by  Joseph  x\plin, 
Esq.,  in  behalf  of  the  said  Martin  Howard  ;  as  it  appears  upon 
examination,  to  be  the  same  account  which  was  heretofore 
presented  to  this  Assembly,  and  rejected,  as  being  charged  in 
gross  and  not  containing  the  particulars  of  the  loss  sustained 
by  him,  in  the  riots  in  Newport,  in  the  year  1765. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  when  the  said  Martin 
Howard  shall,  by  himself  or  his  agent,  present  an  account  of 
the  particulars  of  his  said  loss,  the  same  shall  be  considered 
by  a  committee,  then  to  be  appointed  for  that  purpose. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  whereas,  Augustus 
Johnston,  Esq.,  hath  not,  at  this  session,  applied  to  this 
Assembly,  for  their  consideration  of  his  loss,  by  the  said  riots  ; 
that,  whenever  he  shall,  there  shall  be  the  same  consideration 
had  thereof;  and  that  a  copy  of  this  vote  be  by  the  secretary 
delivered,  or  sent,  to  the  said  Martin  Howard  and  Augustus 
Johnston. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the 
Governor,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  write  to  the  lords 
of  the  treasury,  in  Great  Britain,  and  inform  them  how  far  this 
Assembly  have  proceeded  upon  the  petitions  of  the  sufferers  by 
said  riots  ;  and  respecting  the  moneys  due  from  the  crown,  to 
this  colony,  requesting  that  the  same  may  not  be  delayed  fur- 
ther than  the  next  session  of  Parliament  ;  and  also,  to  the 
agent  for  this  colony,  upon  the  same  subject. 

Whereas,  the  conduct  of  Henry  Marchant,  Esq.,  as  agent 
for  this  colony,   in   Great  Britain,  merits  the  approbation  of 


198  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1772. 

this  Assembly,  this  Assembly  do  therefore,  as  a  testimonial 
thereof — 

Vote  and  resolve,  that  they  fully  approve  of,  and  return  hiin 
their  thanks  for,  his  prudent  conduct  in  the  said  department. 

Whereas,  the  ministers,  church  ^Vardens,  vestry  and  a 
number  of  the  congregation  of  King's  Church,  in  Provi- 
dence, in  behalf  of  said  church,  preferred  a  petition,  and 
represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  they  have  been  at  very 
great  expenses,  in  repairing  said  church  ;  and  that  they  have 
labored  under  many  difficulties,  in  raising  moneys,  from  among 
the  members  of  said  church,  to  make  such  necessary  repairs  ; 
owing  to  their  not  being  authorized,  by  any  law  of  this  colo- 
ny, to  carry  into  execution  such  regulations  as  might  be  agreed 
to  by  the  majority  of  the  congregation  ;  and  thereupon  prayed 
this  Assembly,  that  an  act  may  be  passed,  to  incorporate  them 
into  a  body  politic,  by  the  name  of  The  Minister,  Church  War- 
dens, Vestry  and  Congregation  of  King's  Church,  in  Provi- 
dence ;  giving  them^  and  their  successors,  full  power  to  make 
and  ordain  all  such  laws,  rules  and  ordinances,  as  they,  or  the 
major  part  of  them,  shall  agree  to,  for  the  better  regulating 
the  affairs  of  said  church  ;  and  that  a  charter  may  be  granted 
them  accordinci'ly  ;   on  consideration  whereof,—-^ 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  prayer  of  the  said 
petition,  be  granted  ;  and  that  the  following  charter  be  grant- 
ed to  the  petitioners. 

[Here  follows  the  charter.] 

God  save  the  King. 


1772. 1  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  199 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence, 
on  the  second  Monday  in  December,  1772. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  divers  persons  preferred  a  petition,  and  represent- 
ed unto  this  Assembly,  that  the  road  leading  from  Uxbridge  to 
Providence,  commonly  called  the  Wonscut  Road,  is  for  about 
six  miles,  very  rocky,  and  in  many  places  wet  and  miry,  so 
that  to  put  it  in  good  order,  will  require  a  much  greater  ex- 
pense than  the  inhabitants,  near  the  said  road,  can  possibly 
bear  ;  and  thereupon,  prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  a  lottery, 
to  raise  the  sum  of  $500,  to  be  laid  out  in  mending  the  said 
road  ;  and  that  Mr.  Joseph  Olney,  of  North  Providence  ;  Mr. 
Sylvanus  Sayles  and  Mr.  Amos  Keech,  Jr.,  both  of  Smithfield, 
may  be  appointed  directors  thereof,  they  giving  bond  for  the 
faithful  performance  of  their  duty,  and  completing  the  same,  with- 
out any  expense  to  the  colony  ;   on  consideration,  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  petition  be,  and  the 
same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  restrictions. 

Whereas,  Augustus  Johnston,  Esq.,  Mr.  Nathaniel  Mum- 
ford,  Mr.  John  G.  Wanton,  Mr.  John  Collins  and  Henry  Ward, 
Esq.,  in  behalf  of,  and  by  direction  from  the  town  of  Newport, 
preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that 
the  hospital  upon  Coaster's  Harbor,  hath  been  found,  at  sev- 
eral times,  too  small  for  the  reception  of  persons  having  the 
small  pox ;  and  thereupon  prayed  this  Assembly  lo  grant  a 
lottery,  for  raising  a  sufficient  sum  of  money,  to  erect  a  new 
hospital,  at  said  Coaster's  Harbor,  upon  such  a  plan  as  shall  be 
approved  of  by  said  town  ;  that  Messrs.  John  Collins,  John  G. 
Wanton,    Nathaniel  Mumford,   Simon  Pease,  John  Malbone, 


200  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHOI>E   ISLAND  [17721. 

John  Warren  and  Robert  Stevens,  Jr.,  may  be  appointed  di- 
rectors of  the  said  lottery,  with  power  to  carry  on  the  same,, 
in  one  or  more  classes,  and  in  such  manner,  as  they  shall  think 
most  prudent  ;  and  that  in  case  any  one  or  more  of  the  direc- 
tors shall  refuse  to  serve,  the  said  town  of  Newport  may  ap- 
point another  or  others,  in  his  or  their  room  ;  on  consideration 
whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  petition  be,  and  the 
same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  restrictions. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  exhibited  unto^ 
this  Assembly,  by  Augustus  Johnston,  Esq.,  at  the  present 
session,  be  delivered  to  the  committee,  appointed  at  the  last' 
session,  to  consider  and  report  upon  the  account  of  Doctor 
Thomas  Moffatt  ;  that  the  said  committee,  or  a  major  part  of 
them,  consider  and  examine  what  loss  the  said  Augustus  John- 
ston sustained  by  the  riots  in  the  town  of  Newport,  in  the 
months  of  August  and  December,  A.  D.  1765,  and  what  sum 
said  loss  amounted  to  ;  and  that  the  said  committee,  or  the 
major  part  of  them,  make  report  to  this  Assembly  as  soon  as 
may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  it  was  the  sense  of  this  As- 
sembly, that  the  major  part  of  the  committee,,  appointed  at  the 
last  session,  to  examine  Doctor  Thomas  Moffatt's  accounts, 
should  inspect  into,  and  report  upon  the  same. 

Whereas,  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  James  Barker, 
Esq.,  Mr.  William  Ellery  and  Mr.  Benjamin  West,  presented 
unto  this  Assembly,  the  following  report,  to  wit : 

Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly^, 
relative  to  Dr.  Thomas  Moffatfs  Accounts  against  the  Colo- 
ny, claiming  compensation  for  alleged  losses  sustained  by  him^ 
in  the  Riots ,  in  the  year  Newport »  in  1765. 

We,  the  subscribers,  Ixnug  appointed  a  committee,  by  the  Geiiei'al  Assembly,  to 
^aspect  the  account  of  Doctor  Thomas  Moffatt,  relative  to  his  loss  sustained  by  riots, 
in  the  town  of  Newport,  in  the  year  1765,  as  by  the  vote  and  order  of  the  General 
Assembly,  hereto  annexed,  may  appear ;.  have,  in  compliance  therewith,  met  and 
examined  many  persons,  respecting  the  same,  and  considered  the  depositions  here- 


1772.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  201 


tofore.  taken,  by  order  of  tlie  General  Assembly  ;  and  having  fully  beard  Avbat  the 
said  Doctor  Thomas  Moffatt  had  to  offer  in  that  behalf,  do  report  as  follows : 

And  first,  as  to  his  loss  in  books. 

It  appears,  by  the  deposition  of  Joseph  G.  Wanton  and  his  wife,  and  Charles  Coz- 

zens  and  his  wife ;  and  upon  a  full  examination  of  the  said  Joseph  and  Charles,  that 

a  great  number  of  books,  sufficient  to  fill  the  bodies  of  two  large  carts,  were  saved 

in  their  houses,  and  delivered  to  Dr.  Moffatt's  friends  and  agents. 

Mr.  Cozzens,  upon  examination,  also  informs  us,  that  he  was  present  at  the  whole 

transaction ;  and  is  well  assured  that  there  were  not  more  than  fifty  books  lost. 

And  upon  inspection  of  some  of  the  books  saved,  it  appears  to  us,  that  some  sets 

were  broken,  but  that  very  few  had  received  damage.     We  are  therefore  of  opinion, 

Sterling^ 
£     .V.  'ii. 

that  the  damage  sustained  in  the  books,  does  not  exceed —  -         -       30  00  0 

In  philosophical  instruments. 

We  find  that  a  telescope,  and  a  thermometer  and  barometer,  in  one 
frame  or  table,  and  a  shding  thermometer,  were  saved ;  and  the  loss 
and  damage  in  the  other  articles,  we  compute  at         -  -  -       17   14  0 

In  furniture. 

We  find   a   fine  mahogany  book-case  totally  destroyed ;  value,  by   the 

maker's  account  -  -  -  -  -  -  -       19  02  6 

A  book-case  lost,  and  a  desk  damaged  -  -  -  -  G  14  0 

Eight  mahogany  chairs  saved ;  of  which,  three  or  four,  Avere  damaged    -         3  00  0 

His  black  walnut  and  AVindsor  chairs  saved. 

Bedsteads — one  saved,  and  one  damaged  -  -  -         3  OO  0 

Damage  in  mahogany  tables,  several  being  saved  entire       -  -  4  00  0 

His  china  all  saved. 

Three  looking-glasses,  or  mirrors  saved. 

Kitchen  furniture,  chiefly  saved. 

Table,  bed  and  body  linen,  mostly  saved. 

Four  paintings,  and  thirty-four  prints,  framed  and  glazed,  saved. 

Loss  in  kitchen  and  other  household  furniture,  in  bed  and  bedding, 
body,  bed  and  table  linen,  in  paintings,  prints,  charts,  drawings,  ana- 
tomical and  botanical  preparations,  ores,  fossils,  reptiles,  insects,  an- 
cient coins,  and  other  rarities  -  -  -  -  -  -       72  00  0 

Loss  in  manuscripts,  letters,  common-place  books  and  observations  in  his 

possession,  &c,  -  -  -  -  -  -  -         9  00  0 

Loss  in  wearing  apparel         -  -  -  -  -  -  1.5  00  0 


£179   10  6 

From  the  examination  of  the  said  Joseph   G.  Wanton,  and  Charles  Cozzens,  and 

Caleb  Gardner,  upholsterer,  it  appears  to  us,  that  the  articles  of  the  said  Doct.  Thomas 

Moffatt's  household  furniture  were  very  few ;  and  excepting  his  book-case,   and 

two  or  three  other  articles,  very  indifferent. 

And  in  this  opinion,  we  are  the  more  confirmed,  from  the  small  ness  of  tlie  house 
the  doctor  then  lived  in,  and  from  an  examination  of  his  whole  ratable  personal  es- 
tate, exhibited,  on  oath,  by  himself,  in  the  year  1761,  amounting  to  only  £l07  14s., 
sterling  money. 

VOL.  VII.         26 


202  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1772. 

And  from  a  comparison  of  the  value  of  many  of  his  boooks,  as  charged  in  his  ac- 
count, with  several  printed  catalogues  and  invoices,  it  appeared  lie  had  rated  some 
double,  and  others  treble  of  the  real  value. 

The  foregoing  is  submitted  to  the  General  Assembly,  by — 

STEPHEN  HOPKINS,         "      WILLIAM  ELLERY, 
JAMES  BARKER,  BENJAMIN  WEST. 

And  the  said  report  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
accepted  ;  that  the  said  sum  of  c£l79  10s.  Gd.,  sterling,  be 
granted  to  Doctor  Thomas  Moffatt,  as  a  full  compensation  for 
the  damage  he  sustained  by  the  riots  in  the  town  of  Newport, 
in  the  year  17G5  ;  to  be  paid  when,  and  as  soon  as,  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  shall  receive  information  that  the  money  due 
from  the  crown,  to  the  colony,  for  their  services  in  the  expedi- 
tion against  Crown  Point,  in  the  year  175G,  shall  be  received 
by  the  agent  for  this  colony,  in  Great  Britain. 

That  thereupon,  the  general  treasurer  of  this  colony  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  empowered  and  directed,  in  behalf  of  this  colony, 
to  draw  a  bill  or  bills  upon  the  colony  agent,  payable  to  the 
said  Thomas  Moffatt,  for  the  abovesaid  sum,  so  granted  as 
aforesaid  ;  and  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  requested  to  send  home  a  fair  copy  of  this  report  and 
vote,  with  all  other  papers  relating  thereto. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  Mr.  Moses  Brown  and 
John  Cole,  Esq.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  com- 
mittee, to  prepare  a  draught  of  a  letter,  in  answer  to  Lord 
Dartmouth's  letter,  and  lay  the  same  before  this  Assembly,  at 
the  next  session.* 

Whereas,  two  of  the  council  of  the  Narragansett  tribe  of  In- 
dians, in  this  colony,  are  dead,  and  William  Sachem  (one  of 
the  said  council),  refuseth  to  sign  the  deeds,  for  the  sale  of  the 
lands  of  Thomas  Ninegret,  deceased,  late  sachem  of  the  said 
tribe, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  ap- 
pointed to  settle  the  estate  of  the  said  Thomas  Ninegret,  with 

*  This  letter  is  not  found  in  the  public  archives. 


1773.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  203 

two  of  the  surviving  council  of  the  Indians,  make  and  execute 
a  deed  or  deeds  of  the  lands  they  have  already  sold,  or  may 
hereafter  sell,  to  pay  the  said  Ninegrets's  debts  ;  and  that  such 
deed  or  deeds  be  as  good  and  valid,  to  all  intents  and  pur- 
poses, as  though  the  said  deed  or  deeds  had  been  made  and 
executed  by  the  committee,  and  all  the  Indian  council. 
God  save  the  King. 

Public  Acts  passed  during  the  year  1772.* 

[The  following  laws  will  be  found  at  length  in  the  printed  "  Schedules,"  or  acts 
iand  resolves  of  the  General  Assembly,  for  the  year  1772.] 

An  Act  incorporating  Eawson's  Fountain  Society.     (October.) 

An  Act  for  disposing  of  certain  lands  and    tenements  belonging  to  the  colony. 

(October.) 
An  Act  to  incorporate  Eng's  Church,  in  Providence.     (October.) 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  East  Green- 
ivich,  on  the  second  Monday  in  January,  1773. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions^  Deputy  Governor. 

[There  was  no  business  of  a  public  nature,  transacted  at  this 
session  of  the  Assembly.] 

*  Continued  from  page  54. 


204 


RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND 


1773. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the 
first  Wednesday  of  May,  1773. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

The  following  officers,  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged  : 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 


ASSISTANTS. 


Mr.  Samuel  Dyre, 
Mr.  James  Barker, 
Mr.  Solomon  Drown, 
Mr.  David  Harris, 
Mr.  John  Almy, 


Mr.  Thomas  AVickes, 
Mr.  Jonathan  Randall, 
Mr.  John  Congdon, 
Mr.  Rowland  Robinson. 
Mr.  William  Richmond. 


DEPUTIES. 

Newport. 

Mr.  Thomas  Cranston,  Mr. 

Mr.  John  Wanton,  Mr. 

Mr.  George  Hazard,  Mr. 
Mr.  Joseph  Wanton,  Jr., 

Mr.  John  Read,  Mr. 

Mr.  Thomas  Freebody.  Mr. 

Providence.  Mr. 

Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Mr. 
Mr.  Benjamin  Man, 

Mr.  John  Jenckes,  Mr. 

Mr.  John  Smith.  Mr. 


Portsmouth. 
Metcalfe  Bowler, 
John  Jepson, 
Jonathan  Brownell. 

Warwick. 
Benjamin  Greene, 
William  Greene, 
Jacob  Greene, 
John  Low. 

Westerly. 
Joshua  Babcock, 
James  Rhodes. 


1773. 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


205 


New  Shoreham. 
Mr.  John  Littlefield, 
Mr.  John  Sands. 

North  Kingstown. 
Mr.  Peter  Phillips, 
Mr.  John  Northup. 

South  Kingstown. 
Mr.  John  Rose. 
Mr.  Daniel  Rodman. 

East  Greenv)ich. 
Mr.  Preserved  Pearce, 
Mr.  Thomas  Tillinghast. 

Jamestown. 
Mr.  John  Gardner, 
Capt.  Samuel  Slocum. 

Smithfield. 
Mr.  Daniel  Mowry,  Jr., 
Capt.  Jonathan  Arnold. 

Scituate, 
Mr.  William  West, 
Mr.  Rufus  Hopkins. 

Glocester. 
Mr.  Solomon  Owen, 
Mr.  Caleb  Arnold. 
Charlestown. 
Mr.  Sylvester  Robinson, 
Mr.  Stephen  Perry. 

West  Greenwich- 
Mr.  William  Nichols, 
Mr.  Thomas  Gorton. 

Coventry. 
Mr.  Israel  Bowen, 
Mr.  Caleb  Vaughan. 

Exeter.' 
Mr.  Jeffrey  Wilcox. 


DEPUTIES. 

Middletown. 
Mr.  Nicholas  Easton, 
Mr.  Isaac  Smith. 
Bristol. 
Col.  Simeon  Potter, 
Mr.  William  Bradford. 

Tiverton. 
Mr.  Edward  Gray, 
Mr.  Thomas  Cory. 

Little  Compton. 
Mr.  Thomas  Church, 
Mr.  Daniel  Wilbur. 

Warre?i. 
Mr.  Sylvester  Child, 
Mr.  Nathan  Miller. 
Cumberland. 
Mr.  John  Dexter, 
Mr.  Nathaniel  Shepperdson.. 

Richmond. 
Mr.  Robert  Stanton, 
Mr.  Caleb  Barber. 
Cranston. 
Mr.  Richard  Searle, 
Mr.  Christopher  Lippitt. 

Hopkinton. 
Mr.  Zaccheus  Reynold,. 
Mr.  Jesse  Maxson. 

Johnston. 
Mr.  Richard  Eddy, 
Mr.  Caleb  Harris. 

North  Providence. 
Capt.  Eseck  Hopkins, 
Mr.  Thomas  Olney. 
Barrington. 
Mr.  Nathaniel  Martin, 
Mr.  Thomas  Allen. 


206  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1773. 

The  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  speaker  ;  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon^ 
clerk. 

Mr.  Henry  Ward,  secretary. 

Mr.  Henry  Marchant,  attorney  general. 

Mr.  Joseph  Clarke,  general  treasurer. 

Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  chief  justice  of  the  superior  court 
of  judicature,  court  of  assize  and  general  jail  delivery. 

SHERIFFS    OF    THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

Newport  county— Mr.  Walter  Chaloner.  Providence  county 
— ^Mr.  Paul  Tew.  Kings  county — Mr.  Beriah  Brown.  Bris- 
tol county — Mr.  John  Brown.     Kent  county — Mr.  Henry  Rice. 

FIELD    OFFICERS    OF    THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

Newport  county — Mr.  Daniel  Dunham,  colonel ;  Mr.  Isaac 
Dayton,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  John  Forrester,  major. 

Providence  county — Mr.  Knight  Dexter,  colonel  ;  Mr. 
Abraham  Winsor,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  Chad  Brown,  major. 

Kings  county — Mr.  Thomas  Gardner,  colonel  ;  Mr.  Moses 
Barber,  lieutenant  colonel  ;    Mr.  Jonathan  Vaughan,  major. 

Bristol  county — Mr.  Simeon  Potter,  colonel ;  Mr.  Nathaniel 
Martin,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  Thomas  Gray,  major. 

Kent  county — Mr.  John  Waterman,  colonel ;  Mr.  Aaron 
Bowen,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  Benjamin  Vaughan,  major. 

Whereas,  many  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Provi- 
dence, preferred  a  petition  unto  this  Assembly,  and  represent- 
ed that  the  steeple  of  the  Presbyterian,  or  Congregational 
meeting  house  in  the  said  town,  is  in  so  ruinous  a  condition,  that 
it  must  immediately  be  taken  down ;  and  the  said  meeting  house 
stands  in  need  of  many  other  great  repairs  and  alterations,  which 
the  society  of  themselves  are  utterly  unable  to  make  ;  and 
that  the  situation  of  the  meeting  house  is  such,  that  if  a  tower 
and  steeple,  with  a  clock,  be  erected  at  the  west  end,  thereof, 
it  will  answer  extremely  well  for  a  town  clock,  and  be  also 


1773.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  207 

beneficial  to  the  people  who  come  from  the  adjacent  country, 
to  market;  and  thereupon  prayed,  that  a  lottery  may  be 
granted,  for  raising  the  sum  of  £700,  for  the  purpose  of  taking 
down  the  old  steeple,  and  erecting  a  tower  and  steeple,  with  a 
clock,  at  the  west  end  of  the  said  meeting  house  ;  and  also, 
for  the  making  any  other  alterations,  additions  and  repairs  to, 
and  upon,  the  said  house  ;  that  Messrs.  James  Greene,  Samuel 
Nightingale,  Jr.,  Charles  Keen,  Paul  Allen  and  Nathaniel 
Metcalf,  all  of  Providence,  may  be  appointed  directors  of  the 
said  lottery  ;  and  that  in  case  of  the  death  or  refusal  of  any  of 
the  said  directors,  the  standing  committee,  for  ihe  time  being, 
of  the  said  Presbyterian  or  Congregational  Society,  in  said 
Providence,  may  be  empowered  to  appoint  other  directors  in 
their  stead  and  room  ;  and  also,  be  further  empowered  to  au^ 
dit  the  accounts  of,  settle  with,  and  discharge  such  directors, 
upon  the  completion  of  the  said  lottery ;  on  consideration 
whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  aforesaid  petition  be, 
and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  restrictions  ; 
the  directors  giving  bond  for  the  faithful  performance  of  their 
trust ;  provided,  that  the  colony  incur  no  expense  in  conse- 
quence thereof. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  write  to  the  agent  of  this  colony, 
and  inform  him,  that  Mr.  Benjamin  Mason,  in  behalf  of  Mr. 
Kalph  Inman,  hath  presented  to  this  Assembly,  a  bill  of  ex- 
change, drawn  by  the  agent,  on  the  Governor  and  Company  of 
this  colony,  payable  to  said  Ralph  Inman,  for  the  sum  of  £200, 
sterling  ;  but  that  no  advice,  respecting  the  said  bill,  is  yet 
come  to  hand  ;  and  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be  also  re- 
quested to  transmit  to  the  agent,  a  copy  of  his  last  account,  as 
settled  by  this  Assembly,  in  the  year  1770,  and  desire  him  to 
acquaint  the  colony,  whether  he  hath  received  the  balance,  in 
full  satisfaction  of  said  account  ;  and  also,  to  desire  him  to 
transmit  to  this  colony,  his  accotintj  commencing  from  his  said 


208  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1773. 

last  account  ;  and  to  assure  him,  that  the  balance  which  shall 
appear  to  be  justly  due  to  him,  shall  be  punctually  paid. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  possessors  of  any  lawful 
money  bills,  emitted  by  this  colony,  or  treasurer's  notes  given 
for  such  lawful  money  bills,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  directed 
to  bring  them  into  the  general  treasury,  in  order  to  be  dis- 
charged within  one  month  from  the  rising  of  this  Assembly  ; 
that  no  interest  upon  such  bills  and  notes,  shall  be  allowed  af- 
ter that  time  ;  and  that  the  general  treasurer  immediately  give 
public  notice  of  this  vote  in  the  Newport  Mercury  and  Provi- 
dence Gazette. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  time  for  paying  in  the  last 
colony  rate,  be  lengthened  to  the  next  session  of  this  Assem- 
bly ;  and  that  the  rate  gatherers  collect  the  interest,  as  well  as 
the  principal,  until  paid,  and  pay  the  same  into  the  general 
treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Oliver  Ring  Warner  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  appointed  to  repair  all  the  platforms  for  the 
guns  at  Fort  George,  agreeably  to  the  directions  of  John  Jep- 
son,  Esq.,  and  Capt.  Eseck  Hopkins  ;  that  he  also  procure  six 
new  carriages  for  the  cannon  that  belonged  to  the  colony  sloop  ; 
and  that  he  draw  the  money  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  pay 
for  the  same. 

Whereas,  the  following  petition  was  presented  unto  this  As- 
sembly, to  wit : 

Petition  of  the  Town  of  New  Shoreham,  to  the  General  Assem- 
bly^ for  assistance  to  make  a  Harbor,  kc,  there. 

To  the  Honorable  the  General  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Pro\i- 
dence  Plantations,  in  New  England,  in  America,  to  be  holden  at  ]S^<^^vport,  on  the 
first  Wednesday  in  May,  A.  D.  17  73. 

The  subscribei's,  deputies  from  the  town  of  New  Shoreham,  in  behalf  of,  and  by 
direction  from,  the  said  town,  humbly  show  : 

That  the  inhabitants  of  the  said  island,  have,  for  a  number  of  years  past,  labored 
under  the  greatest  difficulties  and  inconveniences,  for  want  of  an  harboi',  at  the 
said  island  J  they  having  no  other  way  to  ship  off  their  fat  cattle,  horses  and  sheep,, 
^han  by  swimming  them  into  the  sea,  where  there  is  geuerallv  a  large  surf,  and  then- 


1773.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  209 

hoisting  tliem  into  a  vessel ;  whereby,  it  frequently  happens  that  some  of  them  aro 
drowned,  and  others  so  much  bruised,  as  to  be  unlit  for  market. 

That  these  disadvantages  are  greatly  increased  by  the  large  freight  they  arc 
obhged  to  pay  upon  evei'y  thing  brought  to  the  island,  for  their  own  use,  or  trans- 
ported from  thence  for  sale  ;  for,  as  there  is  no  safe  harbor,  very  few  vessels  go  to 
the  island  with,  or  for,  freight ;  and  those  who  follow  that  business,  lose  so  much 
time,  by  being  often  forced  to  leave  the  island  upon  the  approach  of  a  storm,  before 
the  freight  they  carry  is  unladed,  or  the  freight  they  go  for,  taken  in  ;  and  to  make 
an  harbor  upon  the  continent,  where  they  must  wait  for  another  wind,  andmeet  with 
so  many  other  hardships  and  dangers,  that  they  ask  double  the  freight  which  is 
given  in  other  parts  of  the  colony,  for  the  transportation  of  the  like  articles  the  same 
distance. 

That  they  also  suffer  greatly,  by  the  loss  of  the  codfishery  ;  which  formerh-, 
while  a  channel  was  kept  open  between  the  sea,  and  a  large  salt  pond,  on  the  west 
side  of  the  island,  Avas  so  considerable,  that  they  used  to  catch  fish  enough  for  their 
own  consumjition,  and  to  supply  Newport,  and  divers  other  places,  with  fresh  fish, 
besides  exporting  large  quantities  of  cured  fish ;  but  that  the  channel  being  now 
filled,  the  small  fish  or  bait,  which  used  to  go  into  the  pond,  have  left  the  island,  and 
the  codfish  with  them ;  so  that  at  present,  the  inhabitants  cannot  get  near  enough 
for  their  own  eating. 

That  these  inconveniences  have  such  an  effect  upon  the  real  estates  on  the  island, 
that  land  wiU  not  sell,  or  rent,  for  more  than  half  the  sum  which  land  of  the  like 
quahty  will  sell,  or  rent  for,  in  other  parts  of  the  colony ;  and  the  island,  conse- 
quently, in  a  general  estimation  of  property,  is  not  worth  above  half  so  much  to  the 
colony,  as  it  otherwise  would  be. 

That  these  are  some  of  the  many  evils,  that  the  inhabitants  continually  sufier ;  be- 
sides which,  there  are  others,  arising  from  the  want  of  an  harbor,  at  the  said  island, 
which  greatly  affect  the  commerce  of  the  whole  colony,  and  of  a  great  part  of  the 
continent ;  many  vessels,  for  want  of  such  an  harbor,  being  blown  of  the  coast,  or 
forced  to  a  different  port,  from  that  to  which  they  were  bound,  or  perliaps  ship- 
wrecked, or  foundered,  to  the  loss  of  the  fives  and  properties  of  many. 

That  a  most  effectual  remedy,  for  all  these  evils,  may  be  provided,  by  cutting  a 
channel  from  the  sea,  into  the  aforementioned  pond,  which  is  large  enough  to  con- 
tain the  whole  British  navy,  and  deep  enough  for  any  vessels  in  this  colony. 

That  between  the  sea,  and  the  pond,  there  is  a  sand  bank,  about  twenty  rods  wide, 
and  on  the  pond  side,  ten  feet  of  water,  within  two  rods  of  the  bank,  which  soon  in- 
creases to  thirty  feet ;  and  on  the  side  of  the  sea  there  is  also  a  very  fine  bold  shore  ; 
that  a  channel  was  formerly  cut  through  the  said  bank,  and  became  so  navigable, 
that  vessels  of  seventy  and  eighty  tons  burthen  have  actually  sailed  into  the  pond  ; 
but  the  place  where  the  said  channel  was  formed,  not  being  properly  defended  on 
the  sea-side,  it  filled  up  with  sand. 

That  the  place  now  proposed  for  opening  a  communication  with  the  sea,  is  about 
a  quarter  of  a  mile  southward  from  the  old  channel,  where  the  water  is  much 
deeper,  and  the  channel  will  be  secured  by  a  point  of  rocks  that  lies  to  the  south- 
ward ;  which  affords  the  greatest  prospect  of  obtaining  an  effectual  and  lasting 
harbor. 

That  the  benefit  resulting  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  said  island,  to  the  colony  in 
general,  and  to  the  neighboring  governments,  from  such  an  harbor,  will  be  very 
VOL.  VII.  27 


210  EECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1773. 

great,  as  the  real  value  of  the  island  Avill  be  much  enhanced,  and  the  ratable  estate 
of  the  colony  proportionably  increased,  a  most  extensive  codfishery  may  be  earned 
on,  to  the  great  emolument  of  the  colony,  and  an  harbor,  into  which,  vessels  driven 
near  the  island,  by  stress  of  weather,  may  run  and  be  safe  from  every  wind  that 
blows,  and  thereby  preserve  the  lives  and  properties  of  many. 

And  that  the  said  inhabitants,  although  they  are  willing  to  exert  themselves  to 
the  utmost,  in  completing  so  beneficial  a  design,  are,  by  reason  of  their  poverty, 
utterly  unable  to  accomplish  it. 

The  i^etitioners  hope  that,  as  the  inhabitants  of  the  said  island,  have  at  all  times 
contributed  in  full  as  large  a  proportion  as  any  other  town,  towards  building  and 
repairing  court  houses,  jails,  bridges  and  other  conveniences,  without  having  re- 
ceived any  grant  from  the  General  Assembly,  for  the  particular  benefit  of  the  said 
island  for  nearly  forty  years  past,  they  may,  with  modesty,  ask  the  assistance  of  the 
public  upon  this  occasion.  And  they  do  humbly  request  that  the  General  Assembly 
will  take  this  matter  into  consideration,  and  appoint  some  suitable  persons  to  exam- 
ine the  pond,  and  the  situation  of  the  place  proposed  for  the  channel,  and  report  their 
opinion  of  the  practicabHty  of  the  project,  and  an  estimate  of  the  expense. 

And  in  case,  upon  their  report,  it  shall  appear  advisable  to  open  such  a  commu- 
nication, they  humbly  pray  that  such  a  sum  of  money  may  be  granted  out  of  the 
general  treasury,  as  will  be  sufficient  to  purchase  timber,  and  provide  stones  for  be- 
ginning, and,  in  some  measure,  carrying  on,  the  work  ;  and  that  the  remainder  may 
be  raised  by  lotteries ;  which,  considering  the  utility  of  such  an  harbor,  they  have 
reason  to  hope  will  meet  with  great  encom-agement ;  and,  as  in  duty  bound,  will 
ever  pray,  &c.  JOHN  LITTLEFIELD, 

JOHN  SANDS. 

On  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  Thos. 
Cranston,  Esq.,  Mr.  Eseck  Hopkins,  Joseph  Wanton,  Jr., 
Esq.,  and  Mr.  Joseph  Brown,  be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part 
of  them,  are  hereby  appointed,  a  committee  to  go  to  New 
Shoreham,  and  inspect  into  the  circumstances  of  the  premises 
mentioned  in  the  said  petition  ;  and  that  they  make  report  to 
this  Assembly,  at  the  next  session. 

God  save  the  King. 


1773.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  211 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  on  the 
third  Monday  in  August,  1773. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  lion.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  a  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  county  cf 
Providence,  preferreil  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  As- 
sembly, that  the  road,  commonly  called  Plainfield  Koad,  is 
one  of  the  largest  that  leads  into  the  town  of  Providence  ;  that 
the  bounds  thereof,  are  mostly  lost  and  unknown  ;  and  that 
several  persons  have  made  encroachments  on  said  road,  so 
that,  in  many  places,  it  is  almost  impassable,  especially  in  the 
winter  season  ;  and  thereupon,  they  prayed  this  Assembly  to 
appoint  a  committee,  to  revise  the  said  road,  from  a  birch  tree, 
standing  in  a  brook,  called  Bennett's  Brook  (a  known  boundary 
of  said  road),  westerly,  as  far  as  Scituate  line,  with  powder  to 
make  such  alterations  as  they  shall  think  necessary  ;  and  the 
said  petition  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Esq.,  Job  Randall,  Esq.  and  Charles  Harris,  Esq.,  be,  and 
they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  hereby,  appointed  a  com- 
mittee, to  revise  the  aforesaid  highway  ;  that  the  charge,  there- 
of, be  equally  paid  by  the  towms  of  Providence,  Cranston  and 
Johnston. 

And  that  the  said  committee  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  em- 
powered to  make  such  alterations  in  said  highway,  as  they 
shall  think  proper,  agreeably  to  law. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  time  for  the  payment  of 
what  remains  due,  of  the  last  colony  tax,  be  lengthened  to  the 
10th  day  of  October  next ;  that  it  be  upon  interest  until  paid  ; 
and  that  the  general  treasurer  issue  his  warrants  against  the 


212  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1773. 

several  town  treasurers,  for  the  sums  that  shall  be  due  from 
them,  respectively,  on  the  10th  day  of  October,  returnable  in 
ten  days. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  a  tax  of  £4,000,  lawful 
money,  be  assessed,  and  levied,  upon  the  inhabitants  of  this 
colony,  and  paid  into  the  general  treasury,  on  or  before  the  1st 
day  of  May  next  ;  one  half  thereof,  to  be  appropriated  to  the 
payment  of  the  debts,  now  due  from  the  colony,  and  the  other 
half  to  the  supplying  of  the  treasury  ;  that  the  said  tax  be  ap- 
portioned unto  the  several  towns  in  the  same  proportion  as  the 
last  colony  tax  was  done  ;  and  that  Joshua  Babcock,  Esq., 
Daniel  Rodman,  Esq.,  and  Mr.  John  Low,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  draw  up  j^n  act  accordingly, 
of  the  same  tenor  (excepting  the  necessary  alterations)  of  the 
act,  apportioning  the  last  colony  tax. 

Whereas,  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  Capt.  Eseck 
Hopkins  and  the  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Jr.,  Esq.,  presented 
unto  this  Assembly,  the  following  report,  to  wit : 

Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly,  rela- 
tive to  New  Shoreham. 

We,  the  subscribers,  togetber  with  Thomas  Cranston,  Esq.  and  Mr.  Joseph 
Brown,  being  apjjointed  a  committee,  to  go  to  New  Shoreham,  and  inspect  into  the 
circumstances  set  forth  in  the  petition  of  a  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  New  Shore- 
ham, do  report : 

That  we  have  been  to  Block  Island  ;  have  Aiewed  and  examined  the  place  pro- 
posed for  making  a  harbor  ;  have  sounded  the  water  both  on  the  sea  and  pond 
sides  ;  have  observed  both  the  height  and  distance  of  the  land-between  them  ;  and, 
on  the  whole,  are  of  opinion,  that  a  channel  may  be  made,  secured  and  kept  open 
between  the  sea  and  the  pond,  sufficient  to  admit  small  vessels  of  forty  or  fifty  toDg 
burthen ;  which,  when  in  the  pond,  will  be  in  as  safe  a  harbor,  as  any  can  be  ;  and 
also  restore  and  perpetuate  much  the  most  considerable  and  beneficial  fishery  in  the 
colony,  which  will  be  altogether  lost,  without  such  a  channel  be  cut  and  kept  open. 

We  further  report  that,  as  things  are  at  i:)resent,  there  is  no  lauding,  nor  taking  off 
any  creatures  or  goods  at  Block  Island,  but  by  putting  them  afioat  in  the  surf;  and 
even  passengers  cannot  land  in  the  smoothest  time,  as  we  ourselves  experienced, 
without  wading  in  the  water  above  their  knees,  or  being  carried  by  those  that  do. 

And  lastly,  we  do  report,  that  although  the  making  and  securing  such  a.  harbor 
as  we  have  spoken  of,  be  so  extremely  necessary,  and  will  be,  when  made,,  so  ex- 
tensively beneficial  to  the  inhabitants  of  Block  Island,  yet  we  think  the  burthen  of 
doing  it  wholly  at  theii*  own  expense,  will  be  too  great  for  them  to  bear ;  and,  as 


1773.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  213 

not  tlicy,  only,  but  the  colony  in  general,  avIII  be  benefited  by  its  being  done,  Ave  are 
of  opinion  the  colony  will  do  well  to  assist  them  in  doing  it. 

STEPHEN  HOPKINS, 
ESECK  HOPKINS, 
Newport,  Aug.  18,  1773.  JOSEPH  WANTON,  JR. 

And  the  said  report  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
accepted. 

Whereas,  a  number  of  merchants  in  this  colony,  preferred  a 
petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  they  have, 
for  several  years  past,  been  concerned  in  prosecuting  that  valu- 
able branch  of  business,  the  codfishery,  in  and  near  the  Gulf 
of  St.  Lawrence  ;  by  which,  a  great  number  of  industrious 
poor  have  been  employed  and  supported,  and  an  advantageous 
circulation  of  specie  promoted  ;  and  that  the  permission 
granted  by  His  Majesty  to  his  subjects,  to  carry  on  the  said 
fishery,  being  not  sufficiently  explicit,  the  same  is  thereby  ren- 
dered precarious  ;  and  is  particularly  greatly  endangered  by  a 
certain  bill  before  a  committee  of  the  Honorable  House  of 
Commons,  of  Great  Britain,  for  encouraging  the  fishery,  afore- 
said, &c. 

And  thereupon,  they  prayed  this  Assembly,  to  interpose  in 
their  behalf,  with  His  Majesty's  ministers,  and  procure  their 
cause  so  to  be  represented  to  His  Majesty,  that  they  may>  by 
royal  indulgence,  be  permitted  to  prosecute  their  fishing  busi- 
ness in  its  full  extent,  at  Isle  Bonaventure,  Isle  Pierre,  Point 
St.  Peter,  and  elsewhere,  in  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  without 
obstruction  or  hindrance  ;  and  that  the  fishery  in  those  parts 
may  by  no  means  be  converted  into  private  property,  or  mo- 
nopolized by  a  company ;  and  the  said  petition  being  duly 
considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Aaron  Lopez,  George 
Gibbs  and  William  Vernon,  be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part  of 
them,  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  prepare  the 
draught  of  a  letter,  respecting  the  matters  set  forth  in  the  said 
petition,  to  be  sent  to  His  Majesty's  secretary  of  state  ;  and 
that  they  lay  the  same  before  this  Assembly, 


'214  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1773. 

Whereas,  the  following  petition,  signed  by  forty-three  In- 
dians, of  the  Narragansett  tribe,  in  this  colony,  was  presented 
unto  this  Assembly,  to  wit  : 

Petition  of  the  Narragansett  Tribe  of  Indians  to  the   General 
Assemblij. 

To  the  Honorable  the  General  Assembly  of  His  Majesty's  colony  of  Rhode  Island, 
holden  at  iJewport,  the  third  Monday  of  August,  1773. 

The  petition  of  us,  the  subscribers,  Indians  of  the  Narragansett  tribe,  in  said 
colony,  humbly  showeth : 

That  some  of  our  late  sachems,  through  extravagance  and  indiscretion,  had  here- 
tofore run  themselves  largely  in  debt ;  and  for  the  discharging  those  debts,  we  have 
consented  to  the  sale  of  the  greatest  part  of  the  most  valuable  lands  belonging  to 
the  tribe  ;  so  that  there  now  remaineth  but  a  small  tract,  compared  with  what  they 
once  possessed  ;  and  that  they  have  remaining  only  one  small  piece  of  Fort  Neck,  by 
which  they  can  get  to  the  salt  water,  from  which  they  fetch  great  part  of  the  sup- 
port of  themselves  and  families. 

And  being  informed  by  the  honorable  committee,  appointed  by  the  Assembly,  to 
settle  the  accounts,  and  discharge  the  debts  of  the  late  Sachem  Thomas  Ninegret 
deceased,  that  they  apprehend  that  they,  with  our  consent,  have  sold  lands  sufficient 
to  discharge  the  whole  of  said  debts  :  we  therefore  humbly  petition  this  Honorable 
Assembly,  to  pass  an  act,  to  secure  to  the  said  tribe,  forever,  as  well  the  said  small 
part  of  Fort  Neck,  as  all  the  other  lands  now  of  right  belonging  to  them ;  and  that 
the  same  be  not,  for  the  future,  liable  to  the  payment  of  debts. 

"We  would  further  represent  to  this  Honorable  Assembly,  that  when  the  late  Sa- 
chem Ninegret,  by  his  deed  of  the  28th  of  March,  1709,  in  consideration  of  the  pro- 
tection of  the  colony,  resigned  to  the  Governor  and  Company  of  said  colony,  the 
lands  then  called  the  vacant  lands,  he,  by  the  same  deed,  excepted  and  reserved  to 
himself,  for  the  use  of  the  tribe,  a  certain  tract  of  land,  bounded  on  the  east,  as  fgl- 
loweth  ;  that  is  to  say  : 

"  Beginning  at  the  brook  where  Joseph  Davil's  mill  standeth,  and  runs  into 
the  Great  Salt  Pond  ;  and  so,  from  said  brook  on  a  straight  line,  northerly,  to  Pasr 
queset  Pond,  and  by  the  brook  that  runs  out  of  Pasqueset  Pond,  into  Pawcatuck 
Hiver." 

That  soon  after,  and  wliile  the  intent  of  tlie  parties  was  well  known,  by  order  and 
direction  of  the  late  Col.  Joseph  Stanton,  and  others  of  tlie  committee,  appointed 
by  the  General  Assembly,  to  oversee  the  Indian  affairs,  the  line  was  run  from  the 
said  brook  to  Pasqueset  Pond,  and  bounds  made. 

That  afterwards,  some  persons,  who  claimed  lands  to  the  eastward  of  said  line, 
caused  another  line  to  be  run  from  one  of  the  most  westernmost  parts  of  said  bi'ook, 
viz. :  Cross's  Mill  Dam,  to  Pasqueset  Pond.  By  the  running  of  which  last  men- 
tioned line,  as  well  the  burying  ground  and  graves  of  our  ancient  sachems  and  fa- 
thers, as  also  several  hundred  acres  of  land,  which  were  not  intended  to  be  granted 
by  the  deed,  aforesaid,  are  claimed,  and,  against  right,  held  from  the  Indians,  by 
.sundry  persons  in  Charlestown. 

We,  therefore,  hmnbly  pray  this  Honorable  Assembly,  to  authorize  and  empower  the 


1773.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS;  215 

committee  for  settling  the  affairs  of  the  late  Sa,chem  Thomas  Ninegret,  or  some  one 
or  more  of  them,  to  cause  an  exact  survey  of  the  said  lines,  and  so  much  of  the  brook 
and  Pasqueset  Pond,  as  may  be  necessary  to  illustrate  the  facts,  to  be  taken  ;  and 
that  a  draught  thereof,  be  laid  before  this  Honorable  Assembly,  for  their  advisement 
thereon. 

And  we  do,  on  this  occasion,  approach  the  General  Assembly  Avith  the  greater 
confidence,  because  we  look  upon  them  as  our  guardians  and  protectors,  agree- 
ably to  the  consideration  of  the  deed  of  the  sachem  Ninegret. 

The  granting  our  prayer  will  oblige  your  petitioners,  as  in  duty  bound,  ever  to 
pray,  &c. 

And  the  said  petition  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
granted  ;  that  all  the  lands  now  of  right  belonging  to  the  said 
tribe,  be  secured  to  them  ;  and  that  the  same,  or  any  part 
thereof,  shall  not,  for  the  future,  be  liable  to  the  payment  of 
any  debts. 

That  James  Helme,  Esq.,  or  some  other  of  the  committee, 
appointed  for  settling  the  accounts  of  the  late  Sachem  Thomas 
Ninegret,  cause  a  survey  of  the  lines  of  the  lands  claimed  by 
the  said  tribe,  and  the  lands  claimed  by  some  other  persons  in 
Charlestown,  and  held  from  the  said  tribe  (as  it  is  said  in  the 
said  petition),  against  right ;  that  a  draught  of  the  same  be 
laid  before  this  Assembly  at  the  next  session ;  that  he  be,  and 
hereby  is,  empowered  to  summon  and  swear  witnesses  respect- 
ing the  same. 

That  the  secretary  cause  notifications  to  be  set  up  in  one  or 
more  public  places  in  Charlestown,  notifying  the  persons 
claiming  said  lands,  to  appear  before  the  next  session  of  As- 
sembly, to  be  then  heard,  thereon  ;  and  that  the  colony  be 
at  no  charge  respecting  this  affair,  but  that  the  charge,  thereof, 
be  paid  by  said  tribe. 

Whereas,  James  Barker,  Esq.,  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hop- 
kins, Esq.,  William  Ellery,  Esq.  and  Henry  Ward,  Esq.,  who 
were  appointed  a  committtee,  to  audit  the  accounts  of  Martin 
Howard,  Jr.,  Esq.,  laid  before  this  Assembly  an  account,  ex- 
hibited to  them  by  Mr.  Simon  Pease,  attorney  to  the  said 
Martin  Howard,  together  with  their  report  thereon,  as  follows, 
to  wit : 


216  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE  ISLAND  [1773. 


Estimate   of  damage  sustained  by  Martin  Howard,  by  the  Riot 
at  Newport,  Rhode  Island,  August  27,  1765. 

My  house,  Avliicli  was  repaired,  and  but  just  finlslied  ;  cost  Sterliiif/. 
me  nearly          ------      £450  00  0 

Sold  for,  at  vendue,  by  Mr.  Rome,  deducting  all  charges,          210  00  0  £     s.  d. 

240  00  0 

It  is  impossible  to  be  particular,  as  to  the  loss  and  damage  of  my  furniture, 
as  I  cannot  recollect  all  the  articles,  which  are  lost  and  missing.     What 
follows  are  the  chief  I  can  remember. 
A  shagreen  case  of  knives  and  forks,  almost  new  .  .  - 

A  scrutoire  and  book-case,  with  glass  doors,  damaged  and  brokenj  - 
A  large  mahogany  table,  broken  to  pieces  _  -  -  - 

A  small  desk  lost      ------- 

A  red  cedar  desk,  and  book-case,  cut  to  pieces 

A  small  tea-table      ------- 

A  couch  frame  lost  .--._-- 

Four  large  family  pictures,  gilt  frames  ;  one,  by  Sir  Peter  Lely 
Several  mezotinto  ditto,  damaged  and  broken     -  -  -  - 

An  escutcheon,  or  coat  of  arms,  of  Mr.  Kay  -  -  - 

A  jappiinned  tea-table,  and  tea-board,  destroyed 

A  close  stool,  with  a  pewter  pan      _  -  -  -  - 

A  glass  lantern  ------- 

Two  large  chairs     ------- 

A  jappanned  high  case  of  di-awers,  broken  and  lost      -  -  - 

A  jappanned  dressing  table  .  -  -  -  . 

Two  leather  buckets     ------- 

A  large  demijohn    ------- 

Sundry  books  lost,  kitchen  furniture  destroyed,  china,  empty  bottles 

baskets,  &c.,  broken  and  lost,  at  least  to  the  value  of 
A  cask  of  old  sherry  wine,  put  in  bottles,  a  little  while  before  the  riot. 
Cider,  provisions  in  the  store  and  cellar 

A  large  press  book-case,  in  my  office  -  -  -  . 

A  common  writing  desk  ------ 


I  submit  it  to  the  consideration  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  committee,  appointed  to 
examine  the  aforegoing  account,  whether  they  will  not  think  it  reasonable  to  allow 
interest  upon  such  sum  as  they  shall  find  due  to  me.  MARTIN  HOWARD. 

Newbern,  North  Carohna,  Dec.  26,  1772. 


1 

10 

0 

2 

00 

0 

2 

05 

0 

1 

10 

0 

3 

10 

0 

10 

0 

10 

0 

35 

00 

0 

15 

0 

10 

0 

1 

10 

0 

15 

0 

05 

0 

2 

05 

0 

4 

00 

0 

2 

10 

0 

10 

0 

08 

0 

15 

00 

0 

5 

00 

0 

3 

00 

0 

1 

05 

0 

03 

0 

£324 

13 

0 

1773.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  217 


Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly,  to 
examine  the  foregoing  Account. 

We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  to  examine  the  loss  of  Martin  Howard,  Jr., 
Esq.,  by  the  riot  in  Newport,  in  August,  1765,  do  report: 

That  we  have  examined  the  above  account,  and  considered  several  evidences  re- 
specting his  loss  ;  that  we  find  that  the  real  damage  sustained  in  the  house,  did  not 
exceed  £60,  sterhng;  it  having  been  actually  repaired  and  put  into  better  order, 
than  before  the  riot,  for  that  sum  or  less;  and  have  accordingly  deducted  £180, 
sterling,  from  that  charge. 

And  that  we  have  also  deducted  £32  15.5.,  sterhng,  which  appears  to  us  to  have 
been  overcharged  in  the  pictures,  and  some  other  articles. 

So  that  his  loss,  as  estimated  by  us,  amounts  to  £111  18s.,  sterling  ;  which  we 
submit.  JAMES  BARKER,  WILLIAM  ELLERY, 

STEPHEN  IIOPiaNS,         HENRY  WARD. 

And  the  premises  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  aforegoing  report  be,  and 
the  same  is  hereby,  accepted  ;  that  the  sum  of  £111  18^., 
sterling,  be  granted  to  the  said  Martin  Howard,  Jr.,  as  a  full 
compensation  for  the  damage  he  sustained  by  the  riots,  in  the 
town  of  Newport,  in  the  year  1765  ;  to  be  paid  when,  and  as 
soon  as,  the  General  Assembly  shall  receive  information,  that 
the  money  due  from  the  crown,  to  the  colony,  for  their  services 
in  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point,  in  the  year  1756,  shall 
be  received  by  the  agent  of  this  colony,  in  Great  Britain. 

That  thereupon,  the  general  treasurer  of  this  colony,  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  empowered  and  directed,  in  behalf  of  this  colony, 
to  draw  a  bill  or  bills  upon  the  colony  agent,  payable  to  the 
said  Martin  Howard,  for  the  abovesaid  sum,  so  granted,  as 
aforesaid  ;  and  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  requested  to  send  home  a  fair  copy  of  this  report  and 
vote,  with  all  other  papers,  relating  thereto. 

Whereas,  James  Barker,  Esq.,  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Esq.,  William  Ellery,  Esq.  and  Henry  Ward,  Esq.,  who  were 
appointed  a  committee,  to  audit  the  accounts  of  Augustus 
Johnston,  Esq.,  laid  before  this  Assembly,  an  account,  by  him 
exhibited  to  them,  together  with  their  report  thereon,  as  fol- 
loweth,  to  wit : 

VOL,  VII.         28 


218  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  1773. 


An  Account  of  the  Losses  sustained  by  Augustus  Johnston,  in  the 
Riots  in  Newport,  in  August  and  December,  1765. 

Lmrful  Money. 

£   s.d. 

Two  broadcloth  jackets,  and  one  pair  of  breeches,  half -n-orn       -  -         2  16  0 

Four  pair  of  fine  sheets        -  -  -  -  -  -  3  00  0 

Eleven  new  shirts  ;  the  eloth  cost  me   £.355  8a\,  old  tenor,  which,  with 

the  making,  is  -  -  -  -  -  -  -       18  09  0 

Four  shirts,  about  one-third  worn    -  -  -  -  -  6  00  0- 

Three  yards  of  New  Holland,  which  cost  £  10,  old  tenor,  per  yard  -         1  05  8 

About  eighteen  fine  cravats  -  -  -  -  -  2  08  0 

One  beaver  hat,  worn  but  two  or  three  times     -  -  -  -         1100 

Two  wigs,  (one  quite  new,)  which  cost  me  48.<;.       -  -  -  2  14  0 

About  nine  pair  of  worsted  stockings,  very  fine  and  good  -  -         1  04  0 

About  five  pair  of  thread  stockings  -  -  -  -  10  0 

All  the  clothes  belonging  to  three  children  (one,  about  eight  years  old), 
besides  what  they  had  on,  when  taken  out  of  bed,  to  be  carried  to  a 
place  of  safety  -  -  -  -  -  -  .       lO  00  0 

Sundry  men's  caps,  at  least  a  dozen  -  -  -  -  1   00  0 

Five  pair  of  fine  pillow-cases       -  -  -  -  -  -         3  00  0 

At  least  one  dozen  fine  napkins,  and  one  dozen  fine  table-cloths     -  10  16  0 

At  least  two  dozen  homespun  towels       -  -  -  -  -2  08  0 

A  number  of  women's  shifts,  aprons,  caps  and  cambric  handkerchiefs,  10  00  0 

A  case  of  old  Jamaica  rum,  a  large  old  cheese,  hams,  and  other  provisions,     5  00  0 
Molloy  de  Jure  Maritimo,  quite  new  -  -  -  -  1160 

Holt's  Reports,  a  large  folio,  and  almost  new      -  -  -  -         3  00  0 

First  and  seventh  volumes  of  Swift's  works ;  the  sett  being  eight  vol- 
umes, cost  me  405.,  sterling. 
One  volume  of  Madam  de  Maintenon's  Letters;  the  thi-ee  cost  me  13.9. 

6fZ.,  lawful  money. 
Pope's  Works,  in   eight  or  ten  volumes  (T  forget  which),  neatly  bound 

and  gilt ;  they  cost  me  -  -  -  -  -  -         2  08  0 

Five  volumes  of  Dryden's  works  ;  I  can't  find  what  they  cost  me  ;  but 

the  five  could  not  be  worth  less  than  -  .  .  - 

Life  of  Count  Saxe,  three  volumes  .  .  .  -  . 

Two  volumes  of  The  World ;  the  sett  being  six  volumes,  cost  me 
One  volume  of  Campbell's  Lives  of  the  Admirals  ;  the  four  cost  me 
Mrs.  Rowe's  works,  two  volumes,  95. ;  Henrietta,  two  volumes,  95. ;  Hap- 
py Orphans,  95.     - 
Luportance  of  the  African  Expedition,  35. ;  Delincourt  on  Death,  9s. 
Third,  fourth  and  sixth  volume   Compendium  Voyages  ;  the  sett  being 
six  volumes,  cost  me  a  little  time  before  .  -  _  - 

One  volume  Bolingbroke's  works ;  the  two  cost  me 
The  damage  done  my  furniture,  as  appraised  by  the  committee 


1 

08 

0 

14 

0 

1 

08 

0 

1 

10 

0. 

1 

07 

0 

12 

0 

40 

0 

20 

0 

9 

06 

0 

£108 

09 

it 

1773.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  219 

N.  B.  Since  extiblting  my  last  account,  I  have  found  some  few  of  my  books,  that 
■were  charged  in  that  account ;  and  have  left  them  out  of  this. 

Newport,  August  19,  1773.  AUGUSTUS  JOHNSTON. 

Report  of  the  Committee,  apppointed  hy  the  General  Assembly,  to 
examine  the  foregoing  Account. 

We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  a  committee,  to  examine  into  the  losses 
sustained  by  Augustus  Johnston,  Esq.,  by  the  riots  in  Newport,  in  the  1705,  do 
report : 

That  he  exhibited  to  us  an  account  of  the  particulars  of  his  loss,  under  oath  ; 
which  we  have  examined,  together  with  several  other  evidences,  respecting  his  loss  ; 
and,  after  making  some  small  deductions,  have  settled  it  at  £76  10.s-.,  sterling. 
Which  account,  with  this  report,  we  submit  to  the  General  Assembly. 

JAMES  BARKER,  HENRY  WARD, 

STEPHEN  HOPKINS,        WILLIAiM  ELLERY. 

And  the  premises  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  foregoing  report  be,  and 
the  same  is  hereby,  accepted  ;  that  the  sum  of  £76  lO^.,  ster- 
ling, be  granted  to  the  said  Augustus  Johnston,  as  a  full  com- 
pensation for  the  damages  he  sustained  by  the  riots  in  the  town 
of  Newport,  in  the  year  1765,  to  be  paid  when,  and  as  soon 
as,  the  General  Assembly  shall  receive  information  that  the 
money  due  from  the  crown,  to  the  colony,  for  their  services  in 
the  expedition  against  Crown  Point,  in  the  year  1756,  shall  be 
received  by  the  agent  of  this  colony,  in  Great  Britain. 

That  thereupon,  the  general  treasurer  of  this  colony  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  empowered  and  directed,  in  behalf  of  this  colony, 
to  draw  a  bill  or  bills  upon  the  colony  agent,  payable  to  the 
said  Augustus  Johnston,  for  the  abovesaid  sum,  so  granted,  as 
aforesaid  ;  and  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  requested  to  send  home  a  fair  copy  of  this  report  and 
vote,  with  all  other  papers  relating  thereto. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  transmit  to  the  Right  Honorable 
the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  the  letter  presented  to  this  Assembly, 
respecting  the  codfishery,  in  the  Eiver  St.  Lawrence  ;  he 
making  such  alterations  therein,  as  he  shall  think  proper. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  no  money  be  drawn  out  of  the 


220  RECOKDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1773. 

general  treasury  by  virtue  of  any  general  act  or  order  of  this 
Assembly,  heretofore  made  or  passed,  without  further  orders 
from  this  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  £300,  lawful  money,  be  paid 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  Mr.  Oliver  Ring  Warner,  for 
carrying  on  the  repairs  at  Fort  George. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  acquaint  the  Right  Honorable 
the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  that  the  assurance  His  Lordship  hath 
given  the  Governor  and  Company  of  this  colony,  of  his  desire 
of  serving  them,  respecting  their  demand  upon  the  crown,  is 
very  flattering  to  their  just  expectations,  of  at  length  obtaining 
the  moneys  so  long  due,  for  their  most  ready  and  faithful 
services. 

That  the  colony  is  the  more  encouraged  in  this,  as  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  have,  they  doubt  not,  answered  the  expectations 
of  His  Majesty,  in  their  consideration  of  the  sufferers,  recom- 
mended to  them  by  His  Majesty. 

And  that  the  General  Assembly  desire  His  Lordship's  more 
particular  attention  hereto,  as  they  have  just  received  advice 
of  the  death  of  their  late  agent ;  and  are,  at  present,  destitute 
of  an  agent  that  might  repeat  their  application  to  the  treasury. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kings- 
town, on  the  last  Wednesday  in  October,  1773. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  Daniel  Commins,  of  Coventry,  in  the  county  of 
Kent,  yeoman,  for,  and  in  behalf  of,  a  religious  society  of  peo- 
ple, in  said  Coventry,  of  the  Baptist  profession,  preferred  a  pe- 


1773.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  221 

tition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  the  societjj 
aforesaid,  have  not  been  able,  by  reason  of  their  poverty,  to 
build  a  house  for  public,  social  worship,  in  said  town,  for  the 
edification  of  themselves  and  others,  whose  sentiments  corres- 
pond with  theirs. 

And  thereupon,  prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  them  the  lib- 
erty of  raising  $500,  by  lottery,  under  the  direction  of  John 
Kice,  Thomas  Matterson  and  Nehemiah  Potter,  all  of  said  Cov- 
entry, Esqs.  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  petition  be,  and  the 
same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  restrictions. 

Provided,  that  no  charge  arise  to  the  colony,  thereby. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Honorable  Stephen  Hop- 
kins, Esq.,  George  Hazard,  Henry  Ward  and  Henry  Marchant, 
Esqs.,  be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  hereby,  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  consider  of  the  queries  sent  to  this 
colony,  by  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  and  to  form  an  answer  to 
them  ;  and  that  they  lay  the  same  before  this  Assembly,  at 
the  next  session. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  write  a  letter  to  the  Earl  of 
Dartmouth,  advising  him  of  the  receipt  of  the  queries  ;  and 
that  the  same  were  laid  before  the  General  Assembly,  who 
have  appointed  a  committee  to  inspect  into  and  answer  the 
same. 

Also,  to  request  His  Lordship,  as  this  colony  hath  not  any 
agent  appointed  at  the  court  of  Great  Britain,  that  he  will  still 
be  a  protector  to  the  colony,  until  an  agent  shall  be  appointed. 

And  also  to  solicit  His  Lordship,  that  he  will  make  applica- 
tion to  the  treasury  board,  for  the  moneys  due  to  the  colony. 

God  save  the  King* 


222  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1773. 


Publk  Ads  passed  during  the  year  1773. 


[The  following  laws  will  be  found  at  length  in  the  printed  "  Schedules,"  or  acts 
and  resolves  of  the  General  Assembly,  for  the  year  1773.] 

An  Act  for  the  more  effectual  repairing  of  highways  in  this  colony.     (January.) 
An  Act  to  prevent  fish  being  interrupted  in  their  course  up  Mill  Cove,  in  Warwick. 

(January.) 
An  Act  empowering  the  towns  of  Providence  and  North  Providence,  to  repair  their 

liighways,  by  a  town  tax.     (January.) 
An  Act  making  it  latvflil  to  break  down  and  blow  up  the  rocks  at  Pawtucket  Falls, 

to  let  fish  pass  up.     (January.) 
An  Act  empowering  the  church  and  society  of  the  people  called  Baptists,  or  Anti- 

Pedobaptists,  in  Providence,  to  sell  their  lot  of  land,  in  Providence.     (August.) 
An  Act  to  prevent  fish  from  being  hindered  in  their  courses  of  going  into  Point 

Judith  Pond,  and  Petaquamscut  River.     (August.) 
An  Act  for  assessing  a  tax  of  £4,000.     (August.) 
An  Act  to  naturalize  Thomas  Courtain.     (October) 
An  Act  incorporating  Cook's  Fountain  Society.     (October.) 


The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Lord  Dartmouth. 

Newport,  Rhode  Island,  February  16,  1773. 

My  Lord : — I  have  the  honor  to  address  Your  Lordship  upon  the  subject  of  a 
demand  of  this  colony  upon  the  crown. 

Before  I  enter  upon  the  narrative  of  this  aSair,  I  would  just  observe  to  Your 
Lordshij),  that  in  the  cause  of  the  last  war,  the  colony  gi-eatly  distinguished  them- 
selves by  their  exertions  against  the  enemy  ;  which  was  repeatedly  acknowledged  by 
His  Majesty's  ministers  and  commanders ;  and  notwithstanding  the  Parliamentary 
grants  made  them  at  different  times  (which  they  remember  Avith  gratitude) ,  incurred 
a  very  heavy  debt,  which  the  colony  hath  not  yet  been  able  to  discharge. 

Mr.  Secretai-y  Fox,  in  his  letter  of  the  13th  of  March,  1756,  informed  the  colony 
that  nothing  more  than  the  raising  the  men  ;  their  pay,  arms  and  clothing  would  be 
expected  from  the  colony,  who  had  the  preceding  year  furnished  their  quota  of  military 
stores  and  provisions.  But  this  letter  was  not  received  until  after  the  colony  had 
provided  their  quota  of  stores  and  provisions ;  and  the  principal  part  of  which,  were 
really  expended  in  the  service,  and  the  remainder  taken  into  the  King's  magazines. 

This,  ]\Iy  Lord,  was  also  the  case  of  the  other  northern  colonies,  all  of  whom, 
have  been  reimbursed  their  expenses  upon  that  account,  excepting  the  colony  of 
Rhode  Island.  The  Province  of  New  Hampshire,  indeed,  received  theirs  by  a  grant 
from  Parliament,but  the  session  before  the  last. 

By  the  miscarriage  of  letters  in  a  time  of  war,  or  by  some  other  accident, 
the  accounts  from  the  colony  for  those  expenses,  were  not  laid  before  the  lords  of 
the  treasuary  until  the  year  1759;  which,  being  so  long  after  the  supphes  were 
granted  by  the  colony,  was  a  very  unfavorable  cu-cumstance,  and  I  imagine  was  the 
sole  reason  why  payment  was  not  made. 


1773.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  223 

The  lords  of  the  treasury  referred  the  accounts,  amounting  to  £4,211  7s.  Id.,  to 
the  secretary  of  war  and  paymaster  general,  who  reported  the  sum  of  £3,002  bs.  Id.^ 
sterling,  to  be  due  to  the  colony;  having  deducted  the  sum  of  £1,209  14s.,  which 
was  charged  in  the  accounts  for  the  subsistence  of  the  regiment,  until  their  arrival 
at  Albany,  and  upon  their  return  home,  after  they  were  discharged. 

The  affair  remained  in  this  situation,  for  some  considerable  time,  when  the  lords 
of  the  treasury,  upon  a  second  application,  agaift  referred  the  consideration  of  it  to 
the  secretary  at  Avar,  and  the  paymaster  general ;  who  made  another  considerable 
deduction,  for  several  articles  charged  in  the  accounts,  as  not  being  strictly  military 
stores,  and  then  reported  the  sum  of  £2,672  18s.  11(/.,  to  be  due  and  payable. 

As  the  colony  had  really  advanced  the  sum  of  £4,211  7s.  Id.,  and  as  the  other 
colonies  for  the  same  services,  had  been  reimbursed  in  a  larger  proportion,  they 
conceived  themselves  greatly  aggrieved  at  these  deductions.  But  even  this  sum,  so 
reduced,  from  what  they  thought  they  had  a  right  to  expect,  hath  never  yet  been 
paid. 

In  the  year  1765,  considerable  confusion  and  tumults  arose  in  all  the  North 
American  colonies.  And  it  is  confessed,  that  this  colony  was  not  exempt  from 
these  disorders ;  although  the  injury  done  to  private  propei'ty,  was  inconsiderable. 

Doctor  Moffatt,  Mr.  Howard  and  Mr.  Johnston,  however,  represented  themselves 
to  the  administration,  as  very  great  sufferers.  In  consequence  of  Avhich,  His  Maj- 
esty was  pleased  to  recommend  them  to  the  colony,  for  a  compensation  for  their  losses. 
The  General  Assembly,  altogether  from  motives  of  obedience  to  the  royal  recom- 
mendation, immediately  came  to  a  resolution  that  they  would  make  them  full  com- 
pensation for  their  real  losses ;  upon  which,  the  gentlemen  exhibited  to  the  General 
Assembly  accounts,  consisting  altogether  of  general  charges ;  such  as  no  persons 
coiild  judge  of,  and  amounting  to  within  about  £20,  sterling,  of  the  above  sum  re- 
ported to  be  due  to  the  colony. 

This  naturally  gave  reason  to  suspect  that  the  gentlemen  flattered  themselves  with 
the  hopes  of  obtaining  all  that  money.  The  General  Assembly  ordered  that  they 
should  exhibit  an  account  of  the  particulars  of  their  losses ;  and  in  the  mean  time 
instructed  Joseph  Sherwood,  Esq.,  their  agent,  to  apply  to  the  lords  of  the  treasury, 
to  obtain  their  recommendation  of  this  matter  to  Parliament,  for  a  grant  of  these 
moneys  so  long  due  to  the  colony.  Mr.  Sherwood  informed  the  colony,  that  it  was 
intimated  to  him  (though  it  was  not  openly  declared),  that  the  lords  of  the  treasury 
chose  to  postpone  doing  any  thing  in  the  affair,  until  they  should  be  acquainted 
with  the  measures  adopted  by  the  colony,  with  respect  to  the  sufferers. 

The  colony.  My  Lord,  could  not  see  any  reasonable  connection  between  that  de- 
;mand  upon  the  crown,  and  the  claims  of  these  gentlemen.  They  also  esteemed 
.themselves  affected  in  a  tender  point ;  that  any  of  His  Majesty's  ministers  should 
think  the  withholding  these  moneys  a  necessary  measure  to  induce  the  colony  to  a 
due  respect  to  the  royal  recommendation.  It  was  not  from  so  unworthy  a  motive, 
that  the  colony  undertook  to  pay  the  sufferers  their  losses,  but  altogether  in  compH- 
ance  with  the  recommendation  of  their  gracious  sovereign,  who  never  had  occasion 
to  call  their  duty  and  ready  obedience  in  question.  That  sum,  distressed  as  the 
colony  hath  been,  and  still  is,  would  never  be  an  inducement. 

The  General  Assembly  again  instructed  their  agent  to  renew  his  application  to 
the  lords  of  the  treasury.  The  colony  also  addressed  their  lordships  and  the  Earl  of 
Hillsborough  upon  the  subject.     And  His  Lordship  was  pleased  to  inform  the  General 


224  RECORDS   OF   THE    COLONY   OF  RHODE   ISLAND  [1773. 

Assembly,  that  they  might  depend  upon  his  attention  to  it ;  and  that  the  sufferers 
were  enjoined  to  exhibit  such  accounts  of  their  losses  as  were  required  by  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly. 

Still,  My  Lord,  those  gentlemen  did  not  comply  with  this  most  reasonable  requi- 
sition of  the  General  Assembly.  Although  the  colony  is  informed  that  Doctor  Mof- 
fatt  hath  acquainted  the  lords  of  the  treasury  that  he  really  offered  such  an  account 
to  the  Assembly,  but  was  refused  an  hearing  ;  which  I  must  assure  Your  Lordship 
was  not  the  case.  That  gentleman  not  only  seems  to  hold  the  colony  in  defiance, 
but  also  to  have  been  unwearied  in  his  misrepresentations  of  it. 

The  colony,  nevertheless,  from  the  disposition  they  have  perceived  in  the  present 
lords  of  the  treasury,  together  with  the  hopes  of  Your  Lordship's  patronage,  flatter 
themselves  that  at  length  they  will  have  justice  done  them. 

Joseph  Sherwood  and  Henry  Marchant,  Esqs.,  agents  for  the  colony,  did  the  last 
year  present  a  memorial  to  the  lords  of  the  treasury  upon  this  subject ;  who  were 
pleased,  by  their  secretary,  Grey  Cooper,  Esq.,  to  give  the  following  answer  : 

"  June  11,  1772.  I  am  authorized  to  inform  you,  that,  at  a  board  held  last  week,  Mr.. 
Stewart,  as  agent  for  Dr.  MofiFatt,  and  Mr.  Howard,  r.gain  attended  the  board,  by  their 
lordships'  order,  upon  Dr.  Moftatt's  affair ;  and  accordingly  instructed  Mr.  Stewart  strongly 
to  recommend  to  the  Doctor,  to  present  as  soon  as  possible,  an  account  of  his  losses  to  the 
General  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  ;  but  to  omit  in  such  account,  the  charge 
he  had  made  in  his  former  account,  of  his  expenses  upon  his  voyage  to  Great  Britain,  and 
of  any  consequential  damages;  and  to  exhibit  an  account  only  of  such  effects  as  were  abso- 
lutely lost,  damaged  or  destroyed,  during  the  riot ;  and  that  he  should  consent  to  accept  in 
part  of  his  compensation,  any  goods  or  effects  that  were  saved,  and  are  now  remaining  in 
the  hands  of  any  of  his  friends  or  others;  and  the  lords  suppose  that,  upon  such  an  account 
being  exhibited,  the  Asserobly  will  act  upon  it  in  such  manner,  as  to  give  satisfaction  to 
■the  board. 

And  should  the  doctor  refuse,  in  a  reasonable  time,  to  exhibit  such  an  account,  the  lordi 
will  proceed  to  a  final  settlement  of  the  inatter  in  dispute." 

Doctor  Moffatt,  hereupon  saw  fit  so  far  to  comply,  as  to  exhibit  another  account 
of  his  losses,  less  general,  indeed,  than  he  had  before  presented,  but  by  no  means  so 
particular  as  he  could  easily  have  given,  and  the  colony  had  a  right  to  expect  J 
twelve  hundred  volumes  of  books  being  one  article,  and  others  made  in  gross,,  to  a 
very  large  amount.  The  General  Assembly,  however,  immediately  received  it,  and 
appointed  a  committee  to  consider  it. 

The  Doctor  still  made  no  deduction  for  any  of  the  articles  saved  ;  although  the 
greater  part  of  his  books,  furniture,  &c.,  had  been  deposited  in  the  hands  of  his  most 
inlimate  friends  and  agents ;  and  even  went  so  far  as  to  declare  before  the  conunit- 
tee,  that  he  was  utterly  ignorant  that  any  articles  were  saved ;  until  the  committee 
showed  him,  by  incontestlble  evidence,  that  not  only  many  articles  Avere  saved,  but 
led  him  to  the  spot  where  they  still  were. 

He  also  charged  a  very  round  sum  for  china ;  when  it  appeared,  that  the  smaU 
quantity  he  had,  had  been  carried  from  his  house  and  placed  with  a  friend,  several 
days  before  the  riot,  upon  the  apprehension  that  there  might  be  one ;  and  remained 
unpacked  until  it  was  shown  to  the  Doctor.  The  committee,  upon  the  examina- 
tion of  the  matter,  reported  the  Doctor's  loss  at  £l  79  10s.  6d.,  sterhng.  The  General 
Assembly  received  the  report,  and  granted  him  that  sum. 

But  the  Doctor,  by  his  attorney,  in  the  face  of  the  General  Assembly,  refused  to 
accept  it  in  writing,  under  his  hand. 


1773.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  225 

I  enclose  Your  Lordship  copies  of  the  Doctor's  account,  the  appointment  and  re- 
port of  the  committee,  &c. ;  and  flatter  myself,  it  will  appear  to  Your  Lordship,  that 
the  colony  have  fully  complied  with  the  royal  recommendation,  and  with  the  ex- 
pectation of  the  lords  of  the  ti-easur}-,  respecting  the  Doctor's  demand. 

Mr.  Johnston  hath  since  exhibited  an  account  of  his  losses,  which  the  Assembly 
have  referred  to  the  same  committee.  Mr.  Howard,  who  lives  in  a  remote  province, 
hath  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  exhibiting  his  account ;  wliich,  as  soon  as  he 
does,  will  meet  with  due  consideration. 

I  must  mention  to  Your  Lordship,  that  I  have  certain  information,  that  the  Doctor 
hath  taken  a  number  of  evidences,  in  a  very  indirect  manner,  without  giving  any 
one  of  the  committee,  or  any  other  person,  an  opportunity  of  appearing,  on  the  part 
of  the  colony,  to  cross-examine  the  witnesses.  These  evidences,  instead  of  passing 
through  the  proper  offices,  to  be  authenticated  in  the  manner  that  such  things  have 
been  constantly  and  invariably  done,  and  annexed  to  the  certificate,  are  secreted,  to 
prevent  the  colony  from  knowing  the  purport  of  them,  and  from  justifying  them- 
selves by  setting  matters  in  a  true  light.  And  the  Doctor  hath  taken  a  general  cer- 
tificate, that  certain  persons  are  officers,  without  any  reference  to  their  particular 
acts  or  attestations.  What  weight  ought  to  be  allowed  to  such  depositions,  I  submit 
to  Your  Lordship's  judgment. 

His  Majesty  has  the  highest  reason  to  expect  loyalty  and  obedience  from  his 
faithful  subjects  of  this  colony,  who  have  demonstrated  it,  not  only  by  the  most 
•sincere  professions  and  declarations,  but  by  cheerfully  expending  their  blood  and 
treasure  upon  every  requisition  from  the  crown. 

May  not,  My  Lord,  the  colony  have  reason  to  expect  that  the  administration  will 
see  the  royal  promise  to  the  colony  complied  with  ?  If  under  a  former  administra- 
tion, they  have  been  disappointed,  they  will  not  despair  of  the  present.  And  from 
the  answer  which  the  lords  of  the  treasury  were  the  last  year  pleased  to  give  to  the 
■memorial  then  presented  to  them,  from  the  justness  of  their  demand,  and  from  the 
hopes  they  conceive  of  Your  Lordship's  friendship  and  countenance,  they  will  not 
doubt  but  a  grant,  at  this  present  session  of  Parliament,  will  be  made  at  least  for 
the  sum  reported  to  be  due  and  payable,  with  the  interest  thereof. 

I  beg  Your  Lordship's  patronage  of  this  cause,  in  which  the  colony  hath  been  so 
long  delayed,  and  am,  may  it  please  Your  Lordship, 

Your  Lordship's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

JOSEPH  WANTON, 

To  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth. 

Peyton  Randolph  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island,  transmitting 
certain  proceedings  of  the  House  of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia. 

Virginia,  March  19th,  1773. 

Sir  : — I  have  received  the  commands  of  the  House  of  Burgesses  of  this  colony,  to 
transmit  to  you  a  copy  of  the  resolves  entered  into  by  them  on  the  12th  instant, 
which  they  hope  will  prove  of  general  utility,  if  the  other  colonies  shall  think  fit 
to  adopt  them. 

They  have  expressed  themselves  so  fully  as  to  the  motives  that  led  to  these  reso- 
Jutions,  that  I  need  not  say  any  thing  on  that  point ;  and  shall  only  beg  you  will  lay 

VOL.  vn.        29 


226  RECORDS   OF  THE    COLONY   OP   RHODE  ISLAND         [1773. 

them  before  your  Assembly  as  early  as  possible,  and  request  them  to  appoint  some 
of  their  body  to  communicate  from  time  to  time  with  the  corresponding  committee  of 
Virginia.  I  am,  -with  great  respect,  &c., 

PEYTON  RANDOLPH. 
To  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 


Extracts  from  tKe  Journal  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  House  of 
Burgesses^  of  Virginia. 

"  Friday,  the  12th  of  March,  ^ 
13th  George  in.,  1773.      | 

Upon  a  motion  made, — 

The  House  resolved  itself  into  a  committee  of  the  whole  House,  ujwn  the  state  of 
the  colony. 

Mr.  Speaker  left  the  chair. 

Mr.  Bland  took  the  chair  of  the  committee. 

Mr.  Speaker  resumed  the  chair. 

Mr.  Bland  reported  from  the  committee  that  they  had  directed  him  to  make  the 
following  report  to  the  House,  viz. : 

'  Whereas,  the  minds  of  His  Majesty's  faithful  subjects,  in  this  colony,  have  been 
much  disturbed  by  various  rumors  and  reports  of  jiroceedings,  tending  to  deprive 
them  of  their  ancient,  legal  and  constitutional  rights ; — 

And  whereas,  the  affairs  of  this  colony  are  frequently  connected  with  those  of 
Great  Britain,  as  well  as  of  the  neighboring  colonies,  which  renders  a  communica- 
tion of  sentiments  necessary  ;  in  order,  therefore,  to  remove  the  uneasiness,  and  to 
quiet  the  minds  of  the  people,  as  well  as  for  the  other  good  purposes  above  men- 
tioned,— 

Be  it  resolved,  that  a  standing  committee  of  correspondence  and  inquiry,  be  ap- 
pointed, to  consist  of  eleven  persons,  to  wit :  the  Hon.  Peyton  Randolph,  Esq.,  Robert 
Carter  Nicholas,  Richard  Bland,  Richard  Henry  Lee,  Benjamin  Harrison,  Edmund 
Pendleton,  Patrick  Henry,  Dudley  Digges,  Dabney  Carr,  Archibald  Carey  and 
Thomas  Jefferson,  Esqs.,  any  six  of  whom,  to  be  a  committee,  whose  business  it  shall 
be,  to  obtain  the  most  early  and  authentic  intelligence  of  all  such  acts  and  resolu- 
tions of  the  British  Parliament,  or  proceedings  of  the  administration,  as  may  relate 
to,  or  affect  the  British  colonies  in  America ;  and  to  keep  up  and  maintain  a  cor- 
respondence and  communication  with  our  sister  colonies,  respecting  these  imjiortant 
considerations ;  and  the  result  of  such  their  proceedings,  from  time  to  time  to  lay 
before  this  House. 

Resolved,  that  it  be  an  instruction  to  said  committee,  that  they  do,  without  delay, 
inform  themselves  particularly  of  the  principles  and  authority,  on  which  was  con- 
stituted a  court  of  inquiry,  said  to  have  been  lately  held  in  Rhode  Island,  with 
powers  to  transport  persons  accused  of  offences  committed  in  America,  to  places  be- 
yond the  seas,  to  be  tried.' 

The  said  resolutions  being  severally  read  a  second  time,  were,  upon  the  questions 
severally  put  thereupon,  agreed  to,  by  the  House,  nemine  contradicente. 

'  Resolved,  that  the  speaker  of  this  House  do  transmit  to  the  speakers  of  the  dif- 


1773.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  227 

ferent  Assemblies  of  the  British  colonies  on  this  continent,  copies  of  the  said  resolu- 
tions, and  desire  that  they  will  lay  them  before  their  i-espective  Assemblies ;  and  re-^ 
quest  them  to  appoint  some  person  or  persons  of  their  respective  bodies,  to  commu- 
nicate from  time  to  time,  with  the  said  committee.' 

By  the  House  of  Burgesses  of  the  colony  of  Virginia.  ]  G.  "WYTHE, 

Extracted  from  the  journal.  )  C.  H.  B.' " 

Metcalfe  Bowler,  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of 
Rhode  Island,  to  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Burgesses,  of 
Virginia. 

Newport,  May  15th,  1773, 

Sir : — Having  received  a  letter  from  the  speaker  of  the  House  of  Burgesses,  of 
Virginia,  enclosing  the  resolutions  of  that  patriotic  and  illustrious  Assembly,  of  the 
12th  of  March  last ;  and  also  a  letter,  from  the  committee  of  correspondence  and  in- 
quiry, by  them  appointed. 

I  took  the  earhest  opportunity  of  laying  them  before  the  House  of  Deputies  of 
this  colony,  Avho  immediately  entered  into  the  consideration  of  them ;  and  persuad- 
ed that  nothing  less  than  a  firm  and  close  union  of  the  colonies  in  the  most  spirited, 
prudent  and  consistent  measures  can  defeat  the  designs  of  those  who  are  aiming  to 
deprive  them  of  their  inestimable  rights  and  privileges,  passed  nemine  contradicetUe, 
the  resolutions  of  which  I  have  the  honor  to  enclose  you  a  copy.* 

I  beg  the  favor  of  you  to  lay  them  before  your  House  of  Representatives  as  soon 
as  possible.  I  am,  with  great  respect,  &c.,  &c., 

METCALFE  BOWLEE. 

To  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia. 


Resolutions   of  the  House  of  Representatives  of  Rhode  Island, 
relative  to  the  foregoing  Correspondence. 

Whereas,  this  House  hath  appointed  a  committee  of  cori'espondence  with  commit- 
tees of  the  other  colonies  in  North  America,  respecting  the  rights  and  privileges  of 
the  colonies,  &c. :  it  is  therefore — 

Resolved  by  this  House,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be  requested  to  deliver 
the  said  committee  a  copy  of  his  commission  as  one  of  the  judges  of  the  court  of 

*  The  printed  Schedules,  or  proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  for  May,  1773,  do  not 
contain  these  very  important  resolutions,  relative  to  the  measures  proposed  bv  the  House 
of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia  ;  although  it  is  certain  the  subject  was  acted  on  by  the  Assembly, 
at  this  session. 

On  referring  to  the  manuscript  acts  and  resolves  of  this  period,  four  blank  pages  are 
found  ;  and  as  the  next  minutes  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Assembly,  under  date  of  the  7th 
May,  1773,  contain  these  resolutions,  it  is  evident  that  the  clerk  omitted  to  complete  the 
record,  for  which  the  blank  pages  were  left.  The  sudden  breaking  off  of  the  manuscript 
acts  and  resolves,  show  that  it  was  intended  to  make  additions;  and  that,  for  some  reason, 
perhaps  to  the  incompleteness  of  some  papers,  the  imperfect  copy  was  sent  to  the  printer». 
The  correspondence  growing  out  of  these  resolves,  appears  to  be  complete. — J.  E.  B. 


228  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1773. 

inquiry,  constituted  from  home,  and  said  to  be  held  in  this  colony  ;  and  of  all  such 
other  papers,  which  were  laid  before  said  court,  as  may  be  consistent  with  his  honor 
as  Governor  of  this  colony. 

Resolved,  that  the  speaker  of  this  House  be  requested  to  write  to  the  Speaker  of 
the  House  of  Burgesses,  in  Virginia,  and  to  all  other  speakers  of  Assemblies  in 
[North  America,  informing  them  of  the  proceedings  of  this  House  relating  to  the 
preservation  of  the  rights  of  the  colonies. 

Resolved,  that  a  standing  committee  of  correspondence  and  inquiry,  to  be  ap- 
pointed, to  consist  of  seven  persons,  to  wit :  the  Honorable  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq., 
Metcalfe  Bowler,  Moses  Brown,  John  Cole,  William  Bradford,  Henry  Marchant 
and  Henry  Ward,  Esqs. ;  any  four  of  whom,  to  be  a  committee,  whose  business  it 
shall  be,  to  obtain  the  most  early  and  authentic  intelligence  of  all  such  acts  and  reso- 
lutions of  the  British  Parliament,  or  proceedings  of  the  administration  as  may  relate 
to,  or  affect  the  British  colonies,  in  America ;  and  to  keep  and  maintain  a  corres- 
pondence and  communication  with  the  other  colonies,  respecting  those  important 
considerations ;  and  the  result  of  their  proceedings,  from  time  to  time,  to  lay  before 
this  House. 


/.  Wentworth,  of  New  Hampshire,  to  the  Speaker  of  the  House 
of  Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Portsmouth,  New  Hampshire,  ^ 
27th  May,  1773.  | 

Sir : — Having  received  a  letter  from  the  committee  of  the  House  of  Burgesses,  of 
Virginia,  enclosing  their  resolves  of  the  1 2th  of  March  last,  a  few  days  before  the 
receipt  of  yours,  of  the  15th  May  inst.  ;  which  resolves,  the  House  have  duly  consid- 
ered, and  agree  in  substance  with  them ;  and  you  may  be  assured,  that  this  House 
wiU  readily  concur  with  you,  and  all  the  American  colonies,  in  all  constitutional 
measures,  to  obtain  the  desired  redress. 

In  behalf  of  the  House,  I  pray  the  favor  of  a  copy  of  the  commission  of  inquiry 
whenever  obtained.  I  have  the  honor  to  be,  &c.,  &c., 

J.  WENTWORTH. 
To  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives  of  Rhode  Island. 

Resolutions  of  the  House  of  Representatives  of  New  Hampshire, 
relative  to  certain  Resolutions  of  the  Colonies  of  Virginia  and 
Rhode  Island. 

In  the  House  of  Representatives,  ^ 
May  27th,  1773.  } 

ProTince  of  New  Hampshire  : 

Resolved  and  voted,  that  a  standing  committee  of  correspondence  and  inquiry,  be 
appointed,  to  consist  of  seven  persons,  viz.  :  the  Hon.  John  Wentworth,  Esq.,  John 
Sherburne,  William  Parker,  John  Giddinge,  Jacob  Sheape,  Christopher  Toppan 
and  John  Pickering,  Esqs.,  any  four  of  Avhom,  to  be  a  committee,  whose  business  it 
shall  be,  to  obtain  the  most  early  and  authentic  intelligence  of  all  such  acts  and 
resolutions  of  the  British  Parliament,  or  proceedings  of  the  administration,  as  may 


1773.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  229 

relate  to,  or  affect  the  British  colonies,  in  America ;  and  to  keep  up  and  maintain  a 
correspondence  and  communication  with  our  sister  colonies,  respecting  these  impor- 
tant considerations  ;  and  the  result  of  such  their  proceedings  from  time  to  time  to 
lay  before  this  House.  Attest :  WILLIAM  PARKER,  Clerk. 

Extracted  from  the  journal  of  the  House  of  RcpresentatiY( 
of  the  Province  of  New  Hampshire. 


"} 


Extract  from  the  proceedings  of  the  House  of  Representatives 

of  Massachusetts. 

In  the  House  of  Representatives,  ■> 
May  28th,  1773.  j" 

Whereas,  the  speaker  hath  communicated  to  this  House  a  letter  from  the  truly 
respectable  House  of  Burgesses,  in  His  Majesty's  ancient  colony  of  Virginia,  enclos- 
ing a  copy  of  the  resolves  entered  into  by  them  on  the  1 2th  of  March  last^  and  re- 
questing that  a  committee  of  this  House  may  be  appointed,  to  communicate  from 
time  to  time,  with  a  corresponding  committee  then  appointed  by  the  said  House  of 
Burgesses,  of  Virginia. 

And  whereas,  this  House  is  fully  sensible  of  the  necessity  and  importance  of  an 
union  of  the^several  colonies  in  America,  at  a  time  when  it  clearly  appears  that  the 
rights  and  liberties  of  all  are  systematically  invaded,  in  order  that  the  joint  wisdom 
of  the  whole  may  be  employed  in  consulting  their  common  safety, — 

Resolved,  that  this  House  have  a  very  grateful  sense  of  the  obligations  they  are 
under  to  the  House  of  Burgesses,  in  Virginia,  for  the  vigilance,  firmness  and  wisdom, 
which  they  have  discovered  at  all  times  in  support  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the 
American  colonies  ;  and  do  heartily  concur  with  them  in  their  said  judicious  and 
spirited  resolves. 

Resolved,  that  a  standing  committee  of  correspondence  and  inquiry,  be  appointed^ 
to  consist  of  fifteen  members,  any  eight  of  whom,  to  be  a  quorum  ;  whose  business  it 
shall  be,  to  obtain  the  most  early  and  authentic  intelligence  of  all  such  acts  and 
resolutions  of  the  British  Parliament,  or  proceedings  of  the  administration,  as  may 
relate  to,  or  affect  the  British  colonies  in  America ;  and  to  keep  up  and  maintain  a 
correspondence  and  communication  with  our  sister  colonies,  respecting  these  im- 
portant considerations  ;  and  the  result  of  such  their  proceedings,  from  time  to  time, 
to  lay  before  the  House. 

Resolved,  that  it  be  an  instruction  to  the  said  committee,  that  they  do,  without  de- 
lay, inform  themselves  particularly  of  the  principles  and  authority  on  which  was 
constituted  a  court  of  inquiry,  held  in  Rhode  Island ;  said  to  be  vested  with  powers 
to  transport  persons  accused  of  offences  committed  in  America,  to  places  beyond  the 
seas,  to  be  tried. 

Resolved,  that  the  said  committee  be  further  instructed  to  prepare  and  report  to  this 
House,  a  draft  of  a  very  respectful  answer  to  the  letters  received  from  the  speaker 
of  the  honorable  House  of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia,  and  tho  speaker  of  the  Honorable 
House  of  Representatives  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  ;  also,  a  circular  letter  to  the 
speakers  of  the  several  other  Houses  of  Assemblies,  on  this  continent,  enclosing  the 
aforesaid  resolves ;  and  requesting  them  to  lay  the  same  before  their  respective  As- 


230  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OF  RHODE   ISLAND  [1773. 

semblies,  in  confidence   that  they  Tvill  readily  and  cheerfully  comply  with  the  wise 
and  salutary  resolves  of  the  House  of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia. 

Then  the  House  immediately  made  choice  of  the  following  gentlemen,  to  be  the 
committee  of  correspondence  and  communication  with  the  other  colonies,  viz. : 

Mr.  Speaker,  Mr.  Samuel  Adams,  Hon.  John  Hancock,  Esq.,  Mr.  William  Phil- 
lips, Capt.  William  Heath,  Hon.  Joseph  Hawley,  Esq.,  Hon.  James  Warren,  Esq., 
Richard  Derby,  Jr.,  Esq.,  Mr.  Elbridge  Gerry,  Jerathmeel  Bowers,  Esq.,  Jedediah 
Foster,  Esq.,  Daniel  Leonard,  Esq.,  Capt.  Thomas  Gardner,  Capt.  Jonathan  Green- 
leaf  and  James  Prescott,  Esq. 

A  true  copy:  SAJVI'L  ADAJVIS,  Clerk. 

John  Cruger,  of  New  York,  to  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives, of  Rhode  Island, 

New  York,  May  29,  1773. 
Sir  : — I  had  the  honor,  this  day,  to  receive  your  letter,  directed  to  the  speaker  of 
the  House  of  Representatives  of  this  province,  together  with  the  resolves  entered  into 
by  the  honorable  House  of  Deputies  of  Rhode  Island,  which  shall  be  laid  before  the 
General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  so  soon  as  they  are  convened ;  which  will  not  be, 
before  the  latter  end  of  this,  or  the  beginning  of  the  next  year,  unless  they  are  called 
on  some  extraordinary  occasion. 

I  am,  with  great  respect,  &c.,  &c.,  JOHN  CRUGER. 

To  the  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Esq. 

The  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Massachu- 
setts, to  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives  of  Rhode 
Island. 

Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  ^ 
June  3,  1773.  J 

Sir : — The  House  of  Representatives,  of  this  province,  being  earnestly  attentive  to 
the  controversy  between  Great  Britain  and  the  colonies  ;  and  considering  that  the 
authority  claimed  and  exercised  by  Parhament,  on  the  one  side  ;  and  by  the  Gen- 
eral Assemblies  of  this  continent,  on  the  other,  greatly  miUtates,  and  so  is  productive 
of  this  unhappy  contention  ;  think  it  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the  welfare  of  both 
and  particularly  of  the  colonies,  that  the  constitutional  rights  and  powers  of  each,  be 
inquired  into,  delineated  and  fully  ascertained. 

That  His  Majesty's  subjects  of  America,  are  entitled  to  the  same  rights  and  lib- 
erties, as  those  of  Great  Britain  ;  and  that  these  ought,  in  justice  by  the  constitution, 
to  be  as  well  guaranteed  and  secured  to  the  one  as  to  the  other,  are  truths  too  appa- 
rent to  be  denied. 

It  is  by  this  House,  humbly  conceived  to  be  likewise  undeniable,  that  the  authority  as- 
sumed and  now  forcibly  exercised  by  Parliament  over  the  colonies,  is  utterly  subver- 
sive offreedom  in  the  latter  ;  and  that  while  His  Majesty's  loyal  subjects  in  Ameri- 


1773.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  231 

ca,  have  the  mortification  daily  to  see  new  abridgments  of  their  rights  and  Hberties, 
they  have  notthe  least  security  for  those  which  at  present  remain. 

Were  the  colonists  only  affected  by  a  legislature,  subject  to  their  control,  they 
•would  even  then  have  no  other  security  than  belongs  to  them  by  the  laws  of  nature 
and  the  English  constitution ;  but,  should  the  authority  now  claimed  by  Parliament, 
be  fiilly  supported  by  power,  or  submitted  to  by  the  colonies,  it  appears  to  this 
House,  that  there  will  be  an  end  to  hberty  in  America,  and  that  the  colonists  will 
then  change  the  name  of  freemen,  for  that  of  slaves. 

The  magnanimous  House  of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia,  having,  in  order  to  adjust  and 
settle  these  important  concerns,  proposed  a  method  for  uniting  the  councils  of  its 
sister  colonies,  which  appears  to  this  House,  to  be  a  measure  very  wise  and  salutary. 

It  has,  for  many  years,  been  the  policy  of  the  administration,  to  disunite,  in  order 
to  govern  the  colonies  ;  and  this  House  is  well  assured,  that  had  the  firm  and  lasting 
union  now  in  prospect,  taken  jilace  early  in  the  controversy,  Great  Britain  and  the 
colonies  would  at  this  day  have  harmonized  most  happily  together. 

The  same  effects  are  yet  to  be  expected  from  such  a  union.  It  was,  therefore, 
with  inexpressible  pleasure,  that  this  House  received  your  letter,  and  the  resolves 
of  the  patriotic  House  of  Deputies,  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  corresponding 
with  those  of  Virginia.  And  the  first  business  of  the  House  in  this  session,  was  to 
pass  the  enclosed  resolves. 

In  the  name,  and  by  order  of  the  House,  I  have  the  honor,  &c.,  &c., 

THOMAS  GUSHING, 

To  the  Speaker  of  the  Honorable  House  of  Representatives  )  Speaker, 

of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island.  j 

Ebenezer  Silliman,  of  Connecticut,  to  the  Speaker  of  the  House 
of  Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Fairfield,  in  Connecticut,  25th  June,  1773. 

Sir : — I  have  received  the  commands  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  this 
colony,  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  favor,  of  the  15th  of  May  last,  which  I 
received  while  the  Assembly  of  this  colony  was  sitting. 

I  without  delay  communicated  it  to  the  House,  who  had  before  received  dispatches 
from  the  speaker  and  committee  of  the  House  of  Burgesses,  in  Virginia,  and  had 
taken  the  subject  matter  thereof,  into  consideration,  and  came  into  a  complete  con- 
currence with  the  sentiments  of  that  patriotic  House ;  and  fully  adopted  the  mea- 
sures by  them  proposed. 

In  consequence  whereof,  the  House  of  Representatives  of  this  colony  made  sundry 
resolves,  and  appointed  a  committee  of  correspondence  to  keep  up  and  maintain  a 
strict  and  happy  union  with  our  sister  colonies ;  and  constantly  to  correspond, 
touching  any  thing  that  may  affect  the  general  interests  of  the  British  colonies  on 
the  continent. 

I  am  conunanded  to  transmit  a  copy  of  said  resolves  to  you,  which  I  here  enclose; 
and  in  the  name  and  behalf  of  said  House,  request  you  to  improve  the  earliest  op- 
portunity to  lay  them  before  the  House  of  Representatives  of  the  colony  of  Rhode 
Island.  I  have  the  honor  to  be,  &c.,  &c., 

EBENEZER  SILLIMAN, 

To  the  Honorable  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  } 
of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island.  ^ 


232  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1773. 


Proceedings,  ^-c,  in  the  Commons  House  of  Assembly,  of  South 
Carolina. 


In  the  Commons  House  of  Assembly,  ■» 
tbeSthof  July,  1773.  | 

South  Carolina. 

Mr.  Speaker  reported  to  the  House,  that  he  had  received  a  letter  from  the  speaker 
of  the  Honorable  House  of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia,  enclosing  several  resolutions  of 
that  House ;  and  the  said  resolutions  being  read,  were  unanimously  approved  of,  by 
the  House. 

Kesolved,  that  Mr.  Speaker,  and  any  eight  of  the  other  members  of  the  standing 
committee  of  correspondence,  be  a  committee,  to  inquire  for,  and  obtain  intelligence 
upon  the  several  matters  mentioned  in  the  said  resolutions ;  and  to  correspond  with 
the  committee  appointed  by  the  said  House  of  Burgesses,  and  committees  appointed, 
or  to  be  appointed,  in  our  other  sister  colonies,  respecting  the  same. 

Resolved,  that  Mr.  Speaker  do  transmit  the  thanks  of  this  House,  to  the  speaker 
and  members  of  the  said  House  of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia,  for  communicating  the  said 
resolutions  to  this  House,  as  well  as  for  their  steady  attention  to  the  general  interests 
of  America. 

Mr.  Speaker  also  reported  to  the  House,  that  he  had  received  a  letter  from  the 
committee  mentioned  in  the  resolutions  of  the  House  of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia,  en- 
closing him  a  copy  of  an  act  of  the  General  Assembly,  of  Virginia,  to  prevent  the 
counterfeiting  the  paper  money  of  other  colonies.  And  the  said  letter  and  act  being 
read  to  the  House, — 

Ordered,  that  leave  be  given  to  bring  in  a  bill,  to  prevent  the  counterfeiting  the 
^paper  money  of  other  colonies.  And  it  is  referred  to  Mr.  Eutledge,  Capt.  Gadsden 
.and  Col.  Pinckney,  to  prepare  and  bring  in  the  said  bill. 

A  true  copy  from  the  journal :  THOS.  FARR,  JR.,  Clerk. 

Raw.  Lowndes,  of  South     Carolina,  to  Metcalfe  Bowler,  of 
Rhode  Island. 

Charleston,  South  CaroHna,  ^ 
22d  July,  1773.  ^ 

.Sir  : — I  am  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  favors  of  the  15th  day  of  May  last, 
enclosing  a  copy  of  the  resolves  of  your  House  of  Deputies,  of  the  7th  of  the  same 
month,  respecting  the  measures  proposed  by  the  House  of  Bui  gesses,  of  Virginia. 

You  may  assure  yourself,  sir,  that  I  shall  take  the  first  opportunity,  after  our 
House  meets,  which  stands  prorogued  to  the  9th  of  next  month,  to  lay  your  letter, 
before  them. 

The  resolutions  of  the  House  [of  Burgesses]  of  Virginia,  have  been  transmitted' 
here,  and  our  House  have  adopted  the  wise  expedient  recommended  by  that  truly 
respectable  senate.  I  take  the'hberty  to  enclose  you  an  extract  from  our  journals 
of  what  we  have  done,  relative  to  that  matter ;  and  also,  to  the  proposition  for  pre- 
venting fthe  counterfeiting  the  paper  money  of  other  colonies. 

As  a  close  and  firm  union  of  the  colonies  is  most  certainly  necessary  for  the  gen- 


1773.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  233 

eral  welfare,  so  ought  the  general  endeavors  of  the  whole  to  be  exerted  in  averting 
the  dangers  threatened  to  any  part.  The  novel,  unconstitutional  court  of  inquiry, 
set  up  in  your  province,  is  truly  alarming ;  and  requires  the  united  etForts  of  the 
colonies  to  prevent  its  baneful  etfects  and  influence. 

You  will  do  an  acceptable  service  to  our  House,  if  you  will  be  pleased  to  furnish 
me  (if  practicable)  with  a  copy  of  the  commission  and  instructions,  by  which  the 
judges  are  to  be  governed  in  the  exercise  of  the  most  extravagant  powers  they  are 
said  to  be  vested  with ;  and  of  their  proceedings  in  consequence  thereof 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  &c.,  &c., 

RAW.  LOWNDES. 

The  Hon.  Met<j^lfe  Bowler,  Esq. 


The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Lord  Dartmouth. 

Providence,  Rhode  Island,  Aug.  20,  1773. 

My  Lord  : — I  am  requested  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  to  transmit 
to  Your  Lordship  the  enclosed  copy  of  a  petition  preferred  to  them  by  a  very  con- 
siderable number  of  respectable  inhabitants,  concerning  the  fishery,  at,  and  within, 
the  River  St.  Lawrence,  a  matter  of  public  utihty  and  general  concern. 

Permit  me.  My  Lord,  to  inform  Your  Lordship,  that  for  several  years  past,  the  fish- 
ermen from  this  colony  have  erected,  at  their  own  cost,  and  improved  certain  houses, 
buildings  and  stakes  upon  most  or  all  of  the  places  mentioned  in  the  petition  referred 
to ;  of  which  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  His  Majesty's  province  of  Canada,  the  spring 
past,  forcibly  took  possession,  and  the  same  detained  against  right,  until  awed  by 
numbers. 

I  am  also  requested  to  desire  Your  Lordship  will  please  to  communicate  the  subject 
matter  of  that  petition  to  His  Majesty,  that  his  royal  pleasure  therein,  may  be  known  ; 
and  humbly  to  entreat  His  Majesty,  in  behalf  of  the  poor  fishermen,  from  this,  his 
loyal  colony,  that  they  may  uninterruptedly  prosecute  their  business,  as  well  at  the 
several  places  in  the  said  petition  specified,  as  elsewhere  within  the  Gulf  of  St.  Law- 
rence ;  provided  they  conduct  themselves  inoifensively  toward  others. 

I  am,  My  Lord,  &c.,  &c., 


JOSEPH  WANTON. 


To  the  Right  Honorable  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth. 


Proceedings,    ^c,    in   the    Commons   House   of  Assemblijy  of 
Georgia. 

Commons  House  of  Assembly,        -\ 
Friday,  the  10th  September,  1773.    | 
Georgia. 

Mr.  Speaker  laid  before  the  House,  two  letters  that  he  had  received  from  the 
speaker  of  the  House  of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia  ;  and  also,  of  the  House  of  Deputies^ 
of  Rhode  Island,  enclosing  resolutions  of  their  respective  Houses ;  and  abo,  the  copy 
of  an  act  to  prevent  counterfeiting  the  paper  currency  of  other  colonies ;  Avhich  said 
resolutions  being  severally  read,  were  unanimously  approved  of 

Resolved,  nem  con,  that  Mr.  Speaker,  and  any  five  of  the  committee  of  correspond- 

VOL.  VII.  30 


234  RECORDS   OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1773. 

ence,  be  a  committee  to  inquire  for,  and  obtain,  the  earliest  intelligence  of  the  many 
important  matters  contained  in  the  said  several  resolutions  ;  and  that  they  likewisa 
do,  from  time  to  time,  correspond  with  the  respective  committees  that  now  are,  or. 
may  be,  appointed  by  the  houses  of  representatives,  on  this  continent. 

Resolved,  nem  con,  that  the  thanks  of  this  House  be  transmitted  to  the  honorable 
the  speaker,  and  members  of  the  House  of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia;  and  also,  the 
honorable  the  speaker  and  members  of  the  House  of  Deputies,  of  Rhode  Island,  for 
communicating  their  intentions  firmly  to  support  the  rights  and  privileges  of  His 
Majesty's  faithful  and  loyal  subjects  in  America ;  and  also,  to  the  Honorable  Peyton 
Randolph,  Esq.,  Robert  Carter  Nicholas  and  Dudley  Digge,  Esqs.,  for  transmitting 
to  this  House  a  copy  of  the  above  mentioned  act.  ^ 

A  true  copy,  taken  from  the  original  journals,  and  examined  by — 

RICHARD  CUNNINGHAISI  CROOKE,  Clerk. 

To  the  speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives  of  Rhode  Island. 

The  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Fennsylvania, 
to  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives  of  Rhode 
Island. 

PhiladeljAia,  September  25th,  1773. 
Sir: — I  embraced  the  earUest  opportunity,  to  communicate  your  favor  of  the  19th 
of  March,  with  the  resolves  of  the  House  of  Burgesses,  of  the  colony  of  Virginia,  to 
the  Assembly  of  this  province  ;  and  I  have  it  in  command  from  them,  to  assure  your 
honorable  House,  that  they  esteem  it  a  matter  of  the  greatest  importance,  to  co- 
operate with  the  representatives  of  the  other  colonies,  in  every  wise  and  prudent 
measure  whicli  may  be  proposed  for  the  preservation  and  security  of  their  general 
rights  and  liberties ;  and  that  it  is  highly  expedient  and  necessary  a  correspondence 
should  be  maintained  between  the  Assemblies  of  the  several  colonies. 

But,  as  the  present  Assembly  must  in  a  few  days  be  dissolved  by  virtue  of  the 
charter  of  the  provif  ,'e,  and  any  measures  they  might  adopt  at  this  time,  be  ren- 
dered, by  the  dissolution,  ineffectual,  they  have  earnestly  recommended  the  subject 
matter  of  the  letter  and  resolves  of  the  House  of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia,  to  the  consid- 
eration of  the  succeeding  Assembly. 

In  the  name,  and  by  order  of  the  House, 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  &c.,  &c., 

JOSEPH  GALLOWAY, 

Speaker. 
To  the  Honorable  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Deputies,    ) 
of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island.  j 

Proceedings,  ^-c,  of  the  Lower  House  of  Assembly,  of  Maryland. 

By  the  Lower  House  of  Assembly,  ) 
Friday,  October  15th,  1773.        1 
The   order   of  the   day   being    read,    the   House   took   into   consideration   the 
several  letters,  and  other  papers,  communicated  to  this  House  by  the  honorable 
speaker,  and  addressed  to  him,  by  the  honorable  the  speakers  of  the  several  colonies 
of  Virginia,  Massachusetts  Bay,  Connecticut  and  Rhode  Island ;   and — 


1773.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  235 

Eesolved  unanimously,  that  this  House  most  cordially  accept  the  invitation  to  a 
mutual  correspondence  and  intercourse  with  our  sister  colonies. 

Resolved,  unanimously,  that  a  standing  committee  of  correspondence  and  inquiry, 
be  apppointed,  to  consist  of  eleven  persons,  to  wit :  the  Honorable  Matthew  Tilgh- 
man,  Esq.,  speaker ;  .Tohn  Hall,  Thomas  Johnson,  William  Paca,  Samuel  Chase, 
Edward  Lloyd,  Matthias  Hammond,  Josias  Beall,  James  Lloyd  Chamberlaine,  Brice 
Thomas,  Beale  Worthington  and  Joseph  Sim,  Esqs. ;  any  five  of  whom,  to  be  a  com- 
mittee, whose  business  it  shall  be,  to  obtain  the  most  early  and  authentic  intelligence 
of  all  such  acts  and  resolutions  of  the  British  Parliament,  or  proceedings  of  the  ad- 
ministration as  may  relate  to,  or  affect  the  British  colonies,  in  America  ;  and  to  keep 
up  and  maintain  a  correspondence  and  communication  with  our  sister  colonies,  re- 
specting these  important  considerations ;  and  the  result  of  such  their  proceedings, 
from  time  to  time,  to  lay  before  this  House. 

Resolved,  unanimously,  that  the  speaker  of  this  House  transmit  to  the  speakers  of 
the  different  Assemblies  of  the  British  colonies,  on  this  continent,  copies  of  the 
above  resolutions.  JNO.  DUCKETT, 

Clerk  of  the  Lower  House. 

Extracted  from  the  journal  of  the  Lower  House  of  Assembly,  ^ 
of  the  Province  of  Maryland.  I 

Proceedings,  ^x. ,  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Delaware. 

Counties  on  Delaware,  in  the  House  of  Representatives,    ) 
Saturday,  October  23d,  1773.     A.  M.  J 

On  motion  of  ]\Ir.  Read, — 

Ordered,  that  the  several  letters,  from  the  respective  speakers  of  the  House  of  Bur- 
gesses, in  the  colony  of  Virginia ;  the  House  of  Deputies,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  ; 
and  the  House  of  Representatives,  in  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay ;  with 
the  several  resolves  enclosed,  be  read  the  second  time  ;  which  was  done,  accordingly. 

And  the  House,  taking  the  same  into  consideration,  resolved  itself  into  a  grand 
committee  of  the  whole  House.  • 

The  speaker  left  the  chair. 

]\Ir.  M'Kean  took  the  chair  of  the  committee. 

Mr.  Speaker  resumed  the  chair. 

Mr.  M'Kean  reported  from  the  committee,  that  they  had  directed  him  to  make 
the  following  report  to  the  House,  viz. : 

Whereas,  the  speaker  of  the  late  Assembly,  presented  to  the  House,  several 
letters,  which  he  received  during  the  recess  of  the  House  ;  one,  from  the  truly 
patriotic  House  of  Burgesses,  of  His  Majesty's  ancient  dominion  of  Virginia,  enclos- 
ing a  copy  of  certain  resolutions  entered  into  by  them,  on  the  12th  of  March  last . 
one,  from  the  honorable  House  of  Deputies,  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and 
Providence  Plantations,  enclosing  certain  resolutions  entered  into  by  them,  on 
the  7th  of  May  last ;  and  one,  from  the  free  and  spirited  House  of  Representa- 
tives, of  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  enclosing  certain  resolutions, 
entered  into  by  them,  on  the  28th  of  May  last;  and  requesting  that  a  committee  of 
this  House  may  be  appointed,  to  communicate,  from  time  to  time,  with  the  corres- 
ponding committees,  appointed  by  the  said  Assemblies,  and  named  in  the  said  respec- 
tive resolves. 

And,  whereas,  this  House  is  of  opinion,  that  the  measures  adopted  by  the  aforesaid 


236  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  1773. 

Assemblies,  and  proposed  to  this,  are  very  salutary,  and  bighly  necessary  at  this 
time,  when  the  rights  and  liberties  of  all  appear  to  be  systematically  invaded. 

Resolved,  that  this  House  have  a  very  grateful  sense  of  the  obligations  they  are 
under  to  the  House  of  Burgesses,  in  Virginia,  for  the  vigilance,  firmness  and  wis- 
dom, which  they  have  discovered  at  all  times,  in  support  of  the  rights  and  Hberties 
of  the  American  colonies;  and  do  heartily  concur  with  them  in  their  said  judicious 
and  spirited  resolves. 

Resolved,  that  a  standing  committee  of  correspondence  and  inquiry,  be  appointed, 
to  consist  of  five  members,  any  three  of  whom,  to  be  a  quorum  ;  whose  business  it 
shall  be,  to  obtain  the  most  early  and  authentic  intelligence  of  all  such  acts  and 
resolutions  of  the  Bi'itish  Parliament,  or  pi-oceedings  of  the  administration,  as  may 
relate  to,  or  affect  the  British  colonies  in  America ;  and  to  keep  up  and  maintain  a 
correspondence  and  communication  with  our  sister  colonies,  respecting  these  Im- 
portant considerations ;  and  the  result  of  such  their  proceedings,  from  time  to  time, 
to  lay  before  the  House. 

Resolved,  that  it  be  an  Instruction  to  the  said  committee,  that  they  do,  without  de- 
lay, inform  themselves  particularly  of  the  principles  and  authority  on  Avhich  was 
constituted  a  court  of  Inquiry,  held  In  Rhode  Island ;  said  to  be  vested  with  powers 
to  transport  persons  accused  of  offences  committed  In  America,  to  places  beyond  the 
seas,  to  be  tried. 

Resolved,  that  the  said  committee  be  further  Instructed  to  prepare  and  report 
to  this  House,  drafts  of  very  respectful  answers  to  the  letters  above  mentioned ; 
also,  a  circular  letter  to  the  speakers  of  the  several  other  Houses  of  Assembly,  on 
this  continent,  enclosing  the  aforesaid  resolves  ;  and  requesting  them  to  lay  the  same 
before  their  respective  Assemblies,  In  confidence  that  they  will  readily  and  cheer- 
fully comply  with  the  well-concerted  and  wise  resolves  of  the  House  of  Burgesses, 
in  Virginia. 

To  which  said  resolves,  the  House  agreed,  nemine  contrmliccnte. 

Then  the  House  Immediately  made  choice  of  the  following  gentlemen  to  be  the 
committee  of  correspondence  and  communication  with  the  other  colonies,  viz. : 

Mr.  Speaker,  George  Read,  Thomas  JM'Kean,  John  ]M'KInly  and  Thomas  Robln^ 
son,  Esqs. 

I  do  hereby  certify,  that  the  above  and  foregoing,  is  a  true  copy  of  the  minutes  of 
Assembly.  DAVID  THOMPSON, 

Clerk  Ibid. 


Cccsar  Rodney,  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of 
Delaware,  to  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of 
Rhode  Island. 

Newcastle,  on  Delaware,  October  25th,  1773.. 
Sir  : — I  am  ordered  by  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  this  government,  to  ac^ 
knowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  lath  of  May  last,  addressed  to  the 
speaker  of  the  late  Assembly  here,  enclosing  a  copy  of  the  resolves,  entered  into  by 
the  House  of  Deputies,  of  your  colony;  and  to  inform  you,  that  the  same  were  laid 
before  this  House,  the  first  time  they  met,  after  receiving  them. 


1773.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  237 

And  I  now  have  tlie  pleasure  of  transmitting  to  yon,  a  copy  of  their  minutes  and 
proceedings  on  this  occasion  :  which  are  so  expressive  of  their  sentiments  of  the 
measures  adopted  and  recommended  by  your  House,  that  nothing  need  be  added 
thereto. 

In  the  name,  and  by  the  order  of  the  House, 

I  am,  with  the  greatest  respect,  &c.,  &c., 

CiESAR  RODNEY,  Speaker. 
To  the  Honorable  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  ] 
of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island.  i 

The  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Georgia,  to  the 
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Savannah,  in  Georgia,  20th  November,  1773. 
Sir : — Your  esteemed  favor,  enclosing  several  resolutions  of  the  House  of  Depu- 
ties, of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  has  duly  come  to  hand ;  and  I  took  an  opportu- 
nity of  laying  them  before  the  Commons  House  of  Assembly,  of  this  province,  who 
immediately  entered  into  some  ;  of  which,  I  have  the  pleasure,  by  order  of  the 
House,  to  enclose  you  a  copy. 

By  them,  you  will  see  that  the  representatives  of  the  people  are  not  backward  in 
any  thing  that  may  have  a  tendency  to  promote  the  general  welfare  of  America  ;  a 
the  same,  to  testify  their  abhorrence  of  measures  that  strike  ultimately  at  the  de- 
struction of  our  liberties  and  privileges. 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

WILLIAM  YOUNG. 
To  the  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Esq. 

The  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Georgia,  to  tha 
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Savannah,  in  Georgia,  20th  November,  1773. 
Sir  : — I  have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  thanks  of  the  Commons  House  of  Assem- 
bly, of  this  province,  to  you,  sir,  and  the  other  members  of  the  House  of  Deputies,  of 
Rhode  Island,  for  communicating  your  intentions  firmly  to  support  the  rights  and 
liberties  of  America.  I  am,  respectfully,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

WILLIAM  YOUNG. 
To  the  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Esq. 

The  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Delegates,  of  Maryland,   to  the 
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Maryland,  December  G,  1773. 
Sir : — Having  received  your  letter  of  the  15th  May  last,  together  with  the  resolu-. 
lions  of  your  House  of  Deputies,  I  took  the  earliest  opportunity  of  laying  them  be- 
fore the  House  of  Delegates,  of  this  province  ;  who,  sensible  of  the  great  utihty  of  a 


238  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1773. 

perfect  union  amongst  tlie  colonies,  most  readily  concurred  in  the  measure  proposed 
by  the  House  of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia ;  and  came  to  the  resolutions  I  have  now  the 
honor  to  enclose,  and  which  I  have  it  in  command  to  transmit  to  you ;  requesting 
you  will  lay  them  before  your  House  of  Deputies,  at  their  next  meeting. 

I  am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  &c.,  &c., 

MAT.  TILGHMAN. 
To  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Deputies,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Proceedings,  SfC,  of  the  House  of  Representatives    of  North 
Carolina. 

In  the  Assembly,  18th  December,  1773. 
North  Carolina. 

Upon  the  speaker's  communicating  to  this  House,  a  letter  from  the  truly  patriotic 
House  of  Burgesses,  of  His  Majesty's  ancient  dominion  of  A^irginia,  enclosing  a 
copy  of  certain  resolves  entered  into  by  them,  upon  the  12th  of  March  last,  and  re- 
questing that  this  House  would  appoint  a  committee,  to  communicate  from  time 
to  time,  with  a  corresponding  committee  by  them  then  appointed ;  and  also  letters 
from  several  of  our  sister  colonies,  expressing  the  high  approbation  of,  and  concur- 
rence with  so  salutary  a  measure ;  this  House — 

Resolve,  that  the  vigilance  which  the  honorable  House  of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia, 
have  displayed  in  attending  to  every  encroachment  upon  the  rights  and  liberties  of 
America,  and  the  wisdom  and  vigor  with  which  they  have  always  opposed  such  en- 
croachments, are  worthy  the  imitation  and  merit  the  gratitude  of  all  their  sister 
colonies  ;  and  in  no  instance  more  particularly,  than  the  measure  proposed  for  ap- 
pointing corresponding  committees  in  every  colony,  by  which  such  harmony  and 
communication  will  be  established  among  them,  that  they  Avill  at  all  times  be  ready- 
to  exert  their  united  efforts,  and  most  strenuous  endeavors  to  preserve  the  just  rights 
and  hberties  of  the  American  colonies ;  which  appear  of  late,  to  be  so  systematically 
invaded,  that  we  heartily  concur  with  their  spirited  resolves. 

Resolved,  that  a  standing  committee  of  correspondence  and  inquiry,  be  ap- 
pointed, to  consist  of  nine  persons,  to  wit :  Mr.  Speaker,  Mr.  Howe,  Mr.  Harnell, 
Mr.  Hooper,  Mr.  Caswell,  Mr.  Vail,  Mr.  Ashe,  Mr.  Hewes  and  Mr.  Samuel  John- 
ston, any  five  of  whom,  to  be  a  committee,  whose  business  it  shall  be,  to  obtain 
the  most  early  and  authentic  intelligence  of  all  such  acts  and  resolutions  of  the 
British  Parliament,  or  proceedings  of  the  administration  as  may  relate  to,  or  affect 
the  British  colonies,  in  America ;  and  to  keep  and  maintain  a  correspondence  and 
communication  with  the  other  colonies,  respecting  those  important  considerations ; 
and  the  result  of  their  proceedings,  from  time  to  time,  to  lay  before  this  House. 

Resolved,  that  it  be  an  instruction  to  said  committee,  that  they  do,  without  delay, 
inform  themselves  particularly  of  the  principles  and  authority,  on  which  Avas  con- 
stituted a  court  of  inquiry,  said  to  have  been  lately  held  in  Rhode  Island,  with 
powers  to  transport  persons  accused  of  oflences  committed  in  America,  to  places  be- 
yond the  seas,  to  be  tried. 

Resolved,  that  the  speaker  of  this  House  write  respectful  answers  to  the  letters 
above  mentioned  ;  and  also,  a  circular  letter  of  thanks  to  the  speakers  of  the  several 
Houses  of  Assembly,  who  have  so  spiritedly  adopted  the  patriotic  resolutiojis  and 


1774.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  239 

measures  of  the  truly  respectable  House  of  Burgesses,  of  Virginia ,  and  for  their 
obliging  communication  thereof  to  this  House,  enclosing  a  copy  of  our  proceedmgs 
and  requesting  them  to  lay  the  same  before  their  respective  Assemblies. 

By  order:  JAS.  GREENJBIELK. 

The  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  North  Carolina, 
to  the  Speaker  of  the  House  Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island. 

North  Carolina,  December  2Cth,  1773. 
Sir  : — I  have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  much  esteemed  favor 
of  the  loth  of  May,  accompanying  the  resolves  of  the  House  of  Deputies,  which  I 
lost  no  time  in  laying  before  the  House  of  Assembly,  of  this  colony  ;  who  very  cheer- 
fully received  and  adopted  them. 

I  have  it  in  command,  to  transmit  you  the  resolutions  entered  into  by  our  House, 
which  you  will  herewith  receive  ;  and  am. 

With  great  respect  and  esteem,  sir,  &c.,  &c., 

JOHN  HARVEY. 
To  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the 
first  Wednesday  of  May,  1774. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

The  following  officers,  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged  . 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  John  Collins,  Mr.  Thomas  Wickes, 

Mr.  Peleg  Barker,  Mr.  Jonathan  Randall, 

Mr.  David  Harris,  Mr.  John  Congdon, 

Mr.  John  Sayles,  Jr.,  Mr.  William  Potter, 

Mr.  John  Almy,  Mr.  William  Richmond. 


240 


RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 


DEPUTIES. 

Newport. 

East  Greenv;ich. 

Mr.  Thomas  Cranston, 

Mr. 

,  Preserved  Pearce, 

Mr.  John  Wanton, 

Mr, 

,  William  Pearce. 

Mr.  George  Hazard, 

Jamestown. 

Mr.  John  Bours, 

Mr.  Edward  Hull, 

Mr.  John  Read, 

Mr. 

Daniel  Weeden,  Jr. 

Mr.  Thomas  Freebody. 

SmithfieU. 

Providence. 

]Mr. 

Israel  Wilkinson, 

Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins, 

i\Ir. 

William  Winsor. 

Mr.  John  Jenckes, 

Scituate. 

Mr.  John  Smith, 

Mr. 

Ezekiel  Cornell, 

Mr.  John  Matthewson. 

Mr. 

Rufus  Hopkins. 

Portsmouth. 

Glocester. 

Mr.  Metcalfe  Bowler, 

Mr. 

Silas  Williams, 

Mr.  John  Jepson, 

Mr. 

Chad  Brown. 

Mr.  Joseph  Brownell, 

Charlestoion. 

Mr.  John  Shearman. 

Mr. 

Sylvester  Robinson^ 

Warivick. 

Mr. 

Jesse  Champlin. 

Mr.  Benjamin  Greene, 

West  Greenwich- 

Air.  William  Greene, 

Mr. 

Benjamin  Tillinghast, 

Mr.  Jacob  Greene, 

Mr. 

Thomas  Gorton. 

Mr.  John  Low. 

Coventnj. 

Westerly. 

Mr. 

Israel  Bowen, 

Mr.  Joshua  Babcock, 

Mr. 

Caleb  Vaughan. 

]Mr.  Stephen  Saunders. 

Exeter. 

New  Shoreham. 

Mr. 

George  Pierce, 

Mr.  John  Sands, 

Mr. 

John  Chapman. 

Mr.  Walter  Rathbun. 

Middletown. 

North  Kingstown. 

Mr. 

Nicholas  Easton, 

Mr.  Peter  Phillips, 

Mr. 

Isaac  Smith. 

Mr.  John  Northup. 

Bristol. 

South  Kingstown. 

Col. 

Simeon  Potter, 

Mr.  John  Potter, 

Mr. 

William  Bradford. 

Mr.  Carder  Hazard. 

1774.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS. 


241 


DEPUTIES. 

Tiverton. 

Cranston. 

Mr.  Edward  Gray, 

Mr.  Joseph  Rhodes, 

Capt.  John  Gooke. 

Mr.  Thomas  Potter. 

Little  Compton. 

Hoplcinton. 

Mr.  Thomas  Ghurch, 

Mr.  Thomas  Wells,  Jr., 

Mr.  Daniel  Wilbur. 

Mr.  Jesse  Maxson. 

Warre?i. 

Johnston. 

Mr.  Sylvester  Ghild, 

Mr.  Edward  Fenner, 

Mr.  Nathan  Miller. 

Mr.  Jeduthun  Belknap. 

Cumberla?td. 

North  Providence. 

Mr.  John  Dexter, 

Gapt.  Stephen  Jenckes, 

Mr.  Nathaniel  Shepperdson. 

Mr.  Thomas  Olney. 

Richnmd. 

Barringlon. 

Mr.  Robert  Stanton, 

Mr.  Nathaniel  Martin, 

Mr.  Galeb  Barber. 

Mr.  Thomas  Allen. 

The  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  speaker  ;  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 

Mr.  Henry  Ward,  secretary. 

Mr.  Henry  Marchant,  attorney  general. 

Mr.  Joseph  Glarke,  general  treasurer. 

Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  chief  justice  of  the  superior  court 
of  judicature,  court  of  assize  and  general  jail  delivery. 

SHERIFFS    OF    THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

Newport  county — Mr.  Walter  Chaloner.  Providence  county 
— Mr.  Paul  Tew.  Kings  county — Mr.  Beriah  Brown.  Bris- 
tol county — Mr.  John  Brown.     Kent  county — Mr,  Henry  Rice. 


FIELD    OFFICERS    OF    THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

Newport  county — Mr.  Daniel  Dunham,  colonel ;  Mr.  Isaac 
Dayton,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  John  Forrester,  major. 

Providence  county — Mr.  James  Angell,  colonel  ;  Mr.  Gha(^ 
Brown,  lieutenant  colonel ;  Mr.  Jabez  Bowen,  major, 

VOL.  VII.  31 


242  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

Kings  county — Mr.  Moses  Barber,  colonel  ;  Mr.  James 
Babcock,  lieutenant  colonel  ;    Mr.  Jonathan  Vaughan,  major. 

Kent  county — Mr.  John  Waterman,  colonel ;  Mr.  John  Low, 
lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  Joseph  Fry,  major. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Abial  Brown,  of  South  Kingstown,  preferred 
a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  on  the 
6th  instant,  his  house,  and  the  principal  part  of  his  furniture, 
were  accidentally  consumed  by  fire  ;  by  which  misfortune,  he,, 
■with  his  wife,  and  four  small  children,  are  reduced  to  a  state 
of  poverty  and  distress  ;  and  thereupon,  prayed  this  Assembly 
to  grant  him  a  lottery,  for  raising  the  sum  of  $500,  in  such 
and  so  many  classes  as  the  directors  shall  think  best,  to  be  ap- 
plied to  his  relief ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the  foregoing 
petition,  lie,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  upon  the  usual 
conditions  ;  provided,  that  no  charge  accrue  to  the  colony  ; 
and  that  Messrs.  Robert  Potter,  Abijah  Brown  and  John  Gard- 
ner (son  of  John),  all  of  South  Kingstown,  be  appointed  directors 
of  the  said  lottery. 

Whereas,  a  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  East  Greenwich, 
preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that 
there  is,  at  present,  but  one  school  house  in  the  compact  part 
of  the  said  town  ;  and  that  another  is  necessary  for  the  educa- 
tion of  youth  ;  and  thereupon  prayed  this  Assembly,  that  a 
lottery  may  be  granted,  to  raise  the  sum  of  :^G00,  to  be  ap- 
plied towards  the  purchasing  a  lot,  and  building  a  public 
school  house  in  the  said  town  ;  and  that  Preserved  Pearce, 
Esq.,  Mr.  Oliver  Arnold  and  Mr.  John  Reynolds,  all  of  East 
Greenwich  ;  and  Silas  Casey,  Esq.  and  Mr.  Isaac  Tripp,  Jr., 
both  of  Warwick,  may  be  appointed  directors  of  the  said 
lottery  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the  foregoing  pe- 
tition be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  on  the  usual  condi- 
tions ;   provided,  that  no  charge  accrue  to  the  colony,  thereby. 

Whereas,  Mr.  GriCfm  Greene,  of  Coventry,  forge-master, 
preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that. 


1774.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.      ,  243 

at  the  session  of  this  Assembly,  held  in  August,  A.  D.  1772, 
a  lottery  was  granted,  to  raise  the  sum  of  $2,500,  for  repair- 
ing a  loss  sustained  by  the  forge,  in  Coventry,  aforesaid,  being 
burnt ;  that  Messrs.  William  Greene,  Christopher  Greene  and 
Charles  Holdon,  Jr.,  of  Warwick,  were  appointed  directors; 
that,  in  conformity  thereto,  two  classes  of  said  lottery  have  been 
drawn,  for  raising  the  sum  of  §500,  only  ;  that  the  greatness 
of  the  plan,  hath  proved  an  insurmountable  obstacle  to  its  fur- 
ther progress  ;  that  Messrs.  Nathaniel  Greene  and  Company, 
parties  concerned,  are  willing  to  relinquish  their  interest  in  said 
lottery,  with  respect  to  any  further  gain  ;  and  that  he  is,  and 
hath  been,  a  great  sufferer,  and  stands  in  need  of  assistance  ; 
and  thereupon,  the  said  Griffin  Greene  prayed  this  Assembly, 
that  the  mode  of  said  lottery  may  be  altered  ;  and  that  he  may 
be  permitted  to  raise  the  sum  of  $500,  by  one  or  more  classes, 
under  the  direction  of  the  above  named  directors  ;  they 
complying  with  the  usual  requisitions;  on  consideration 
whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the  aforesaid  pe- 
tition be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  number  of  families  and 
persons  in  this  colony  be  taken  ;  specifying  the  number  of 
whites,  Indians  and  blacks,  both  male  and  female  ;  and  ascer- 
taining the  number  above,  and  under,  the  age  cf  sixteen  ;  and 
that  the  persons  whose  names  are  set  down  in  the  subsequent 
list,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  to  take  the  account  in 
their  respective  towns,  to  wit : 

Persons  appointed  by  the    General  Assembly,  to  make  an  Enu- 
meration of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Colony. 

Newport— Mr.  Edward  Thurston,  Jr.,  South  Kingstown — Mr.  Nath'l  Hawkins. 

William  Coddington,  Esq.  East  Greenwich — "William  Pierce,  Esq. 

Providence — James  Angell,  Esq.  Jamestown — Benj.  Underwood,  Esq. 

Portsmouth — John  Shearman,  Esq.  Sraithfield — Daniel  Mowry,  Jr.,  Esq. 

Warwick — Mr.  Anthony  Low.  Scituate — Mr.  Rufus  Hopkins. 

Westerly — Joseph  Crandall,  Esq.  Glocester — Zebedee  Hopkins,  Jr.,  Esq. 

New  Shoreham — Mr.  John  Sands.  Charlestown — i\Ir.  Jonathan  Hassard. 

North  Kingstown — Peter  Phillips,  Esq.  West  Greenwich — Job  Spencer,  Es^- 


244  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

Coventry — Mr.  Abel  Bennett.  Cumberland — John  Dexter,  Esq. 

Exeter — George  Peirce,  Esq.  Richmond — Robert  Stanton,  Esq. 

Middletown — John  Barker,  Esq.  Cranston — Thomas  Potter,  Esq. 

Bristol — Richard  Smith,  Esq.  Hopkinton — Thomas  Wells,  Jr.,  Esq. 

Tiverton — Walter  Cooke,  Esq.  Johnston — Edward  Fenner,  Esq. 

Little  Compton — Thomas  Church,  Esq.  North  Providence — Hope  Angell,  Esq. 

Warren — William  Turner  IMiller,  Esq.  Barrington — Mr.  Thomas  Allen. 

It  is  farther  voted  and  resolved,  that,  in  case  any  of  the 
above  named  persons  shall  refuse,  or  by  any  casualty  be  ren- 
dered unable  to  serve,  then  the  deputies  in  the  respective 
towns  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  empowered  to  appoint  others 
in  their  stead. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  secretary 
transmit,  by  express,  as  soon  as  possible,  a  copy  hereof,  to  the 
persons  above  appointed  ;  and  also,  furnish  each  person  with  a 
proper  roll,  with  ruled  columns,  to  take  the  numbers  ;  and  thafc 
the  persons  so  appointed,  make  return  thereof,  to  this  Assem- 
bly, at  the  next  session. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  thanks  of  this  Assembly  be 
given  to  the  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Esq.,  Deputy  Governor  of 
this  colony,  for  his  spirited  conduct  in  exerting  his  authority 
for  the  honor  of  the  colony,  in  issuing  a  proclamation  for  appre- 
hending Daniel  Willson,  a  criminal,  under  sentence  of  death, 
who  had  broken  out  of  the  jail  in  Providence. 

And  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Providence,  present  an 
account  of  the  expenses  and  charges  of  apprehending  the  said 
Willson,  to  this  Assembly,  at  the  next  session. 

God  save  the  King. 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  245 


Proceedings  cf  the  General  Assembhj,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  on 
the  second  Monday  in  June,  1774. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Benjamin  Greene,  one  of  the  owners  of  the 
iron  works,  in  Coventry,  called  Greene's  Iron  Works,  preferred 
a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  a  lottery 
was  heretofore  granted  to  the  owners  of  the  said  iron  works,  to 
enable  them  to  re-build  them,  alter  they  had  been  consumed 
by  fire  ;  that  the  said  owners  have  received  but  small  benefit 
from  the  said  lottery  ;  that  the  expense  of  re-building  them, 
hath  been  very  great,  and  particularly  heavy  upon  him  ;  and 
that,  as  the  said  branch  of  business  is  exceedingly  advantag- 
eous to  the  public,  he  is  greatly  encouraged  to  hope  that  a  lot- 
tery, for  his  relief,  will  be  soon  filled  ;  and  thereupon,  the  said 
Benjamin  Greene  prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  him  a  lottery, 
to  raise  the  sum  of  $600,  towards  discharging  the  expenses  of 
re-building  the  said  iron  works  ;  and  that  Capt.  David  Bray- 
ton,  of  Coventry  ;  Mr.  Daniel  Hall,  of  North  Kingstown  ;  and 
Mr.  John  Greene,  (son  of  David,)  of  Warwick,  be  appointed 
directors  thereof ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the  aforesaid 
petition  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual 
conditions  and  restrictions  ;  provided,  no  charge  accrue  to  the 
colony,  thereby. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  William  Potter,  Esq.,  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  appointed  to  procure  a  new  court  house  to  be 
built,  in  the  county  of  Kings  county,  upon  the  place  where  the 
old  court  house  now  stands,  agreeably  to  the  plan  presented  to 
this  Assembly,  by  the  committee,  appointed  for  that  purpose  ; 


246  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE  ISLAND         [1774. 

that  he  sell  the  old  court  house  for  what  it  will  fetch,  and  ap- 
ply the  money,  arising  from  the  sale  thereof,  towards  building 
the  new  court  house  ;  and  that  the  said  old  house  remain  in 
the  condition  it  is  now  in,  until  after  the  sitting  of  the  superior 
court  in  April  next. 

This  Assembly  taking  into  the  most  serious  consideration, 
several  acts  of  the  Sritish  Parliament,  for  levying  taxes  upon  His 
Majesty's  subjects,  in  America,  without  their  consent,  and  par- 
ticularly an  act  lately  passed,  for  blocking  up  the  port  of  Boston  ; 
which  act,  even  upon  the  supposition  that  the  people  of  Boston 
had  justly  deserved  punishment,  is  scarcely  to  be  paralleled  in 
history,  for  the  severity  of  the  vengeance  executed  upon  them  ; 
and  also  considering  to  what  a  deplorable  state  this,  and  all  the 
other  colonies  are  reduced,  when,  by  an  act  of  Parliament,  in 
which  the  subjects  in  America  have  not  a  single  voice,  and 
without  being  heard,  they  may  be  divested  of  property,  and 
deprived  of  liberty  ;   do,  upon  mature  deliberation, — 

Resolve,  1st.  That  it  is  the  opinion  of  this  Assembly,  that 
a  firm  and  inviolable  union  of  all  the  colonies,  in  councils  and 
measures,  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  their 
rights  and  liberties  ;  and  that,  for  that  purpose,  a  convention 
of  representatives,  from  all  the  colonies,  ought  to  be  holden,  in 
some  suitable  place,  as  soon  as  may  be,  in  order  to  consult  up- 
on proper  measures  to  obtain  a  repeal  of  the  said  acts  ;  and  to 
establish  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  colonies,  upon  a  just 
and  solid  foundation. 

2d.  That  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  and  the  Hon.  Samuel 
Ward,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  by  this  As- 
sembly, to  represent  the  people  of  this  colony,  in  a  general 
congress  of  representatives,  from  the  other  colonies,  at  such 
time  and  place,  as  shall  be  agreed  upon  by  the  major  part  of 
the  committees  appointed,  or  to  be  appointed,  by  the  colonies 
in  general. 

3d.  That  they  consult  and  advise  with  the  representatives 
of  the  other  colonies,  who  shall  meet  in  such  congress,  upon  a 
loyal  and  dutiful  petition,  and  remonstrance,  to  be  presented  to 
His  Majesty,  as  the  united  voice  of  his  faithful  subjects  in 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  247 

America,  setting  forth  the  grievances  they  labor  under,  and 
praying  hi.s  gracious  interposition  for  their  relief ;  and  that  in 
case  a  major  part  of  the  representatives  of  all  the  colonies  shall 
agree  upon  such  petition  and  remonstrance,  they  be  empowered 
to  sign  the  same,  in  behalf  of  this  colony. 

4th.  That  they  also  consult  and  advise  upon  all  such  rea- 
sonable and  lawful  measures,  as  may  be  expedient  for  the 
colonies,  in  an  united  manner,  to  pursue,  in  order  to  procure  a 
redress  of  their  grievances  ;  and  to  ascertain  and  establish 
their  rights  and  liberties. 

5th.  That  that  they  also  endeavor  to  procure  a  regular,  an- 
nual convention  of  representatives  from  all  the  colonies,  to  con- 
sider of  proper  means  for  the  preservation  of  the  rights  and  lib- 
erties of  the  colonies. 

6th.  That  the  speaker  of  the  lower  house  transmit,  as  soon 
as  may  be,  copies  of  these  resolutions,  to  the  present  or  late 
speakers  of  the  respective  houses  of  representatives  of  all  the 
British  colonies  upon  the  continent. 

An  Act  establishing  an  independent  company,  by  the  name  of 
The  Light  Infantry,  for  the  county  of  Providence. 

[Here  follows  the  charter.] 

At  the  request  of  the  persons  formed  into  a  company,  by  the 
name  of  The  Light  Infantry,  for  the  county  of  Providence, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  following  persons  be,  and 
hereby  are,  appointed  the  first  commissioned  officers  for  the 
said  company,  to  wit : 

John  Matthewson,  captain  ;  Jonathan  Ellis,  first  lieutenant ; 
Thomas  Truman,  second  lieutenant  ;  Asa  Franklin,  ensign. 

Whereas,  a  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  towns  of  Warwick 
and  Cranston,  preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this 
Assembly,  that  they  have  built  a  meeting  house  for  the  church 
and  congregation  of  the  Baptist  denomination,  at  Pawtuxet ; 
and  that  there  is  still  wanting,  in  the  said  place,  a  parsonage  house 
<and  lot,  for  the  settlement  and  dwelling  of  the  minister  of  the 


248  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

said  congregation  ;  and  therefore  prayed  this  Assembly  to 
grant  a  lottery,  for  raising  the  sum  of  £300,  lawful  money, 
for  the  purpose  of  purchasing  a  parsonage  lot,  and  building  a 
parsonage  house,  to  be,  and  remain,  forever  hereafter,  to  and 
for  the  use  of  the  minister  of  the  said  congregation,  at  said 
Pawtuxet ;  and  that  Anthony  Aborn,  Esq.  and  Mr.  Nehemiah 
Rhodes,  both  of  Cranston,  aforesaid  ;  and  Robert  Rhodes, 
Esq.  and  Mr.  Benj.  Arnold,  both  of  Warwick,  aforesaid,  may 
be  appointed  directors  of  the  said  lottery,  to  raise  the  said  sum 
of  money,  for  the  purpose  aforesaid,  as  soon  as  conveniently 
may  be  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the  said  petition 
be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  condi- 
tions and  restrictions  ;  provided,  that  no  charge  accrue  to  the 
colony,  thereby. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session  held  in  Au- 
gust, A.  D.  1773,  passed  an  act,  entitled  "An  act  making  it 
lawful  to  break  down  and  blow  up  the  rocks  at  Pawtucket 
Falls,  to  let  fish  pass  up  ;"  through  a  misunderstanding  of 
which  act,  many  disadvantages  have  happened, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Hon.  Stephen 
Hopkins  and  the  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Esqs.,  and  Mr.  Moses 
Brown,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  with 
power  to  see  the  said  act  truly  executed  ;  and  that  no  rocks 
be  blown  up,  nor  any  thing  done,  by  virtue  of  said  act,  but 
by  the  direction  or  permission  of  the  said  committee,  or  any 
two  of  them. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  Nicholas  Brown,  Joseph  Brown,  John 
Brown,  Benjamin  Thurber,  Daniel  Cahoone,  Daniel  Tilling- 
hast,  Edward  Thurber,  William  Russell,  Nathaniel  Wheaton, 
Christopher  Sheldon,  Ephraim  Wheaton  and  John  Jenckes,  the 
committee  of  the  Baptist  or  Anti-Pedobaptist  society,  in  the 
tow^n  of  Providence,  did,  in  behalf  of  said  society,  prefer  a  pe- 
tition, and  represent  unto  this  Assembly,  that  the  said  society 
hath  purchased  a  convenient  lot,  to  build  a  meeting  house  up- 
on, for  the  public  worship  of  Almighty  God,  and  holding  the 
ublic  commencements  in  ;   and  that  the  purchase  of  the  said 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  249 

lot,  together  with  the  bnikVing  a  proper  house  for  the  purposes, 
aforesaid,  will  be  attended  with  very  great  expense  ;  and 
thereupon  prayed  that  a  lottery  may  be  granted,  to  raise  the 
sum  of  o£2,000,  to  enable  the  said  society  to  carry  their  pious 
designs  into  execution  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the  said  petition 
be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted  under  the  usual  restric- 
tions and  conditions  ;  provided,  that  no  charge  accrue  to  the 
colony,  thereby  ;  and  that  the  first  class  of  the  said  lottery 
be  not  drawn  until  the  1st  day  of  October  next. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Nicholas 
Brown,  John  Jenckes,  Benjamin  Thurber,  Daniel  Tillinghast, 
William  Russell,  Edward  Thurber,  Nathaniel  Wheaton,  James 
Arnold,  William  Holroyd  and  Nicholas  Power,  be,  and  they 
are  hereby,  appointed  directors  of  the  said  lottery. 

Y/hereas,  a  certain  act  of  the  British  Parliament,  for  stop- 
ping up  the  harbor  of  Boston,  is  now  in  its  full  operation,  to  the 
great  distress  of  that  town  in  particular,  and  of  the  Province 
of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  in  general. 

And  whereas,  it  nppears  to  this  Assembly,  that  the  said  act 
is  in  direct  violation  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  that  people  ; 
and,  as  such,  is  truly  alarming  to  every  colony  upon  the  con- 
tinent of  British  America,  with  a  sense  whereof,  this  Assem- 
bly is  deeply  impressed. 

And  whereas,  the  Supreme  Being,  upon  account  of  our  mani- 
fold sins,  may  have  permitted  the  present  invasions  of  Ameri- 
can liberty,  and  every  public  evil  with  which  we  are  threat- 
ened,— 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  Thursday,  the  30th 
day  of  this  instant  June,  be  set  apart  as  a  day  of  public  fast- 
ing, prayer  and  supplication,  throughout  this  colony,  to  be- 
seech Almighty  God  to  grant  us  sincere  repentance  ;  to  avert 
every  threatened  judgment  from  us,  and  restore  us  to  the  full 
enjoyment  of  our  rights  and  privileges  ;  and,  in  particular, 
that  he  would  appear  for  the  relief  and  recovery  of  the  town 
of  Boston,  from  their  present  distressed  situation  ;   and   that 

VOL.  VII.         32 


250'  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

His  Honor  the  Governor,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to 
issue  a  prochimation  accordingly,  recommending  a  decent  and 
due  observance  thereof,  by  all  public  religious  societies,  as  well 
as  individuals. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  this  Assembly  hath  a  tender 
commisseration  for  the  poor  in  Boston,  and  will,  at  a  future 
session,  cheerfully  assist  towards  their  support,  as  their  neces- 
ities  may  require,  and  the  abilities  of  the  colony  afford. 

Whereas,  Gideon  Almy,  of  Tiverton,  in  the  county  of  New- 
port, trader,  preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this 
Assembly,  that  the  last  fall  he  laid  out  every  shilling  he  was 
worth  in  fitting  out  two-third  parts  of  the  sloop  Sally,  on  a 
whaling  voyage  ;  that  the  said  sloop,  meeting  with  success, 
had  got  on  board  one  hundred  and  twenty  barrels  of  oil,  by  the 
latter  end  of  January  last ;  and  that  the  said  sloop  being 
obliged,  in  a  gale  of  wind,  to  come  to  an  anchor  under  Ilis- 
paniola,  was  seized  by  a  French  frigate,  carried  into  Port-au- 
Prince,  and  there,  with  her  whole  cargo,  condemned  as  a  law- 
ful prize  ;  by  which  misfortune,  he  hath  totally  lost  upwards 
of  $2,000,  being  the  whole  what  he  was  worth,  and  had 
scraped  together,  by  his  unwearied  diligence  and  industry,  and 
is  deprived  of  the  means  of  putting  himself  into  any  way  of 
business,  to  support  a  wife  and  seven  children. 

And  thereupon,  the  said  Gideon  Almy  prayed  this  Assembly 
to  grant  him  a  lottery,  under  the  direction  of  Messrs.  Edward 
Gray,  Joseph  Wanton,  Jr.,  John  Cooke  and  Isaac  Corey,  for 
raising  the  sum  of  $1,200,  to  help  him  forward  in  business 
again  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the  aforesaid  pe- 
tition be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual 
conditions  and  restrictions  ;  provided,  that  no  charge  accrue  to 
the  colony,  thereby. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  attorney  general,  Mr.  John 
Read  and  Mr.  Thomas  Freebody,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  prepare  a  bill  to  prevent  the  introduc- 
ing and  passing,  false  copper  money  in  this  colony  ;  and  that  they 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  251 

present  the  same  to  this  General  Assembly,  as  soon  as  con- 
veniently may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  William  Potter,  Esq.,  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  directed  to  advertise  in  the  public  prints,  in  this 
colony,  the  dimensions  of  the  court-house,  to  be  built  in  the 
county  of  Kings  county,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  is  to  be 
built,  and  finished  ;  and  request  the  house  carpenters  in  the 
colony  to  send  in  to  him  their  proposals  for  building  the  same, 
in  writing,  sealed  up. 

That  he  contract  by  the  great,  with  such  carpenter  or  car- 
penters, as  shall  appear  skillful,  and  will  undertake  the  busi- 
ness upon  the  best  terms. 

That  he  do  the  same,  with  regard  to  masons,  and  other 
workmen. 

And  that  the  said  William  Potter  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  em- 
powered to  draw  out  of  the  general  treasury,  the  sum  of  £300, 
lawful  money,  towards  carrying  on  the  said  building. 

An  Act  prohibiting  the  importation  of  Negroes  into  this  Colony. 

Whereas,  the  inhabitants  of  America  are  generally  engaged 
in  the  preservation  of  their  own  rights  and  liberties,  among 
which,  that  of  personal  freedom  must  be  considered  as  the 
greatest ;  as  those  who  are  desirous  of  enjoying  all  the  advan- 
tages of  liberty  themselves,  should  be  willing  to  extend  per- 
sonal liberty  to  others  ; — 

Therefore,  be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  for  the  future,  no  negro 
or  mulatto  slave  shall  be  brought  into  this  colony  ;  and  in  case 
any  slave  shall  hereafter  be  brought  in,  he  or  she  shall  be,  and 
are  hereby,  rendered  immediately  free,  so  far  as  respects  per- 
sonal freedom,  and  the  enjoyment  of  private  property,  in  the 
same  manner  as  the  native  Indians. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  that  this  law  shall  not  extend  to  ser- 
vants of  persons  travelling  through  this  colony,  who  are  not  in- 
habitants thereof,  and  who  carry  them  out  with  them,  when 
they  leave  the  same. 

Provided,  also,  that  nothing  in  this  act  shall  extend,  or  be 


252  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

deemed  to  extend,  to  any  negro  or  mulatto  slave,  belonging  to 
any  inhabitant  of  cither  of  the  British  colonies,  islands  or  plan- 
tations, who  shall  come  into  this  colony,  "with  an  intention  to 
settle  or  reside,  for  a  number  of  years,  therein  ;  but  such  ne- 
gro or  mulatto,  so  brought  into  this  colony,  by  such  person  in- 
clining to  settle  or  reside  therein,  shall  be,  and  remain,  in  the 
same  situation,  and  subject  in  like  manner  to  their  master  or 
mistress,  as  they  were  in  the  colony  or  plantation  from  Vvdience 
they  removed. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  that  if  any  person,  so  coming  into 
this  colony,  to  settle  or  reside,  as  aforesaid,  shall  afterwards 
remove  out  of  the  same,  such  person  shall  be  obliged  to  carry 
all  such  negro  or  mulatto  slaves,  as  also  all  such  as  shall  be 
born  from  them,  out  of  the  colony  with  them. 

Provided,  also,  that  nothing  in  this  act  shall  extend,  or  be 
deemed  to  extend,  to  any  negro  or  mulatto  slave  brought  from 
the  coast  of  Africa,  into  the  West  Indies,  on  board  any  vessel 
belonging  to  this  colony,  and  which  negro  or  mulatto  slave 
could  not  be  disposed  of  in  the  West  Indies,  but  shall  be 
brought  into  this  colony. 

Provided,  that  the  owner  of  such  negro  or  mulatto  slave  give 
bond  to  the  general  treasurer  of  the  said  colony,  within  ten 
days  after  such  arrival  in  the  sum  of  d£lOO,  lawful  money,  for 
each  and  every  such  negro  or  mulatto  slave  so  brought  in,  that 
such  negro  or  mulatto  slave  shall  be  exported  out  of  the  col- 
ony, within  one  year  from  the  date  of  such  bond  ;  if  such 
negro  or  mulatto  be  alive,  and  in  a  condition  to  be  removed. 

Provided,  also,  that  nothing  in  this  act  shall  extend,  or  be 
deemed  to  extend,  to  any  negro  or  mulatto  slave  that  may  be 
on  board  any  vessel  belonging  to  this  colony,  now  at  sea,  in  her 
present  voyage. 

And  to  prevent  any  slave  or  slaves  from  being  clandestinely 
brought  into  this  colony,  in  order  that  they  may  be  free,  and 
liable  to  become  chargeable, — 

Be  it  further  enacted,  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  all 
persons,  so  offending,  shall  be  liable  to,  and  pay,  a  fine  of 
£100,  lawful  money,  for  each  and  every  one  so  brought  in,  to 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  253 

and  for  the  use  of  the  colony,  to  be  rGcoverecl  in  the  same  man- 
ner that  other  fines  and  forfeitures  usually  are,  by  the  laws  of 
this  government 

And  also,  all  persons  who  shall  be  convicted  of  receivings 
harboring,  or  concealing,  any  such  negro  or  mulatto  slave, 
within  this  colony,  he  or  they,  so  offending,  shall  be  liable  to 
the  like  penalty,  to  be  recovered  and  applied  in  the  same  man- 
ner ;  and  such  negro  or  mulatto  shall  be  sent  out  of  the  colo- 
ny, as  other  poor  persons  are,  by  law. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Carder  Hazard,  Ben- 
jamin Greene  and  John  Read,  be,  and  they,  or  any  two  of 
them,  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee  to  audit  the  accounts 
of  all  the  persons  wdio,  according  to  appointment,  have  taken 
an  account  of  the  number  of  people  in  this  colony  ;  and  that 
they  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  at  the  next  session. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  petition  from  divers  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Middletown,  praying  that  the  act  granting  an 
excise  on  wine  and  other  strong  liquors,  in  said  town,  may  be 
repealed,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  referred  to  the  next  ses- 
sion ;  and  that  in  the  mean  time,  the  town  treasurer  of  the  said 
town  of  Middletown,  be  cited  to  appear  then,  to  answer  the  same. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Edward  Thurston,  Jr.,  presented  unto  this  As-- 
sembly,  the  following  report,  to  wit : 

Report  of  the  Committee,  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly,  to 
take  the  number  of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Colony. 

Pursuant  to  the  appointment  of  the  honorable  House,  I  have 
completed  the  lists  from  the  several  towns,  of  the  numbers  of 
families  and  persons  ;  and  find  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and 
Providence  Plantations,  contains  9,449  families  ;  and  59,678 
inhabitants  ;  of  which,  54,435  are  whites  ;  1,482  are  Indians, 
and  3,761  are  blacks,  agreeably  to  the  list  herewith  presented. 
Which  is  submitted  by — 

Your  Honors'  humble  servant, 

EDWARD  THURSTON,  JR. 

To  the  Honorable  the  House  of  Deputies. 


254  EECORDS   OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1774. 

And  the  said  report  being  duly  considered, — 
It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
accepted  ;  that  the  secretary  insert  in  the  schedule  of  the  acts 
and  orders  of  this  Assembly,  the  list,  with  the  said  report  pre- 
sented ;  and  that  six  shillings,  lawful  money,  be  allowed,  and 
paid  the  said  Edward  Thurston,  Jr.,  out  of  the  general  treasu- 
ry, for  his  above  mentioned  service. 
God  save  the  Kino;. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly^  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations^  at  East  Green- 
ivich,  on  the  fourth  Monday  in  August,  1774. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  this  Assembly  granted  a  lottery,  for  raising  a  sum 
of  money,  to  be  applied  towards  building  a  Baptist  meetiog 
bouse,  in  the  town  of  Providence  ;  and  some  time  in  the 
month  of  October  next,  was  appointed  for  drawing  the  same. 

And  wdiereas,  the  directors  of  the  said  lottery  have  repre- 
sented unto  this  Assembly,  that  they  have  disposed  of  all  the 
tickets  in  the  first  class  ;  — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  at  the  request  of  the  said 
directors,  that  they  may  draw  the  said  lottery  forthwith,  or  as. 
soon  in  this  month,  or  as  early  in  September  next,  as  they  can 
get  ready. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Joseph  Burrill  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly, 
an  account  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  a  large 
speaking-trumpet,  for  Fort  George  ;  and  the  said  account  be- 
ing duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  twelve  shillings,  lawful  money,  being  the 
amount  thereof,  be  paid  the  said  Joseph  Burrill,  out  of  the 
general  treasury. 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  255 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  £60,  lawful  money,  be  al- 
lowed, and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  the  Hon.  Ste- 
phen Hopkins,  Esq.  ;  and  the  like  sum  to  the  Hon.  Samuel 
Ward,  Esq.,  the  delegates  appointed  by  this  colony,  to  meet 
the  commissioners  from  the  other  colonies,  in  general  congress, 
to  defray  their  present  exigences  ;  and  that  they  account  for 
the  same,  to  this  Assembly. 

Whereas,  it  hath  been  represented  to  this  Assembly,  by  Col. 
Benjamin  Wickham,  that  the  lottery  granted  to  him  by  an  act 
of  this  Assembly,  passed  in  August,  A.  D.  1773,  for  the  dis- 
posal of  his  real  estate,  to  enable  him  to  discharge  his  debts, 
hath  met  with  discouragements,  so  that  there  appears  but  little 
prospect,  at  present,  of  its  being  filled  and  drawn. 

And  whereas,  the  colony  obtained  an  execution  against  the 
said  Benjamin  Wickham,  for  upwards  of  £G0,  lawful  money, 
which  was  returned,  unsatisfied,  to  tlie  last  inferior  court  of 
common  pleas,  held  at  Newport  ;  in  order  to  further  the  re- 
covery of  the  said  sum,  for  the  colony,  as  well  as  to  encourage 
the  said  lottery,  and  thereby  to  relieve  the  said  Wickham, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  general  treasurer  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  directed  to  purchase  of  the  directors  of  the  said 
lottery,  on  the  account  and  risk  of  the  colony,  as  many  tickets 
in  the  said  lottery  as  the  debt  and  cost  of  the  said  execution 
amount  to  ;  on  this  condition,  that  the  said  execution  be  not 
discharged  until  the  said  lottery  be  drawn. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Thomas  Freebody  and 
John  Smith,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee, 
to  divide  and  set  off  to  the  county  of  Providence,  their  propor- 
tion of  the  colony's  arms,  now  in  the  town  of  Newport,  accord- 
ing to  their  proportion  of  the  last  colony  tax. 

That  they  deliver  them  to  such  person  as  shall  be  appointed 
by  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor,  to  receive  them,  he  giv- 
ing a  receipt  therefor. 

And  that  the  said  arms,  so  delivered,  be  always  kept  clean, 
and  in  good  order,  at  the  charge  of  the  town  of  Providence,  be 
lodged  in  the  colony  house,  in  Providence,  and  be  returned 
when  demanded  by  this  Assembly. 


256  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  1774. 

Whereas,  William  Ilolden,  of  Warwick,  in  the  county  of 
Kent,  presented  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assem- 
bly, that  he,  some  years  ago,  exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  of 
his  abilities,  and,  with  great  labor  and  expense,  erected  a  dam 
across  Pawtuxet  River,  and  thereon  erected  a  grist  mill,  which 
su}tplied  many  of  the  neighboring  towns,  especially  when  many 
other  mills  failed  for  want  of  water. 

That  the  last  winter,  the  upper  part  of  said  dam  was  carried 
away  by  a  great  flood. 

That  he  hath  been  so  reduced,  by  the  sickness  of  himself 
and  family,  that  he  is  unable  to  repair  the  said  dam  ;  and  that 
if  it  be  not  repaired,  it  will  not  only  be  a  heavy  loss  to  him, 
but  prove  very  detrimental  to  many  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
colony. 

And  thereupon,  the  said  William  Holden  prayed  this  As- 
sembly to  grant  him  a  lottery,  to  raise  about  £50,  lawful 
money,  to  enable  him  to  repair  and  secure  the  said  dam  ;  on 
consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved^  that  the  said  petition  be,  and  the 
same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  conditions  and 
restrictions  ;  provided,  that  no  charge  accrue  to  the  colony, 
thereby. 

And  that  Capt.  William  Potter  and  Mr.  John  Wickes,  son  of 
Robert,  both  of  AVarwick ;  and  Mr.  Anthony  Holden,  of  East 
Greenwich,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  directors  of  the 
said  lottery. 

Whereas,  a  proclamation  was  issued  by  His  Honor  the 
Deputy  Governor,  promising  a  reward  of  .£100,  lawful  money, 
to  any  person  or  persons  who  should  apprehend  Daniel  Will- 
son,  a  criminal,  under  sentence  of  death,  who  broke  out  of  the 
jail,  in  Providence  ;  in  pursuance  of  which,  he  was  taken  up  by 
eighteen  persons  ;  of  whom,  four  belonged  to  this  colony,  and 
the  other  fourteen,  to  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay, 
whose  names  are  as  follows,  to  wit :  George  Bruce,  Otis  Whip- 
ple, George  Whipple,  Jonathan  Whipple,  Philip  Amadown, 
Levy  Willard,  AVilliam  Drown,  Andrew  Peters,  Calvin  Smith, 
Increase   Thayer,  David  Daniels,  Jr.,  Ichabod  Hay  ward,  Ar- 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  257 

temas  White  and  Jacob  Aldrich,  who  have  applied  for  their 
part  of  the  said  reward  ;  — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  one-eighteenth  part 
of  the  said  reward  be  paid  to  each  of  the  above  named  persons, 
out  of  the  general  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  members  of  the  lower 
House,  before  the  next  session,  lay  before  their  constituents 
the  vote  of  this  Assembly,  at  a  former  session,  and  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  lower  House,  at  the  present  session,  respecting 
the  granting  a  sum  of  money  to  our  suflering,  poor  brethren  in 
the  town  of  Boston. 

That  they  collect  the  sentiments  of  their  constituents,  re- 
specting the  subject  matter  thereof,  and  obtain  instructions  for 
the  members,  who  may  be  elected  for  the  next  session  ;  and 
their  approbation,  if  it  may  be,  of  a  grant  to  be  made,  out  of 
the  general  treasury,  of  a  sum  of  money  for  that  purpose. 

And  also,  for  the  recommending  a  general  subscription, 
throughout  the  colony,  to  give  an  opportunity  for  a  further  ex- 
ertion of  the  generous  and  benevolent  mind. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  on 
the  last  Wednesday  in  October,  1774. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Joseph  Nightingale,  John 
Matthewson,  James  Angell,  Henry  Marchant  and  James 
Mitchel  Varnum,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a 
a  committee,  to  take  into  consideration  the  several  petitions 
presented  to  this  Assembly,  for  establishing  an  independent 
company  in  the  town  of  Newport ;  an  independent  company 
in  the  towns  of  East  Greenwich,  Warwick  and  Coventry  ;   and 

VOL.  VII.         33 


258  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

a  grenadier  company  in  the  town  of  Providence  ;  and  that 
they  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  as  soon  as  conveniently 
may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  a  tax  be  assessed  upon  the  in- 
habitants of  this  colony,  of  £4,000,  lawful  money,  to  be  paid 
into  the  general  treasury  by  next  May  ;  that  d^2,000,  thereof, 
be  appropriated  to  the  discharging  the  lawful  money  notes 
given  for  sinking  the  old  tenor  debts  of  this  colony  ;  and  that 
the  remainder  be  lodged  in  the  general  treasury,  to  defray  the 
incidental  charges  of  government. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  Joseph  Nash  and  Christopher  Whipple, 
owners  of  the  sloop  Two  Follies,  and  her  cargo,  in  behalf  of 
themselves,  and  the  insurers  on  said  sloop  and  cargo,  preferred 
a  memorial  and  petition  unto  this  Assembly,  setting  forth  that 
at  Providence,  in  this  colony,  on  or  f^bout  the  1st  day  of  Oc- 
tober, A.  D.  1773,  they  shipped  on  board  the  said  sloop 
(Ephraim  Carpenter  being  master),  a  cargo  of  goods  for  the 
River  Mississippi,  with  intent  to  dispose  of  the  same  to  the 
settlers  on  that  river. 

That  they,  the  said  Joseph  Nash  and  Christopher  Whipple, 
sailed  from  Rhode  Island,  in  the  sloop  Hope,  in  November  fol- 
lowing, for  the  said  river,  where  they  safely  arrived  in  Decem- 
ber, and  found  the  said  sloop  Two  Pollies. 

That  about  two  leagues  below  the  town  of  New  Orleans, 
they  left  the  said  sloop  Hope,  and  went  on  board  the  sloop  Two 
Pollies,  and  took  with  them,  from  the  said  sloop  Hope,  goods 
to  a  very  considerable  amount,  with  intent  to  proceed  up  the 
river,  in  order  to  dispose  of  the  same. 

That  while  the  said  sloop  Two  Pollies  was  lying  at  anchor, 
about  two  miles  above  the  town  of  New  Orleans,  early  on  Sun- 
day morning,  being  the  20th  day  of  February,  A.  D.  1774,  the  said 
sloop  Two  Pollies  was  boarded  by  a  party  of  Spanish  soldiers, 
with  their  swords  drawm,  and  bayonets  fixed  ;  who,  declaring 
they  had  orders  from  the  Spanish  governor,  took  possession  of 
the  said  sloop,  by  force,  and  carried  her  to  the  said  town  of 
New  Orleans  ;  where,  as  soon  as  she  arrived,  they  stripped  off 
her  rigging  and  sails,  opened  her  cabin  door,  and  went  imme- 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  259 

cliately  to  unlading  her  cargo  ;  part  of  which,  was  carried  into 
the  King's  store,  and  part  was  stolen  and  carried  off  by  the 
soldiers. 

That  on  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  the  said  Joseph  Nash 
(who  was  on  board  the  said  sloop,  when  she  was  so  taken), 
with  the  said  Ephraim  Carpenter,  and  Benjamin  Pitcher,  the 
mate  of  the  said  sloop,  were  sent  to  prison,  where  they  re- 
mained a  considerable  time. 

That  upon  application  made  by  the  said  Joseph  Nash,  to  the 
governor  and  judge,  setting  forth  the  most  flagrant  and  open 
breach  of  the  treaty  of  Paris,  committed  in  taking  the  said 
sloop  and  cargo  (of  which,  the  governor  and  his  auditor,  were 
convinced),  every  thing  was  ordered  to  be  restored  to  the  said 
Joseph  Nash. 

And  that,  although,  by  virtue  of  the  said  decree,  they  re- 
ceived $3,535,  yet  they  are  still  great  sufferers,  to  the  amount 
of  upwards  of  $5,500  ;  as  will  appear  by  a  copy  of  an  account 
annexed  to  a  remonstrance  made  to  the  said  governor  of  New 
Orleans,  after  the  said  decree  ;  wherein  they  represented,  that, 
in  justice,  every  thing  ought  to  be  restored,  with  damages,  and 
prayed  that  the  same  might  be  done  ;  with  which  request,  the 
said  governor  refused  to  comply. 

And  thereupon,  the  said  Joseph  Nash  and  Christopher  Whip- 
ple, prayed  this  Assembly,  to  take  the  premises  into  consideration, 
and  in  order  that  they  may  receive  that  satisfiction  which  the 
justice  of  their  cause  requires,  represent  their  case  to  the  Earl 
of  Dartmouth,  and  request  him  to  lay  the  same  before  His 
Majesty,  that  their  injuries  may  be  redressed  by  the  court  of 
Spain  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Nicholas  TilUnghast,  John  Fos- 
ter, Paul  Tew  and  Benoni  Pearce,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they,  or  the 
major  part  of  them,  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee  to  take 
the  said  memorial  and  petition  into  consideration  ;  and  that 
they  make  report  to  this  Assembly  of  the  damages  the  said  Jo- 
seph Nash  and  Christopher  Whipple  shall  appear  to  have  sus- 
tained, by  means  of  the  premises,  as  soon  as  may  be. 


260  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1774. 

An  Act  establishing  an  independent  company,  in  the  county  of 
Newport,  by  the  name  of  the  Newport  Light  Infantry. 

An  Act  establishing  a  company,  in  the  town  of  Providence,  to 
be  called,  and  known  by  the  name  of  the  Providence  Grena- 
dier Company. 

An  Act  establishing  an  independent  company,  by  the   name  of 
the  Kentish  Guards. 

An  Act  establishing  an  independent  company,  by  the  name  of 
the  Pawtuxet  Rangers. 

Whereas,  Benoni  Pearce,  John  Foster,  Nicholas  Tillinghast 
and  Paul  Tew,  Esqs.,  presented  unto  this  Assembly,  the  fol- 
lowing report,  to  wit : 

Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  hy  the  General  Assemhly, 
relative  to  the  seizure  of  the  sloop  Two  Follies,  by  the  Span- 
iards, on  the  Mississippi  River. 

We,  whose  names  are  hereto  subscribed,  being  a  committee,  appointed  by  the 
Honorable  the  General  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  to  take  into  con- 
sideration the  memorial  and  jietition  of  Joseph  Nash  and  Christopher  Whipple,  and 
to  make  report  of  the  damages  they  have  sustained  by  reason  of  the  seizure  of  the 
sloop  Two  Follies,  and  her  cargo,  by  the  Spanish  governor  of  New  Orleans,  in  the 
River  Mississijipi,  having  duly  inspected  and  considered  the  several  papers  and  evi- 
dences, authenticated  at  said  New  Orleans,  containing  the  proceedings  relative  to 
said  seizure,  do  report : 

That,  by  the  seventh  article  of  the  treaty  of  Paris,  subsisting  between  His  Britan 
nic  Majesty,  and  His  Most  Christian  Majesty,  "  The  navigation  of  the  River  Mis- 
sissippi shall  be  equally  free,  as  well  to  the  subjects  of  Great  Britain,  as  to  those  of 
France,  in  its  whole  breadth  and  length,  from  its  source  to  the  sea  ;  and  expressly, 
that  part  which  is  between  the  said  island  of  New  Orleans,  and  the  right  bank  of 
that  river,  as  well  as  the  passage  both  in  and  out  of  its  mouth. 

It  is  further  stipulated,  that  the  vessels  belonging  to  the  subjects  of  either  nation 
shall  not  be  stopped,  visited,  or  subjected  to  the  payment  of  any  duty,  whatsoever." 

That  the  subjects  of  llis  Most  Cathohc  Majesty,  at  said  New  Orleans,  hold  and 
enjoy  their  right  to  trade  and  commerce,  in  and  by  the  said  river,  subject  to  the 
limits  and  regulations  of  said  treaty. 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  261 

That  it  appears  to  iis,  that  the  said  seizure  is  a  flagrant  breach  of  said  treaty  ;  and 
appears  to  have  been  so  considered  by  the  said  governor  of  New  Orleans,  in  and  by 
his  decree,  acquitting  the  said  Joseph  Nash,  his  said  sloop  and  cargo,  and  ordering 
every  thing  that  had  been  seized,  to  be  restored  to  him. 

It  further  appears  to  us,  that  the  said  decree  hath  not  been  duly  complied  with- 
That  although,  by  virtue  of  said  decree,  the  said  Joseph  Nash  had  $3,535,  restored 
to  him ;  yet,  by  the  account  of  the  said  Joseph,  exhibited  before  the  said  governor 
of  New  Orleans,  and  duly  sworn  to,  and  authenticated  before  the  governor  of  Pen- 
sacola,  that  the  said  JosejA  and  Christopher  have  sustained  damage,  by  means  of 
the  said  seizure,  to  the  amount  of  $5,591,  over  and  above  what  they  had  restored  to 
them.     All  which,  is  humbly  submitted,  by — 

BENONI  PEARCE,     NICHOLAS  TILLINGHAST, 
JOHN  FOSTER,  PAUL  TEW. 


And  the  said  report  being  duly  considered, — 
It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
accepted  ;  and  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  requested  to  transmit  a  statement  of  the  said  affair  to 
His  Majesty's  secretary  of  state,  for  the  American  department, 
at  the  expense  of  the  memorialists. 


An  Act  for  dividing  the  regiment  in  the  county  of  Providence 
into  three  distinct  regiments,  each  regiment  to  be  a  bat 
talion  :   and  for  forming;  the  whole  into  one  brisrade. 


An  Act  establishing  an  independent  company,  by  the  name  of 
The  Company  of  Light  Infantry,  of  the  town  of  Glocester. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  call  the  General  Assembly  to-- 
gether,  as  soon  as  he  shall  think  proper,  within  one  week  after 
the  arrival  of  the  delegates  of  this  colony,  from  the  general 
congress. 

God  save  the  Kin^. 


262  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 


Proceedings  of  tJie  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  on 
the  first  Monday  in  December,  1774. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

An  Act  establishing  a  military  company,  by  the  name  of  the 
Scituate  Hunters. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  James  Angell,  Col.  Jo- 
seph Nightingale,  Col.  John  Matthewson,  Major  Daniel  Hitch- 
cock and  Mr.  Nathaniel  Greene,  Jr.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby, 
appointed  a  committee  to  revise  the  militia  laws  of  this  colony  ; 
and  that  they  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  at  the  present 
session,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  cannon  now  at  Fort 
George  (excepting  two  eighteen-pouuders  and  one  six- 
pounder),  and  all  the  powder,  shot  and  stores,  thereto  be- 
longing (excepting  so  much  powder  and  ball  as  are  sufficient 
for  the  cannon  to  be  left  at  said  fort),  be  immediately  removed 
to  the  town  of  Providence  ;  that  Col.  Joseph  Nightingale,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  appointed  to  see  the  same  done. 

That  the  commanding  officer  of  the  said  fort  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  ordered  to  deliver  the  same  to  the  said  Joseph  Night- 
ingale ;  who  is  hereby  directed  to  keep  the  cannon,  ball,  &c., 
in  his  possession,  until  further  orders  from  this  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  copies  of  the  letter  from 
the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  to  this  colony,  and  of  the  order  therein 
enclosed,  now  lying  before  this  Assembly,  be  immediately  sent 
by  the  speaker  of  the  lower  House,  to  Thomas  Gushing,  Esq., 
the  late  speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives  of  the  Prov- 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  26S 

ince   of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  to  be  communicated  to  the 
provincial  congress,  in  that  colony. 

An  Act  for  establishing  a  military  company,  by  the  name   of 
the  Train  of  Artillery,  in  the  county  of  Providence. 

Whereas,  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  and  the  Hon. 
Samuel  Ward,  Esq.,  delegates  for  this  colony,  in  the  conti- 
nental congress,  held  at  Philadelphia,  in  the  province  of  Penn- 
sylvania, the  5th  day  of  September,  1774,  this  day  made  report 
of  the  proceedings  and  resolutions  of  said  continental  congress,* 
consisting  of  the  bill  of  rights,  list  of  grievances,  occasional 
resolves,  the  association,  an  address  to  the  people  of  Great 
Britain,  a  memorial  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  British  American 
colonies,  an  address  to  the  Canadians,  &c.  ;  all  which,  being 
read,  and  maturely  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
accepted  and  approved. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  thanks  of  this  As- 
sembly be,  and  they  are  hereby,  given  to  the  said  delegates  of 
this  colony,  in  particular,  and  to  the  members  of  the  said  con- 
tinental congress,  in  general,  for  the  wise,  spirited  and  faithful 
discharge  of  the  important  trust  reposed  in  them. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  it  be,  and  hereby 
is,  recommended  to  the  several  towns  in  this  colony,  to  choose 
committees,  agreeably  to  the  eleventh  article  of  the  said  asso- 
ciation, for  the  purposes  therein  expressed. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  secretary  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  directed  to  send  printed  copies  of  the  said 
bill  of  rights,  list  of  grievances,  the  association,  addresses  and 
memorial  ;  and  also  of  this  vote,  to  each  member  of  both 
houses  of  this  Assembly,  and  to  all  such  other  officers,  within 
this  colony,  as  the  schedules  are  by  law  transmitted  to. 

Whereas,   Nathaniel  Stoddard,   of  Little  Compton,    in  the 


*  The  report  of  the  proceedings  of  the  coutineutal   congress,  are  among  the  public  ar- 
chives of  the  State,  in  the  secretary's  office. 


264  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

county  of  Newport,  trader,  preferred  a  petition,  and  repre- 
sented unto  this  Assembly,  that  in  the  fall  of  the  year  1773, 
he  laid  out  every  shilling  he  was  worth,  in  fitting  out  one- 
third  part  of  the  sloop  Sally,  on  a  whaling  voyage  ;  that 
the  said  sloop,  meeting  with  success,  had  got  on  board 
one  hundred  and  twenty  barrels  of  oil,  by  the  latter  end 
of  January  following ;  and  that  the  said  sloop  being  obliged, 
in  a  gale  of  wind,  to  come  to  an  anchor  under  Hispaniola, 
was  seized  by  a  French  frigate,  carried  into  Port-au-Prince, 
and  there,  with  her  whole  cargo,  condemned  as  a  lawful 
prize  ;  by  which  misfortune,  he  hath  totally  lost  upwards 
of  $1,000,  being  the  whole  what  he  was  worth,  and  had 
scraped  together,  by  unwearied  diligence  and  industry,  and 
that  he  is  thereby  deprived  of  the  means  of  putting  himself 
into  any  business,  to  support  a  wife  and  seven  children. 

And  thereupon,  prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  him  a  lottery, 
for  raising  the  sum  of  $000,  to  help  him  forward  in  business 
again  ;  and  that  the  same  be  under  the  direction  of  Messrs. 
Nathaniel  Searle,  Jr.,  Benjamin  Richmond,  John  Wood  and 
Walter  Wilbur  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  petition  be,  and  th& 
same  is  hereby,  granted,  under  the  usual  conditions  and 
restrictions  ;  provided,  that  no  charge  accrue  to  the  colony > 
thereby. 

An  Act  establishing  a  military  company,  by  the  name   of  the 
Providence  Fusiliers. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  captain  of  the  company, 
called  The  Train  of  Artillery,  for  the  county  of  Providence,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  empowered  and  directed,  to  purchase  at  the 
expense,  and  for  the  use  of  the  colony,  four  brass  cannon,  four- 
pounders,  with  carriages,  implements  and  utensils,  necessary 
for  exercising  them  ;  and  that  they  be  lent  to  the  said  com- 
pany, to  improve  them  in  the  exercise  of  cannon,  until  further 
orders  from  this  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins, 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  265 

Esq.,  and  the  Hon.  Samuel  Ward,  Esq.,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby,  chosen  and  appointed  delegates,  to  represent  this  colo- 
ny at  the  continental  congress,  to  be  holden  at  Philadelphia, 
on  the  10th  day  of  May,  1775. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Henry  Marchant,  Esq.,  Mr. 
Joseph  Brown  and  William  Ellery,  Esq.,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby,  appointed  a  committee  to  draw  up  instructions  to  be 
given  to  the  delegates,  appointed  to  represent  this  colony  in 
general  congress  ;   and  lay  the  same  before  this  Assembly. 

Whereas,  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  one  of  the  dele- 
gates of  this  colony  in  the  continent  il  congress,  on  the  5th  day 
of  September  last,  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly,  an  account, 
by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  his  expenses  on  his 
journey  to  Philadelphia,  during  his  residence  there,  and  on  his 
return  home,  &c.,  amounting  to  £51  lid.,  lawful  money. 

And  also  prayed  an  allowance  fur  eighty-one  days  spent  in 
the  said  service,  with  a  servant,  two  horses,  and  a  carriage  ; 
and  the  premises  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  saiil  account  be  allowed  ; 
that  £72  18s-.,  lawful  money,  be  also  allowed,  for  his  above- 
mentioned  service,  and  for  his  servant,  horses  and  carriage  ; 
and  that  <£133  I85.  lid.,  lawful  money,  being  the  amount  of 
the  said  two  sums,  be  paid  the  said  Stephen  Hopkins,  out  of 
the  general  treasury  ;  deducting  therefrom  d£60,  lawful  money, 
already  received  by  him,  as  one  of  the  delegates  from  this  colo- 
ny, out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  the  Hon.  Samuel  Ward,  Esq.,  one  of  the  delegates 
from  this  colony,  in  the  continental  congress,  held  at  Philadel- 
phia, on  the  5th  day  of  September  last,  exhibited  unto  this  As- 
sembly an  account,  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  his 
expenses  on  his  journey  to  Philadelphia,  during  his  residence 
there,  and  on  his  return  home,  &c.,  amounting  to  £49  135. 
1^.,  lawful  money. 

And  also  prayed  an  allowance  for  seventy-two  days,  by  him 
spent  in  the  said  service,  with  a  servant  and  two  horses  ;  and 
the  premises  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  accouiit  be  allowed  ; 

VOL.  vn.         34 


266  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  1774. 

that  ££64  I65.  lawful  money,  be  also  allowed  for  his  above- 
mentioned  service,  and  for  his  servant  and  horses  ;  and  that 
£114  Qs.  Id.,  lawful  money,  being  the  amount  of  the  said  two 
sums,  be  paid  the  said  Samuel  Ward,  out  of  the  general  trea- 
sury ;  deducting  therefrom,  ^£60,  lawful  money,  already  re- 
ceived by  him,  as  one  of  the  delegates  from  this  colony,  out  of 
the  general  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  John  Read,  Mr.  John 
Jenckes  and  Simeon  Potter,  Esq.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby, 
appointed  a  committee,  to  purchase  as  soon  as  may  be,  at  the 
expense  and  for  the  use  of  the  colony,  three  hundred  half- 
barrels  of  pistol  powder,  each  to  contain  fifty  weight  ;  three 
tons  of  lead  and  forty  thousand  flints,  to  be  deposited  in  such 
place  or  places  as  the  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Esq.,  Deputy 
Governor  of  this  colony,  shall  direct,  and  to  be  delivered  to 
the  several  colonels  of  the  militia,  and  the  colonels  of  the  inde- 
pendent companies  in  this  colony;  so  that  each  soldier, 
equipped  with  arms,  according  to  law,  may  be  supplied  with 
such  quantities  thereof,  as  by  law  is  directed  ;  he  or  they  pay- 
ing for  the  same,  at  the  prime  cost  given  by  the  colony  ;  that 
the  remainder  thereof,  be  distributed  as  occasion  may  require. 

That  the  said  Darius  Sessions  be  appointed,  and  he  is  here- 
by, authorized  and  empowered,  to  have  the  care  of  the  said 
magazine  ;  and  to  deliver  the  powder,  lead  and  flints,  as  here- 
in directed,  he  taking  receipts  for  what  may  be  delivered  out. 

And  that  the  said  committee  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  em- 
powered to  draw  on  the  general  treasury,  for  such  sums  of 
money,  as  may  be  necessary  for  the  purpose,  aforesaid. 

And  in  case  of  a  deficiency  in  the  general  treasury,  the  gen- 
eral treasurer  is  hereby  directed  and  empowered  to  hire  a  suffi- 
cient sum  of  money  for  said  purpose,  and  to  give  his  note  or 
notes  therefor,  with  interest,  in  behalf  of  the  colony. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  there  be  no  firing 
of  cannon  upon  any  public  occasion,  or  of  small  arms;  espe- 
cially by  the  militia,  or  incorporated  companies,  on  days  of  ex- 
ercising, excepting  only  for  perfecting  themselves  as  marks- 
men, under  the  immediate  direction  of  the  commanding  officer 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  267 

for  the  day  ;  and  that  it  be,  and  hereby  is,  recommended  to  all 
the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  that  they  expend  no  gun  powder 
for  mere  sport  and  diversion,  or  in  pursuit  of  game. 

Whereas,  the  American  Continental  Congress,  held  in  the 
city  of  Philadelphia,  on  the  5th  day  of  September  last,  recom- 
mended to  the  several  colonies  to  choose  deputies,  as  soon  as 
possible,  to  attend  a  general  congress,  to  be  holden  on  the  10th 
day  of  May  next,  in  the  said  city  of  Philadelphia,  unless  the 
redress  of  American  grievances  be  obtained  before  that  time  ; 
and  whereas,  this  Assembly,  having  the  greatest  regard  to  the 
recommendation  aforesaid,  and  being  determined  to  co-operate 
with  the  other  colonies  in  every  proper  measure  for  obtaining 
a  redress  of  the  grievances,  and  establishing  the  rights  and 
liberties  of  all  the  colonies,  upon  an  equitable  and  permanent 
foundation,  have  unanimously  chosen  and  appointed  the  Hon. 
Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  and  the  Hon.  Samuel  Ward,  Esqs., 
delegates  to  represent  this  colony. 

It  is  therefore  unanimously  voted  and  resolved,  1st.  That 
the  said  Stephen  Hopkins  and  Samuel  Ward,  Esqs.,  be.  and 
they  are  hereby,  fully  authorized  and  empowered  to  represent 
this  colony  in  a  general  congress  of  delegates,  or  representa- 
tives, of  the  several  colonies,  to  be  holden  at  the  time  and 
place  above  mentioned  ;  or  at  such  other  time  and  place  as 
shall  be  agreed  upon  by  the  major  part  of  the  committees  from 
the  several  colonies. 

2d.  That  they  be,  and  hereby  are,  fully  authorized  and 
empowered  to  consult  and  advise  with  the  representatives  of 
the  other  colonies,  and  in  conjunction  with  them,  or  the  major 
part  of  them,  to  enter  into,  and  adopt,  in  behalf  of  this  colony, 
all  reasonable,  lawful,  and  proper  measures  for  the  support,  de- 
fence, protection  and  security  of  the  rights,  liberties  and  privi- 
leges, both  civil  and  religious,  of  all  the  said  colonies,  or  any 
of  them. 

3d.  That  they  be,  and  hereby  are,  authorized  and  empow- 
ered to  adjourn,  from  time  to  time,  and  at  any  time,  within  the 
space  of  one  year,  to  be  computed  from  the  said  10th  day  of 
May  next,  and  at  any  place  which  they  shall  think  proper. 


268  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

4th.  That  they  be,  and  hereby  are,  directed  to  endeavor  to 
procure  a  regular  annual  convention  of  delegates,  or  represen- 
tatives, from  all  the  colonies,  to  be  holden  at  such  time  and 
place,  as  shall  be  by  the  delegates  agreed  upon,  for  the  pro- 
motion and  establishment  of  the  peace,  welfare  and  security  of 
the  said  colonies. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  fire-arms  in  Newport,  be- 
longing to  the  colony,  be  distributed  among  the  several  coun- 
ties which  have  not  yet  received  their  share  of  the  same,  in 
proportion  to  the  rate  paid  by  each  county. 

That  they  be  delivered  to  the  colonel  of  the  regiment  of 
each  respecti/e  county,  he  giving  his  receipt  therefor  ;  who  is 
hereby  directed  to  deliver  to  each  town  in  the  county,  its  pro- 
portion of  the  same,  taking  security  of  each  town  therefor. 

That  the  said  guns,  before  they  are  delivered  to  the  several 
colonels,  be  branded  with  the  colony  arms,  upon  the  breech. 

That  Mr.  Thomas  Freebody  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  appointed 
to  deliver  the  said  arms  to  the  several  colonels. 

And  that  all  expenses  which  have  arisen,  or  may  arise,  in 
consequence  of  their  being  removed  from  Newport,  be  paid  by 
their  respective  towns. 

And  whereas,  the  county  of  Providence  hath  already  received 
its  part  of  the  said  fire-arms, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  each  tow^n  in  the  said  county 
shall  receive  its  proportion  of  the  said  fire-arms,  in  manner  as 
above  mentioned  ;  each  town  paying  its  proportion  of  the 
charge  which  hath  accrued  by  cleaning  them. 

An  Act  incorporating  a  military  company,  by  the  name  of  the 
North  Providence  Rangers. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  William  Greene,  Esq.  and  Mr. 
Nathaniel  Greene,  Jr.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a 
committee,  to  inquire  into  the  circumstances  of  the  affair  which 
iiaused  the  Cadet  Company,  and  the   company  of  Light  In- 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  269 

fantiy,  to  march  from  Providence  to  the  town  of  East  Green- 
wich, and  into  the  charges  which  arose  thereon  ;  and  that 
they  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  at  the  next  session. 

An  Act  for  appointing  a  mnjor  general  of  the  forces  of  this 
colony,  annually. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  A.ssembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority aforesaid  it  is  enacted,  that  a  mjijor  general  of  the 
colony's  forces  be  annually  appointed,  by  the  Governor  and 
Company,  and  be  commissioned  accordingly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Simeon  Potter,  Esq.,  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  appointed  major  general  of  the  colony's  forces. 

An  Act  in  addition  to,  and  amendment  of,  an  act,   entitled 
"  An  act  regulating  the  militia  of  this  colony.'' 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  for  the  future,  each  en- 
listed soldier,  who  shall  not  be  provided  with  a  sufficient  gun, 
or  fuzee,  as  directed  in  the  said  act,  shall  be  fined  two  shil- 
lings, lawful  money,  for  each  deficiency  ;  and  also,  that  every 
soldier  be  provided  with  a  good  bayonet  fixed  on  his  gun, 
upon  the  penalty  of  four  pence,  lawful  money,  for  each  default. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  captain,  or,  in  his  absence,  the  next  superior  officer  of  each 
respective  company,  shall  warn  and  call  together  the  company 
under  his  command,  one  day  in  every  month,  and  exercise  the 
same  in  martial  discipline,  aacording  to  the  mode  establised  by 
His  present  Majesty,  in  the  year  1764. 

That  the  first  warning  be  by  warrant  under  the  hand  and 
seal  of  such  officer,  issued  within  ten  days  before  such  training  or 
exercising  ;  and  that  all  succeeding  warnings  be  given  verbally 
by  the  commanding  officer  for  the  day,  at  the  head  of  the  com- 
pany, while  under  arms. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  that  in  the  towns  of  Providence  and 
Bristol,  the   captain,  or  other  commanding  officer,  may  warn 


270  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

their  companies  by  beat  of  drum,  as  in  the  said  act  is  permitted 
in  the  town  of  Newport. 

An  J  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
within  ten  days  after  each  penalty  shall  be  incurred,  the  cap- 
tain, or  other  superior  officer,  shall  issue  his  warrant  therefor, 
returnable  to  himself,  within  twenty  days  ;  and  that  twelve- 
and-an-half  per  cent,  only,  be  allowed  for  collecting  such  fines. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  fines  of  all  those  who,  being  exempted  from  appearing  on 
the  days  of  training,  are  notwithstanding,  obliged  to  be  pro- 
vided with  arms  and  other  accoutrements,  shall  be  the  same  for 
every  deficiency,  as  the  fines  of  the  enlisted  soldiers  ;  and  that 
the  examination  and  survey,  appointed  by  the  said  act,  shall 
be  made  by  the  sergeants  of  the  company  in  whose  district 
they  live,  by  warrant  from  the  captain,  on  the  first  Monday  in 
February,  and  on  the  last  Monday  in  April. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
no  town  officer  shall  be  exempted  from  doing  military  duty,  as 
an  enlisted  soldier,  excepting  the  members  of  the  town  council, 
the  town  treasurer,  the  town  clerk  and  the  town  sergeant. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
there  be  a  general  muster  and  review  of  each  regiment  or  bat- 
tallion,  twice  in  every  year,  to  wit :  on  the  first  Monday  in 
April,  and  on  the  first  Monday  in  October  ;  and  that  there  be 
a  general  muster  and  review  of  brigade,  once  in  two  years. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  captain  general,  lieutenant  general  and  major  general,  or 
any  two  of  them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  fully  authorized  and 
empowered  to  direct  and  order  when,  and  in  what  manner,  the 
forces  within  this  colony  shall  march  to  the  assistance  of  any  of 
our  sister  colonies,  when  invaded  or  attacked  ;  and  also  in 
what  manner  the  said  forces  shall  be  provided  and  supplied  ; 
and  also  to  direct  and  make  use  of  the  cannon  belongine^  to 
the  colony,  either  in  or  out  of  the  colony,  as  they  may  deem 
expedient. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  271 

the  said  forces,  whenever  they  shall  be  called  out  of  the  colony, 
shall  be  under  the  immediate  command  and  direction  of  the 
major  general. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  secretary  forthwith  cause  this  act  to  be  published  in  the 
Newport  Mercury  and  Providence  Gazette. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Jeremiah  Hopkins,  of  Coventry,  preferred  a 
petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  he  suffi- 
ciently understands  the  business  of  a  gunsmith,  so  as  to  make 
guns,  or  small  arms,  with  advantage  to  himself,  and  to  others, 
by  whom  guns  are  much  wanted  at  this  time,  when  they  can- 
not be  imported  from  Great  Britain  ;  but  that  he  is  unable  to 
furnish  himself  with  such  works,  tools  and  instruments,  as  are 
necessary  for  carrying  on  the  said  business. 

And  thereupon,  the  said  Jeremiah  Hopkins  prayed  this  As- 
sembly to  grant  him  the  benefit  of  a  lottery,  for  raising  the  sum 
of  |200,  to  be  appropriated  and  applied  towards  procuring  said 
w^orks,  tools  and  instruments,  and  for  no  other  purpose  ;  and 
to  appoint  Christopher  Lippitt,  of  Cranston  ;  Jeremiah  Olney 
and  George  Dorrance,  Jr.,  of  Scituate  ;  and  John  Stewart,  of 
Yoluntown,  managers  and  directors  of  said  lottery  ;  on  con- 
sideration whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  th^e  said  petition  be,  and  the 
same  hereby  is,  granted,  under  the  usual  conditions  and  restric- 
tions ;   provided  that  no  charge  accrue  to  the  colony,  thereby. 

God  save  the  King. 


Public  Acts  passed  during  the  year  1774. 

[The  following  laws  will  be  found  at  length  in  the  printed  "  Schedules,"  or  acts 
and  resolves  of  the  General  Assembly,  for  the  year  1774.] 

An  Act  incorporating  certain  persons  by  the  name  of  the  Charitable  Baptist  Society, 

in  the  town  of  Providence.     (May.) 
An  Act  to  naturahze  Augustus  Newman,  a  native  of  Saxony.     (May.) 
An  Act  incorporating  the  First  Congregational  Church,  in  Newport.     (June.) 
An  Act  to  amend  the  charter  of  the  Artillery  Company,  in  Providence.     (Juqc.) 


272  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

An   Act  explaiiatorv  of  an   act  granting  reviews   of  real   and   personal    actions. 

(June.) 
An  Act  incorporating  the  Congregational  Church,  in  East  Greenwich.     (August.) 
An  Act  to  amend  "  An  act  for  the  maintenance  and  support  of  insolvent  debtors." 

(October.) 
An  Act  assessing  a  rate  or  tax  of  £4,000.     (October.) 


DOCUMENTS  RELATIVE  TO  THE  ACTION  OF  RHODE  ISLAND, 
FOR  RESISTING  THE  ACT  OF  THE  BRITISH  PARLIAMENT,  IM^ 
POSING  A  DUTY  ON  TEA;  AND  FOR  OTHERWISE  RAISING  A 
REVENUE  IN  THE  AMERICAN  COLONIES. 


Proceedings  of  the  People  of  Providence,  in  Town  Meeting. 

At  a  town  meeting  of  the  town  of  Providence,  especially  called  and  held  at  the  court 
house,  the  19th  day  of  January,  A.  D.  1774.     Jabez  Bowen,  Esq.,  moderator. 

Inasmuch  as  the  British  Parliament  have  undertaken  to  raise  a  revenue  in  the 
American  colonies,  b}-  a  duty  upon  tea  :  we,  the  freemen  of  the  town  of  Providence, 
legally  assembled  in  meeting,  cannot  be  silent  on  so  interesting  and  alarming  an  occa- 
sion. Should  we,  in  this  case,  omit  to  assert  and  express  the  firmest  resolutions  to 
vindicate  our  rights,  it  might  be  construed  as  a  cession  of  them  into  the  hands  of 
those  who  have  wantonly  invaded  them  in  this  instance. 

We  do,  therefore,  in  justice  to  ourselves,  our  posterity,  and  the  sister  colonies, 
openly  and  publicly  make  the  following  declarations ;  hoping  that  by  a  vigorous  ex- 
ertion, in  conformity  thereto,  we  may  in  some  measure  contribute  towards  escaping 
the  dreadful  train  of  evils  which  must  be  the  consequence  of  a  tame  submission  to 
any  invasions  of  American  freedom. 

We  lament  any  seeming  acquiesence  which  hath  at  any  time  heretofore  been 
made  in  these  colonies,  under  parliamentary  usurpations  of  our  liberties ;  but  as  any 
such  tacit  concessions  were  made  through  fear,  inattention,  or  without  a  due  consid- 
eration of  our  rights,  we  strongly  protest  against  any  precedent  being  made  thereby, 
to  our  disadvantage. 

When  we  consider  that  many  of  our  ancestors  removed  from  Britain,  and  planted 
themselves  here ;  that  tlie  religion,  language  and  customs  of  the  two  countries  are 
mostly  similar,  and  that  there  hath  been  a  long  intercourse  of  trade  and  commerce 
between  them,  we  arc  willing,  and  even  desirous,  of  a  continuance  of  connexion  be- 
tween the  colonies  and  Britain,  if  it  may  be  had  on  terms  in  any  measure  equal. 

Upon  full  consideration  of  the  matter,  upon  which  we  have  met,  we  do  resolve, — 

I.     That  the  disposal  of  their  own  property  is  the  inherent  right  of  freemen ;  that 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  273 

tlicre  can  be  no  property  in  that,  wliich  another  can,  of  right,  take  from  us  without 
our  consent ;  that  the  chiim  of  Parliament  to  tax  America,  is,  in  other  words,  a 
claim  of  right  to  levy  contributions  on  us,  at  pleasure. 

II.  That  the  duty  imposed  by  Parliament  upon  tea,  landed  in  America,  is  a  tax 
on  the  Americans,  or  levying  contributions  on  them,  without  their  consent. 

III.  That  the  express  purpose  for  which  the  tax  is  levied  on  the  Americans) 
namely,  for  the  support  of  government,  administration  of  justice,  and  defence  of  His 
Majesty's  dmninions,  in  America,  has  a  direct  tendency  to  render  Assembhes  useless, 
and  to  introduce  arbitrary  government  and  slavery. 

IV.  That  a  virtuous  and  steady  opposition  to  this  ministerial  plan  of  governing 
America,  is  absolutely  necessary,  to  preserve  even  the  shadow  of  liberty  ;  and  is  a 
duty  which  every  freeman  in  America  owes  to  his  country,  to  himself,  and  to  his 
posterity. 

V.  That  the  resolution  lately  entered  into  by  the  East  India  Company,  to  send 
out  their  tea  ti>  America,  subject  to  the  payment  of  duties  on  its  bemg  landed  here, 
is  an  open  attempt  to  enforce  this  ministerial  plan,  and  a  violent  attack  upon  the 
liberties  of  America. 

VI.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  every  American  to  oppose  this  attempt. 

VII.  That  whoever  shall,  directly  or  indirectly,  countenance  this  attempt,  or  in 
any  wise  aid  or  abet  in  unloading,  receiving,  or  vending  the  tea  sent,  or  to  be  sent 
out  by  the  East  India  Company,  while  it  remains  subject  to  the  payment  of  a  duty 
here,  is  an  enemy  to  his  country. 

VIII.  That  no  tea  belonging  to  the  East  India  Company,  or  any  other  persons? 
subject  to  a  duty,  or  dutied  tea,  shall  be  unladed  here,  or  brought  to  land. 

IX.  That  this  town  Avill  co-operate  with  the  other  towns  in  this  colony,  and  with 
all  the  other  colonies,  in  a  resolute  stand,  as  well  against  every  other  unconstitutional 
measure,  calculated  to  enslave  America,  as  the  tea  act  in  particular. 

X.  That  Samuel  Nightingale,  Esq.,  Jabez  Bowen,  Esq. ;  and  Messrs.  John 
Brown,  John  Updike,  John  Jenckes,  John  Matthewson  and  Daniel  Cahoou,  or  the 
major  part  of  them,  be  a  committee,  to  correspond  with  the  towns  in  this,  and  the 
neighboi-ing  governments,  on  all  such  matters  as  shall  be  thought  to  affect  the  liber- 
ties of  America. 

Voted,  that  this  town  highly  approve  of  the  proceedings  of  their  brethren  of 
Boston,  Philadelphia  and  New  York,  in  their  spirited  and  resolute  opposition  made 
to  the  introduction  of  tea,  while  subject  to  a  duty  laid  by  Parhament ;  and  that  our 
thanks  be  given  them  for  the  same. 

Voted,  that  the  committee  wait  on  all  the  importers  of  English  goods,  in  this  town, 
sand  inform  them  of  the  resolutions  which  the  town  have  entered  into,  respecting  tea, 
while  subject  to  a  duty ;  and  if  any  of  them  have  ordered  any  tea  to  come  next 
pring,  that  they  be  desired  to  send  counter  orders  immediately. 

Voted,  that  the  foregoing  proceedings  be  published  in  the  next  Providence 
Gazette.  JAJ^IES  ANGELL, 

Town  Clerk. 

Immediately  after  this  meeting  was  dissolved,  the  gentlemen  of  the  committee  ap_ 
plied  themselves  to  the  discharge  of  their  important  trust,  by  waiting  on  the  several 
importers,  and  had  the  satisfaction  to  find  that  only  one  chest  of  tea  had  been  or- 
dered for  this  town,  next  spring ;  which  was  countermanded  previous  to  the  meeting- 

VOL.  VII.         35 


274  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1774, 

"We  are  authorized  to  assure  the  pubhc,  from  the  best  authority,  that  there  have 
been  but  nine  chests  of  tea  imported  into  this  town  (on  which  the  3d.  duty  has  beers 
paid),  since  the  memorable  non-importation  agreement. 

Proceedings  of  the  People  of  Newport,  in  Town  Meeting. 

At  a  very  full  town  meeting,  held  at  Newport,  on  the  12th  January,  1774,  mea- 
sures were  adopted,  in  substance,  similar  with  the  foregoing. 

The  gentlemen  of  the  committee  for  that  town  are.  Col.  Joseph  Wanton,  Jr., 
Henry  Ward,  John  Mawdtley,  John  Collins  and  William  Ellery,  Escjs. 

Proceedings  of  the  People  of  Bristol,  in  Town  Meeting. 

At  a  town  meeting,  held  at  Bristol,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  by  adjourn- 
ment, February  28,  1774.     Col.  Simeon  Potter,  moderator. 

The  committee  chosen  by  the  town,  to  consider  and  report  what  measures  may  be 
thought  proper  for  the  town  to  take,  relative  to  the  attempts  of  the  administration  tc 
deprive  us  of  our  invaluable  rights  and  liberties  ;  especially,  in  permitting  the  East 
India  Company  to  import  tea  in  America,  subject  to  a  duty,  reported  the  following 
resolves,  which  were  voted  to  be  the  genuine  sentiments  of  the  town : 

Resolved,  1.  That  our  ancestors  were  neither  felons,  nor  out-laws ;  but  their' 
emigration  from  their  native  land,  and  all  that  was  dear  and  valuable  to  them  there, 
was  the  effect  of  tyranny  and  oppression. 

2.  That  arriving  in  America,  and  purchasing  the  soil  of  the  natives,  who  were 
sole  lords  and  proprietors  of  it,  they  had  a  right  of  jurisdiction,  independent  of  the 
parent  state. 

3.  That  in  their  feeble  state,  being  unable  to  support  that  right,  they  put  them- 
selves under  the  allegiance  and  protection  of  the  crown  of  England;  who,  to  encou- 
rage their  perseverance,  in  subduing  a  wilderness,  which  has  since  been  a  great 
emolument  to  the  British  crown,  stipulated  to  secure  their  natural,  civil  and  religious- 
ri"-hts,  both  to  them  and  their  posterity,  by  charter ;  concernmg  which,  the  late 
Bishop  of  Salisbury  (Dr.  Burnet,)  was  pleased  to  say^  that  there  was  a  greater  sa- 
credness  in  the  charter  of  New  England,  than  in  those  of  the  corporation  of  Eng- 
land ;  because  those  were  only  acts  of  grace  ;  whereas,  the  charter  of  New  England, 
was  a  contract  between  the  King  and  the  first  patentees; 

4.  That  our  privileges  have  been  invaded,  and  several  attempts  made  to  deprive 
us  of  them ;  especially  by  a  late  act  of  Parhament,  empowering  the  East  India 
Company  to  import  tea,  subject  to  a  duty,  &c. 

It  is  therefore  resolved,  that  whoever  is  either  aiding  or  assisting  in  landing,  un- 
loadino-,  vending  or  purchasing  any  of  the  said  tea,  or  any  other  dutied  tea,  shall  ba 
deemed  an  enemy  to  his  country. 

5.  Considerino-  the  vast  addition  of  territory,  wealth  and  power,  that  the  planta- 
tions in  North  America  are  to  the  crown  of  Great  Britain ;  that  it  was  obtained  by 
our  ancestors,  without  any  expense  to  the  crown,  with  the  toil  of  their  lives,  and  ex- 
pense of  their  blood  and  treasure ;  considering  also,  our  own  exertions  for  the 
crown,  in  the  late  wars  ;  especially,  in  the  reduction  of  Louisbourg,  in  the  year  1745, 
Tvhich  purchased  a  peace  for  the  whole  nation,  then  involved  in  a  calamitous  war  ; 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  275 

Tve  say,  considering  these  things,  to  invade  our  privileges,  is  the  most  cruel  ingrati- 
tude. For  although  the  charges  of  that  expedition  have  been  in  part  reimbursed  by 
the  crown ;  yet,  what  restitution  has  been,  or  can  be  made,  for  the  flower  of  the 
land,  who  were  slain  in  battle  ?  and  the  charges  consequent  thereon,  have  been,  and 
still  are,  a  burthen  to  this  town  ;  as  there  are  several  widows  of  those  who  were  either 
slain  in  battle,  or  died  in  the  service  of  their  King  and  country,  who  have,  and  still 
are,  supported  by  the  town. 

6.  That  to  invade  our  privileges,  is  as  impolitic  as  it  is  cruel,  as  several  millions 
of  good  subjects  are  thereby  disaifected,  and  may  in  time  be  provoked  to  renounce 
their  allegiance,  and  assert  an  independency. 

7.  That  Avhich  makes  our  grievances  intolerant,  is,  that  so  many  unnecessary  of- 
ficers are  supported  by  the  earnings  of  honest  industry,  in  a  life  of  dissipation  and 
ease  ;  who,  by  being  properly  employed,  might  be  useful  members  of  society. 

8.  Instead  of  exploring  another  asylum,  with  the  blood  of  our  ancestors  oosing 
from  our  veins,  we  are  determined  to  join  our  brethren  on  the  continent,  in  all  lawful 
measures,  to  defend  our  rights  and  privileges  in  this  good  land,  which  our  fathers 
have  transmitted  to  us,  their  posterity,  as  a  token  of  their  dearest  affection. 

9.  That,  whilst  we  assert  our  own  freedom,  we  would  by  no  means  deprive 
others  of  theirs ;  and  that  a  difference  in  sentiment,  under  the  influence  of  reason 
and  virtue,  ought  by  no  means  to  produce  an  alienation  of  affection,  or  interrupt  a 
friendly  intercourse,  or  mutual  exchange  of  good  oflices. 

10.  Some  may  apprehend  there  is  danger  from  another  quarter,  generally  un- 
foreseen and  unsuspected  ;  that,  that  anarchy  and  confusion,  which  may  prevail,  will 
as  naturally  establish  tyranny  and  arbiti-ary  power,  as  one  extreme  leads  to  an^ 
other  ;  many,  on  the  side  of  liberty,  when  they  see  it  degenerating  into  anarchy,  fear- 
ing their  persons  are  not  safe,  nor  their  property  secure,  will  be  likely  to  verge  to  the 
other  extreme  ;  of  which,  those  that  envy  us  our  happiness  and  prosperity,  Avill  avail 
themselves,  to  carry  their  designs  into  execution  ;  our  determinations,  therefore,  are 
as  firm  for  the  support  of  government,  agreeably  to  our  excellent  constitution,  as 
for  the  defence  of  our  own  rights  and  privileges. 

11.  That,  as  we  have  hitherto  approved  ourselves  loyal  subjects  to  our  gracious 
.sovereign,  George  the  Third,  so  we  take  this  opportunity  to  express  our  allegiance, 
and  entire  confidence  in  the  rectitude  of  his  intentions  ;  being  persuaded,  if  the 
wicked  were  taken  from  before  the  throne,  an  happy  era  would  commence  ;  that  our 
petitions  would  be  heard,  and  our  complaints  eased  ;  that  the  wisdom,  justice  and 
clemency  of  the  administration,  would  conciliate  the  affections  of  the  colonies  ;  which 
under  the  smiles  and  protection  of  the  parent  state,  by  increasing  in  wealth  and 
power,  would  be  a  further  addition  to  the  strength  and  glory  of  Great  Britain. 

Voted,  that  the  thanks  oft  his  meeting  be  given  to  the  towns  of  Boston  and  New>. 
port,  and  the  other  patriotic  towns  on  the  continent,  for  their  virtuous  and  spirited 
opposation  to  the  measures  of  the  administration,  and  their  noble  exertions  in  de- 
fence and  support  of  our  invaluable  rights  and  privileges. 

By  order  of  the  committee—  JOSEPH  EUSSELL, 

Town  Clerk. 


276  RECORDS    OY   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 


Proceedings  of  the  People  of  Richmond^  in  Town  Meeting. 

At  a  town  meeting,  especially  called  and  held  at  Richmond,  in  Kings  county,  and 
colony  of  Rhode  Island,  at  the  house  of  George  Webb,  Esq.,  the  28th  of  February 
1774.     ]\Iajor  Richard  Bailey  chosen  moderator  for  said  meeting. 

This  town,  taking  into  their  most  serious  consideration,  an  act  passed  in  the  Par- 
liament of  Great  Britain,  for  levying  duties  upon  tea,  sent  by  the  East  India  Com- 
pany, to  North  America,  to  be  paid  in  America, — 

Do  resolve,  1.  That  the  first  adventurers,  settlers  of  His  Majesty's  dominions,  in 
British  America,  brought  with  them,  and  transmitted  to  their  posterit^^  and  all  other 
His  Majesty's  subjects  since  inhabiting  in  His  Majesty's  said  dominions,  all  the  privi- 
leges and  immunities  that  have  at  any  time  been  enjoyed  and  possessed  by  the  peo- 
ple of  Great  Britain. 

2.  That  by  the  charter  granted  to  this  colony,  it  is  declared  that  the  inhabitants 
thereof,  are  entitled  to  all  the  privileges  and  immunities  of  natural  born  subjects,  tos 
all  intents  and  purposes,  as  if  they  had  been  born  within  the  realm  of  England  ;  and 
are,  by  the  said  charter,  entirely  exempted  from  all  "  services,  duties,  fines,  forfeit- 
ures, claims  and  demands,  whatever  ;  except  a  fifth  part  of  all  the  ore  of  gold  and 
silver,  found  at  all  times  in  the  colony ;"  which  is  reserved  in  lieu  of  those  duties. 

3.  That  the  act  of  Parliament,  allowing  the  East  India  Company  to  export  tea 
into  America,  subject  to  a  duty,  payable  here ;  and  the  actual  sending  tea  into  the 
colonies,  by  the  Company,  is  an  attempt  to  enforce  the  revenue  acts,  and  is  un- 
doubtedly designed  to.  make  a  precedent  for  establishing  taxes  in  America,  in  order 
that  a  general  tax  upon  all  the  necessaries  of  life,  and  lands,  may  take  place. 

4.  That  the  act  of  Parhament,  levying  duties  or  taxes  in  America,  is  a  violation 
of  the  liberties  and  privileges  of  America ;  and  hath  a  tendency  to  render  the  Gen- 
eral Assemblies  useless. 

5.  That  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony  hath  the  sole  exclusive  right  of 
levying  taxes  upon  the  inhabitants  thereof;  and  that  every  attempt  to  vest  that, 
power  in  any  other  person  or  persons,  whomsoever,  is  unconstitutional,  and  hath  a 
manifest  tendency  to  destroy  the  Uberties  of  the  colony. 

6.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  every  American,  by  all  due  and  legal  means,  to  op- 
pose every  attempt  Avhich  is  made,  to  destroy  the  liberties  and  privileges  of  America  - 
and  particularly,  the  importation  of  tea,  subject  to  a  duty,  to  be  paid  here. 

7.  That  the  inhabitants  of  this  town,  ever  have  been,  and  still  are,  ready  on  any 
occasion,  whatever,  to  demonstrate  their  love  and  loyalty  to  His  Majesty  and  our 
mother  country ;  and  it  is  with  the  greatest  regret  that  we  look  back  upon  the  un- 
happy measures  that  have  been  adopted  by  the  Parliament  and  ministry. 

8.  And  we  are  still  ready,  when  called  upon  in  a  constitutional  wa}-,  to  grant 
such  aids  and  assistance  to  the  crown,  as  the  necessity  of  the  case  may  require,  and 
our  abilities  admit ;  and  are  ready  to  sacrifice  our  hves  and  fortunes  for  the  honor 
and  dignity  of  His  Majesty,  and  the  parent  state,  with  a  fii-m  attachment  to  our 
natural  and  free-born  rights  and  privileges,  which  ai-e  dearer  to  us,  than  our  lives ; 
and  are  a  blessing,  under  God,  that  we  will  not  give  up  to  any  power  on  earth ;  and 
this  town  will  join  Avith,  and  to  the  utmost  of  our  power,  support  our  sister  colonies, 
in  all  legal  measures  for  the  preservation  of  the  rights  and  privileges  of  North. 
America. 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  277 

Voted,  that  Edward  Perry,  Esq.,  Major  Richard  Bailey  and  Mr.  David  Nichols, 
Jr.,  .be  a  committee  of  correspondence,  to  correspond  with  the  other  committees,  ap- 
pointed in  this  colony.  .  THOMAS  LILLIBRIDGE, 

Town  Clerk. 


Proceedings  of  the  People  of  New  Shoreham,  in  Town  Meeting. 

At  a  town  meeting  held  at  New  Shoreham,  March  2,  1774.  John  Sands^ 
Esq.,  moderator. 

Whereas,  there  has  been  sent  to  this  town,  a  copy  of  the  resolves  entered  into  by 
the  town  of  Newport,  and  a  request  to  lay  the  same  before  this  town,  with  a  design 
that  said  town  would  unite  with  the  Qther  towns  in  this  colony,  in  supporting  their 
just  rights  and  liberties. 

1.  Therefore,  we,  the  inhabitants  of  this  town,  being  legally  convened  in  town 
meeting,  do  firmly  resolve,  as  the  opinion  of  said  town,  that  the  Americans  have  g, 
good  right  to  be  as  free  a  people  as  any  upon  the  earth ;  and  to  enjoy  at  all  times 
an  uninterrupted  possession  of  their  rights  and  properties. 

2.  That  the  act  of  the  British  Parliament,  claiming  the  right  to  make  laws  bind- 
ing upon  the  colonies,  In  all  cases,  whatsoever,  js  Inconsistent  with  the  natural,  con- 
stitutional and  charter  rights  and  privileges  of  the  Inhabitants  of  this  colony. 

3.  That  the  express  purpose  for  which  the  tax  Is  levied  on  the  Americans, 
namely,  for  the  support  of  government,  adnnmstratlon  of  justice  and  defence  of  His 
Majesty's  dominions  in  America,  has  a  direct  tendency  to  render  Assemblies  useless, 
and  to  introduce  arbitrary  government  and  slavery. 

4.  That  a  tax  on  the  inhabitants  of  America,  without  their  consent.  Is  a  measure 
absolutely  destructive  of  their  freedom,  tending  to  enslave  and  Impoverish  all  who 
tamely  submit  to  it. 

5.  That  the  act  allowing  the  East  India  Company  to  export  tea  to  America, 
subject  to  a  duty  payable  here  ;  and  the  actual  sending  tea  into  the  colonies,  by 
said  company,  Is  an  open  attempt  to  enforce  the  ministerial  plan,  and  a  violent  at- 
tack upon  the  liberties  of  America. 

6.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  every  American  to  oppose  this  attempt. 

7.  That  whosoever  shall,  directly,  or  indirectly,  countenance  this  attempt,  or  In 
any  wise  aid  or  assist  in  running,  receiving  or  unloading  any  such  tea,  or  In  piloting 
any  vessel,  having  any  such  tea  on  board,  while  It  remains  subject  to  the  payment 
of  a  duty  here,  Is  an  enemy  to  his  country. 

8.  That  we  will  heartily  unite  with  our  American  brethren,  in  suppoi'ting  the 
inhabitants  of  this  continent,  in  all  their  just  rights  and  privileges. 

9.  That  Joshua  Sands,  Caleb  Littlefield  and  John  Sands,  Esqs. ;  and  Messrs. 
Walter  Rathbun  and  Edward  Sands,  Jr.,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  be  appointed  a 
committee  for  this  town,  to  correspond  with  all  other  committees  appointed  by  any 
town  in  this  colony  ;  and  said  committee  is  requested  to  give  the  closest  attention  to 
eveiy  thing  which  concerns  the  liberties  of  America;  and  if  any  tea,  subject  to  a 
duty  here,  should  be  landed  in  this  town,  the  committee  is  directed  and  empo\vered 
to  call  a  town  meeting,  forthwith,  that  such  measures  may  be  taken,  as  the  public 
safety  may  require. 

10.  And  we  return  our  hearty  thanks  to  the  town  of  Newport,  for  their  patriotic 


278  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

resolutions,  to  maintain  the  liberties  of  their  country ;  and  the  pi-udent  measures^ 
thev  have  taken  to  induce  the  other  towns  in  this  colony,  to  come  into  the  same 
generous  resolutions.  WALTER  RATHBUX, 

Town  Clerk. 


Proceedings  of  the  People  of  Cumberland,  in  Town  Meeting. 

At  a  town  meeting,  held  at  Cumberland,  in  the  county  of  Providence,  specially 
called,  and  legally  assembled,  at  the  house  of  Captain  John  Fisk,  innholder,  March 
18,  17  74;  Mr.  Nathaniel  Staples,  chosen  moderator. 

At  a  time  when  the  enemies  of  America  are  continually  misrepresenting  us  to  the 
mother  country,  and  incessantly  laboring  to  extinguish  in  her  the  few  remaining 
gparks  of  parental  affection ,  it  must  aflford  sensible  pleasure  to  all  who  wish  for  the 
preservation  of  our  invaluable  constitutional  rights  and  liberties,  to  find  such  an 
union  take  place  in  America,  as  may  enable  us,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  to  support 
our  just  rights,  hberties  and  privileges,  wherewith  God,  nature,  and  our  happy  con- 
stitution, have  made  us  free. 

The  town  taking  into  consideration,  certain  intelligence,  received  from  the  com- 
mittee of  correspondence  at  Newport,  the  following  resolves  were  passed  nem.  con. 

1.  That  it  is  one  of  the  natui-al  rights  of  man,  to  dispose  of  the  fruits  of  his  honest 
industry  himself 

2.  That  every  British  subject  in  special,  in  whatever  part  of  the  extensive 
British  empire  he  is  settled,  has  eminently,  by  our  happy  constitution,  as  well  as  by 
nature,  the  sole  right  to  dispose  of  his  own  property,  either  by  himself  or  repre- 
sentative. 

3.  That  some  violent  attacks  have  been  made  by  the  administration  on  the  rights 
and  privileges  of  British  subjects,  in  the  colonies ;  that  the  retaining  the  duty  on  tea, 
for  the  express  purpose  of  raising  a  revenue  in  America,  and  impowering  the  East 
India  Company  to  send  their  tea  here  for  sale,  Avhile  subject  to  said  duty,  is  a  strik- 
ing instance  of  their  determination  to  persevere  in  their  attacks,  and  thereby  reduce 
us  to  the  most  abject  state  of  wretchedness  and  slavery. 

4.  That  Avhoever  shall,  directly  or  indirectly,  countenance  this  attempt,  or  in 
any  wise  aid  or  abet  in  unloading,  receiving  or  vending  the  tea  sent,  or  to  be  sent 
out  by  the  East  India  Company,  while  it  remains  subject  to  the  payment  of  a  duty 
here,  shall  be  deemed  by  us  inimical  to  the  rights  of  his  country,  and  as  endeavoring 
to  counteract  the  designs  of  those  who  are  zealous  for  its  true  interests. 

5.  That  we  do,  in  this  way,  stand  forth  in  the  cause  of  liberty,  in  union  with 
other  towns,  and  do  pay  our  tribute  of  thanks  to  the  leading,  spirited,  pat- 
riotic towns  of  Newport  and  Providence,  and  other  towns  adjacent,  for  the  firm- 
ness and  intrepidity  so  conspicuous  in  them,  by  discovering  to  the  world  a  true 
sense  of  the  blessings  which  our  constitution  affords,  and  a  noble  resoluion  to  defend 
them. 

6.  That  we  are  sorry  for  the  unhappy  disagreement  between  this  and  the  mother 
country ;  and  earnestly  wish  to  see  harmony  restored. 

7.  That  John  Dexter  and  Joseph  Davis,  Esqs. ;  Messrs.  Nathan  Staples,  Ezekiel 
Ballou  and  Janies  Dexter,  Esqs.,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  be  a  committee,  to  cor- 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  219 

respond  with  the  towns  in  this  and  the  neighboring  governments,  in  all  laudable 
measures  for  the  preservation  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  America. 

Voted,  that  the  foregoing  proceedings  be  published  in  the  Providence  Gazette. 
Witness  :  .JOHN  DEXTER, 

Town  Clerk. 


Proceedings  of  the  People  of  Barring/ on,  in  Town  Meeting. 

At  a  meeting  of  the  freemen  of  the  town  of  Barrington,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode 
Island,  held  the  21st  day  of  March,  1774,  by  adjournment.  James  Brown,  Esq., 
moderator. 

The  inhabitants  of  this  town  being  justly  alarmed  at  the  several  acts  of  Parlia- 
ment, made  and  passed  for  raising  a  revenue  in  America  •  and  more  especially,  the 
act  empowering  the  East  India  Company  to  export  their  tea  into  America,  subject  to 
a  duty,  payable  here,  for  the  purpose  of  raising  a  revenue  in  America,  with  many 
other  unconstitutional  acts  (which,  having  been  duly  considered  by  a  number  of  our 
sister  towns  in  this  colony,  we  think  it  needless  to  enumerate),  and  being  sensible  of 
the  dangerous  situation  of  the  colonies,  occasioned  by  wicked  and  designing  men,  do 
enter  into  the  following  resolves : 

1.  That  the  inhabitants  of  this  town  ever  have  been,  and  now  are,  loyal  and 
dutiful  subjects  to  the  King  of  Great  Britain. 

2.  That  we  highly  approve  of  the  resolutions  of  our  sister  colonies,  and  the  noble 
stand  they  have  made  in  defence  of  the  liberties  and  privileges  of  the  colonies.  We 
likewise  thank  the  worthy  author  of  The  Rights  of  Colonies  Examined,  for  his  spirited 
jDcrformance,  in  support  of  the  liberties  of  America. 

3.  That  the  act  empowering  the  East  India  Company  to  export  their  tea  to 
America,  subject  to  a  duty,  payable  here,  is  designed  as  a  precedent  for  establishing 
taxes,  duties  and  monopolies,  in  America,  that  our  property  may  be  taken  from  us 
at  pleasure,  and  we  be  thereby  reduced  to  a  state  of  abject  slavery. 

4.  That  we  will  neither  buy,  sell,  nor  receive  as  a  gift,  any  dutied  tea,  nor 
have  any  dealings  with  any  person  or  persons  that  shall  buy,  sell,  give,  receive,  or 
trade  in  said  tea,  directly  or  indirectly,  knowing  or  suspecting  it  to  be  such ;  but 
will  consider  all  persons  concerned  in  introducing  dutied  tea,  into  this  town,  or  any 
town  in  America,  as  enemies  to  their  country,  and  unworthy  the  society  of  freemen. 

.5.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  every  man  in  America  to  oppose,  by  all  proper  mea^ 
sures,  to  the  utmost  of  his  power  and  abilities,  every  attempt  upon  the  liberties  of  his 
country  ^  especially,  those  mentioned  in  the  foregoing  resolves ;  and  to  exert  him- 
self to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  in  obtaining  a  redress  of  tlie  grievances  the  colonies 
now  groan  under.     We  do,  therefore,  solemnly  resolve, — 

6.  That  we  will  heartily  unite  with  the  town  of  Newport,  and  the  other  towns  in 
this,  and  all  the  other  sister  colonies,  and  exert  our  whole  force  in  support  of  the 
just  rights  and  privileges  of  the  American  colonies. 

7.  That  James  Brown,  Samuel  Allen,  Josiah  Humphrey,  Edward  Bosworth, 
Nathaniel  Martin,  Moses  Tyler  and  Thomas  Allen,  or  a  major  part  of  them,  be  a 
committee,  to  correspond  with  all  the  other  committees,  appointed  by  any  town  in 
this  and  the  neighboring  governments ;  and  the  committee  is  desired  to  give  then* 
attention  to  every  thing  that  concerns  the  liberties  of  America ;  and  if  any  of  the 
obnoxious  tea  should  be  brought  into  tliis  town,  or  any  other  attempt  made  on  the 


280  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

liberties  of  the  inhabitants  thereof,  the  committee  is  directed  and  empowered  to  call 
a  town  meeting,  forthwith,  that  such  measures  may  be  taken  as  the  public  safety  may 
require. 

8.  That  we  heartily  unite  in,  and  resolve,  to  support  the  foregoing  resolves,  Atith 
our  lives  and  fortunes. 

Voted,  that  the  above  resolves  be  published  in  the  Providence  Gazette. 
A  true  copy.     Witness:  SOLOMON  TOWNSEXD,  JR., 

Town  Clerk. 

Proceedings  of  the  People  of  Providence,  in  Town  Meeting. 

At  a  town  meeting,  held  at  Providence,  on  the  17th  day  of  May,  1774  ;  called  by 
'\varrant. 

Resolved,  that  this  town  will  heartily  join  with  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts 
Bay,  and  the  other  colonies,  in  such  measures  as  shall  be  generally  agreed  on  by 
the  colonies,  for  the  protecting  and  securing  their  invaluable  natural  rights  and 
privileges,  and  transmitting  the  same  to  the  latest  posterity. 

That  the  deputies  of  this  town  be  requested  to  use  their  influence  at  the  approach- 
ing session  of  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  for  promoting  a  congress,  as 
soon  as  may  be,  of  the  representatives  of  the  General  Assemblies  of  the  several  colo- 
nies and  provinces  of  North  America,  for  establishing  the  firmest  union  ;  and  adopts 
ing  such  measures  as  to  them  shall  appear  the  most  effectual  to  answer  that  im- 
portant purpose ;  aild  to  agree  upon  proper  methods  for  executing  the  same. 

That  the  committee  of  correspondence  of  this  town  be  desired  tO'  assure  the  town 
of  Boston,  that  we  consider  ourselves  greatly  interested  in  the  present  alarming  con- 
duct of  the  British  Pai'liament  towards  them  ;  and  view  the  whole  English  Amerl- 
oan  colonies  equally  concerned  in  the  event ;  and  that  we  will,  with  the  utmost  firm- 
ness, act  accordingly,  whenever  any  plan  shall  be  agreed  on.  In  the  mean  time,  we 
are  of  opinion,  that  an  universal  stoppage  of  all  trade  with  Great  Britain,  Ireland-,. 
Africa  and  the  West  Indies,  until  such  time  as  the  port  of  Boston  shall  be  re- 
instated in  its  former  privileges,  &c.,  will  be  the  best  expedient  in  the  case  ;  and  that 
a  proper  time  should  be  generally  agreed  on  for  the  same  universally  to  take  place. 

Whereas,  Jacob  Schoemaker,  late  of  Providence,  died  Intestate,  and  hath  left  six: 
negroes,  four  of  whom  are  Infants  ;  and  there  being  no  heir  to  the  said  Jacob,  ia 
this  town  or  colony,  the  said  negroes  have  fallen  to  this  town,  by  law,  provided  no 
heir  should  appear.     Therefoi-e — 

It  Is  voted  by  this  meeting,  that  It  is  iinbecomlng  the  character  of  freemen  to 
enslave  the  said  negroes ;  and  they  do  hereby  give  up  all  claim  of  right  or  property 
in  them,  the  said  negroes,  or  either  of  them ;  and  it  is  hereby  recommended  to  the 
town  council  to  take  the  said  negroes  under  their  protection,  and  to  bind  the  small 
children  to  some  proper  masters  and  mistresses  ;  and  in  case  they  should  not  be  per- 
sonal estate  of  the  said  Jacob  Schoemaker,  sufficient  to  pay  his  just  debts.  It  Is  fur- 
ther recommended  to  said  council,  to  bind  out  either  or  both  of  the  adult  negroes 
for  that  purpose. 

Whereas,  the  inhabitants  of  America  are  engaged  in  the  preservation  of  their 
rights  and  liberties ;  and  as  personal  liberty  is  an  essential  part  of  the  natural 
rights  of  mankind,  the  deputies  of  the  town  are  directed  to  use  their  endeavors  to 
obtain  an  act  of  the  General  Assembly,  prohibiting  the  importation  of  negro  slaves. 


1Y74.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  281 

into  this  colony  ;  and  that  all  negroes  born  In  the  colony,  should  be  free,  after  at- 
taining to  a  certain  age. 

Voted,  that  James  Angell,  Esq.,  be  added  to  the  committee  of  correspondence,  of 
this  town,  and  that  he  sign  their  letters  as  clerk. 

A  true  copy:  JAMES  ANGELL, 

Town  Clerk. 

Proceedings  of  the  People  of  Newport,  in  Town  Meeting. 

At  a  town  meeting,  called,  and  held  at  Newport,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island, 
the  20th  day  of  May,  1774.     Henry  Ward,  Esq.,  moderator. 

Voted,  that  we  have  the  deepest  sense  of  the  injuries  done  to  the  town  of  Boston, 
by  the  act  of  Parliament,  lately  passed,  for  putting  an  end  to  their  trade,  and  de- 
stroying the  port ;  and  that  we  consider  this  attack  upon  them,  as  utterly  subversive 
of  American  liberty ;  for  the  same  power  may  at  pleasure  desti'oy  the  trade,  and 
shut  up  the  ports  of  every  colony  in  its  turn ;  so  that  there  will  be  a  total  end  of  all 
property. 

Voted,  that  we  will  unite  with  the  other  colonies  in  all  reasonable  and  proper 
measures  to  procure  the  establishment  of  the  rights  of  the  colonies,  upon  a  just  and. 
permanent  foundation ;  and  particularly,  in  case  the  other  colonies  shall,  upon  this 
alarming  occasion,  put  a  stop  to  their  trade  to  Great  Britain  and  the  West  Indies 
that  we  will  heartily  join  with  them  in  the  measure. 

Voted,  that  the  committee  of  correspondence,  for  this  town,  immediately  transmit 
a  copy  of  these  resolutions  to  the  committee  of  correspondence,  for  the  town  of 
Boston. 

Voted,  that  the  committee  of  correspondence,  of  this  town,  Immediately  send  a 
copy  of  the  above  resolutions  to  each  town  in  this  colony. 

WILLI AJ^I  CODDINGTON, 

Town  Clerk. 

The  above  votes  were  passed  in  a  very  full  meeting ;  and  it  is  with  great  jileasure 
we  Inform  the  public,  that  there  never  appeared  a  more  universal  spirit,  firmness  and 
determined  i-esolution  to  stand  by,  and  support  our  brethren  of  Boston,  against  the 
diabohcal  ministerial  plan  of  slavery  ;  there  being  but  one  or  two  held  up,  against 
every  thing  bearing  the  least  imaginable  appearance  of  liberty. 

It  Is  proposed  that  a  number  of  gentlemen  Immediately  form  a  company  for  car- 
rying on  the  woolen  manufacture  In  this  colony,  In  the  most  extensive  manner  ;  there 
being  quite  wool  enough  raised  here,  to  clothe  all  the  Inhabitants. — Prov.  Gazette. 

Proceedings  of  the  People  of  Providence,  in  Town  Meeting. 

At  a  town  meeting,  held  at  Providence,  Rhode  Island,  convened  by  warrant,  on 
the  12th  day  of  August,  1774.     Benjamin  Man,  Esq.,  moderator. 

INSTRUCTIONS  TO  THE  DEPUTIES  OF  THIS  TOWN,  IN  GENERAL  ASSEMBLY. 

Gentlemen : — The  sufferings  and  distresses  of  the  people  of  the  town  of  Boston, 
occasioned  by  a  relentless  execution  of  that  cruel  edict  for  blocking  up  the  port, 

VOL.  VII.         36 


282  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

awakens  our  attention  and  excites  our  compassion.  Their  cause  is  our  cause  ;  and 
unless  aid  and  succor  be  afforded  them,  they  may  be  discouraged  into  a  hurtful  sub- 
mission, and  ministerial  vengeance  may  be  next  directed  against  this  colony ;  and 
in  the  end,  alight  upon  all. 

You  are  therefore,  requested  to  use  your  endeavors,  at  the  next  session  of  the 
General  Assembly,  to  procure  a  grant  to  be  made  from  this  colony,  of  such  sum  of 
money  as  they  may  think  fit,  towards  reheving  and  mitigating  the  difficulties  and 
distresses  which  that  town  must  experience  from  the  operation  of  that  most  unright- 
eous inhibition,  the  hostile  manner  of  carrying  the  same  into  force,  and  a  general 
arrest  of  their  hberties. 

Permit  us  to  observe,  that  in  doing  this,  it  will  be  evidenced,  that  as  a  community, 
we  would  do  unto  others  as  we  would  that  they  should  do  unto  us,  in  a  like  circum- 
stance ;  and  that  it  will  be  a  greater  testimony  of  unanimity  in  the  general  concern- 
ments of  Amei-ica,  in  this  day  of  struggle  and  danger,  than  private  contributions,  and 
far  more  equal.  Jj\JMES  A^GELL, 

Town  Clerk. 

Proceedmgs  of  the  People  of  Providence,  in  Toivn  Meeting. 

At  a  town  meeting,  held  at  Providence,  on  the  last  Tuesday  of  August,  1774. 
The  Honorable  Darius  Sessions,  Esq.,  moderator. 

Whereas,  at  the  last  session  of  the  Assembly,  an  order  was  passed,  that  John 
Smith  would  receive  the  quota  of  the  arms  belonging  to  the  county  of  Providence, 
and  deliver  them  to  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereupon,  it  is  by  this  meeting  voted,  that  John  Smith  be  appointed  to  procure 
the  said  small  arms  to  be  cleaned  and  made  fit  for  use,  and  to  procure  proper  chests 
for  the  same  ;  all  of  which  expenses,  to  be  paid  by  this  town,  after  his  accounts 
have  passed  the  town  audit. 

It  is  i-esolved  by  this  meeting,  that  this  town  ought  not  to  be  made  the  asylum  of 
any  person  or  persons,  of  whatever  town,  place  or  city,  Avithin  the  British  dominions, 
whose  principles  and  practices  being  inimical  to  the  liberties  of  our  country  and  its 
happy  constitution,  have  rendered,  or  shall  render  them  obnoxious  to  the  inhabit- 
ants of  such  place  or  places  from  which  they  may  emigrate ;  and  that  all  such  ought 
to  be  discouraged  by  every  prudent  and  legal  measure. 

And  the  honorable  town  council  are  hereby  requested  to  exert  themselves  for  the 
removal  and  ejection  of  all  such  persons,  so  far  as  by  law  they  may  be  warranted ; 
as  they  being  admitted  among  us,  may  tend  greatly  to  endanger  the  peace,  order 
and  tranquility  of  the  town,  as  by  recent  instances  have  been  manifested. 

Voted,  that  the  above  resolve  be  Inserted  in  the  Providence  Gazette. 

A  true  copy :  JAjVIES  ANGELL, 

Town  Clerk. 

Proceedings  of  tfie  People  of  Providence,  in  Town  Meeting. 

At  a  town  meeting,  held  in  Providence  on  the  31st  day  of  August,  1774;  called 
by  a  warrant.     The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  chosen  moderator. 

Whereas,  on  the  evening  of  the  30th  of  August  instant,  a  number  of  persons  im- 
pudently and  tumultuously  assembled  themselves  together,  in  a  manner  that  did 


1774.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  283 

disturb  the  peace  and  order  of  tlie  town ;  and  as  sucli  proceedings  are  of  evil  ex- 
ample, and  repugnant  to  the  good  and  wholesome  laws  of  this  town  and  colony, 
which  if  executed,  we  deem  sufficient  to  support  .the  quiet  and  tranquility  thereof; 
and  such  doings  being  ever  derogatory  to  the  honor  of  the  town,  and  subversive  of 
our  rights  and  liberties  to  their  very  foundation,  this  town  do  protest  against  such 
proceedings  ;  and  desire  the  civil  magistrates,  therein,  to  exert  themselves  to  their 
utmost,  to  prevent  and  suppress  all  such  unhappy  disturbances  in  future  ;  in  doing 
which,  they  may  rely  upon  the  aid  and  support  of  the  freemen  and  well-disposed  in- 
habitants of  this  town,  at  all  times. 

Voted,  that  this  vote  be  published  (together  with  the  resolve  of  yesterday),  in  the 
next  Providence  Gazette. 

The  meeting  was  then  dissolved.  JONA.  ARNOLD, 

Deputy  Clerk. 


Proceedings  of  the  People  of  Scituate,  in  Town  Meeting. 

At  a  meeting  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Scituate,  in  the  colony  of  Ehode  Is- 
land, legally  warned  and  duly  assembled,  on  Monday,  the  26th  day  of  September, 
1774.     William  West,  Esq.,  moderator. 

Having  taken  into  our  consideration,  the  dark  and  gloomy  clouds  that  seem  to 
threaten  a  total  destruction  of  the  liberties  of  this,  our  native  country,  in  general ; 
the  distressing  circmnstances  of  the  town  of  Boston,  in  particular ;  their  harbor 
blockaded ;  the  inhabitants  cut  off  from  all  trade  and  commerce  by  sea,  on  which 
great  numbers  of  them  depended  for  a  supply  of  bread ;  principles  adopted  for  the 
government  of  that  once  flourishing  province,  unconstitutional,  oppressive  and  en- 
forced by  military  power ;  every  artful  means  used  to  hasten  its  destruction ;  char- 
ters which  we  once  doated  on,  which  we  considered  as  unalterable  as  the  laws  of  the 
Medes  and  Persians,  and  gloried  in  as  the  bulwark  of  the  constitution  of  these  colo- 
nies, now  seem  failing  to  protect  the  liberty  of  the  subject,  and  altering  at  pleasure ; 
taxes  levying,  revenues  raising  without  our  consent  obtained,  or  even  asked ;  in 
short,  slavery  herself,  protected  and  guarded  by  tyi-anny,  advancing  with  hasty  steps 
towards  this  land  of  freedom  and  liberty. 

With  the  attention  which  such  a  subject  demands,  and  at  the  same  time  we  hope 
with  all  that  calmness  and  candor  so  horrid  a  scene  will  possibly  admit  of,  we  have 
thought  proper  to  come  to  the  following  resolve,  viz. : 

That  we  will  choose  a  committee  of  correspondence,  to  meet  the  committees  chosen 
in  the  neighboring  towns,  that  they  may  consult  and  agree  on  some  general  plan, 
that  may  have  a  tendency,  under  the  blessing  of  Heaven,  to  insure  to  us  our  inval- 
uable rights  and  privileges;  for  which  purpose,  the  following  gentlemen  were  elected 
and  chosen,  viz. :  Job  Randall,  Benjamin  Slack,  William  West,  Ezekiel  Cornell, 
Esqs. ;  Capt.  Rufus  Hopkins,  Messrs.  Peter  Cooke  and  Stephen  Sheldon,  Jr. ;  any 
four  of  whom,  to  represent  this  town  in  any  meeting  of  corresspondence  with  the 
other  committees,  and  to  make  a  report  of  their  proceedings  to  this  town. 

Voted,  that  a  committee  be  chosen,  to  collect  donations  for  the  relief  of  the  poor 
of  Boston,  now  suffering  in  the  glorious  cause  of  liberty  ;  and  that  Capt.  Rufus  Hop- 
kins and  Ezekiel  Cornell,  Esq.,  receive  said  donations  of  said  committee,  and  trnsmit 


284  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAKD  [1774. 

the  value  thereof,  in  fat  sheep,  to  the  selectmen  of  the  town  of  Boston,  for  the  use, 
aforesaid. 

Toted,  that  the  foregoing  proceedings  be  pnbHshed  in  the  Providence  Gazette. 
A  true  copy  :  GIDEON  HARRIS, 

Town  Clerk. 

Proceedings  of  the  People  of  Providence,  in  Town  Meeting. 

At  a  town  meeting,  hold  at  Providence,  Rhode  Island,  on  the  21st  day  of  Novem, 
ber,  17  74,  A.  M.,  called  by  warrant,  to  order  a  town  tax,  &c.  Nicholas  Brown 
Esq.,  moderator. 

Voted,  that  the  committee  of  correspondence,  for  this  town,  be  hereby  empowered 
to  receive  of  the  town  treasury  the  sum  of  £125,  lawful  money,  and  to  transmit  the 
same  to  the  committee  in  the  town  of  Boston,  for  receiving  donations  for  the  dis- 
tressed inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Boston  and  Charlestown  ;  and  the  treasurer  is 
hereby  ordered  to  pay  said  sum  out  of  the  first  money  he  shall  receive  of  the  tax  now 
ordered.  JAMES  ANGELL, 

Town  Clerk. 

Proceedings  of  the   Committee  of  Correspondence  of  the  Town  of 
Providence. 

Providence,  November  24,  1774. 

The  committee  of  correspondence  of  the  town  of  Providence,  having  met  together 
this  day,  and  taking  under  consideration  an  article  in  the  association,  made  at  the 
late  American  Continental  Congress,  relative  to  improving  the  breed  of  sheep,  in- 
creasing their  number,  kiUing  them  as  sparingly  as  may  be  ;  especially,  those  of  the 
most  profitable  kind,  and  not  exporting  them  to  the  West  Indies,  do  earnestly  en- 
treat and  exhort  all  persons  within  this  town,  to  conform  themselves  exactly  to  this 
good  and  wise  regulation  ;  as  it  will  have  a  manifest  tendency  to  bring  about  and 
secure  that  freedom  and  hajipiness  which  we  so  greatly  contend  for. 

We  would  observe,  in  particular,  that  those  who  shall  so  fer  act  in  opposition  to 
the  united  sentiments  of  all  America,  collected  in  general  congress,  as  to  kill  any 
lambs,  or  young  sheep,  without  the  most  evident  necessity,  or  export  any  sheep  at  all 
to  the  West  Indies,  ought  to  be  discountenaced,  as  persons  who  counteract  the  gen- 
eral welfare. 

Signed  by  order,  and  in  behalf  of  the  committee,    JAMES  ANGELL,  Clerk. 

Providence  {Rhode  Island),  Committee.    Proceedings  of  the  People 
of  Providence,  in  Toivn  Meeting. 

At  a  town  meeting,  held  at  Providence,  Rhode  Island,  on  the  1 7th  day  of  Decem- 
ber, A.  D.  1774,  by  adjournment  and  warrant.     Nicholas  Brown,  Esq.,  moderator. 

Voted,  that  the  following  persons,  to  wit :   William  Earle,  Nicholas  Cooke,  Esq. 
Benjamin  Man,  Zephaniah  Andi-ews,  Ai-thur  Fenner,  Jr.,  Ambrose  Page,  Nicholas 


1774.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  285 

Power,  George  Corlis,  Paul  Allen,  David  Lawrence,  Joscpli  Russell,  Job  Sweeting 
Joseph  Bucklin,  Jonathan  Arnold,  Bernard  Eddy,  Aaron  Mason,  Joseph  Brown  and 
Nathaniel  Wheaton,  together  with  the  present  committee  of  correspondence  of  this 
town,  be,  and  hereby  are,  appointed  a  committee  of  inspection,  to  see  that  the  associa- 
tion entered  into  by  the  general  Continental  Congress,  be  strictly  adhered  to,  by  all 
persons  within  this  town,  agreeably  to  the  eleventh  article  of  said  association ;  and 
that  any  seven  of  them  make  a  quorum,  who  are'  to  meet  monthly,  to  wit :  on  the 
thn-d  Wednesday  of  every  month,  at  the  council  chamber,  at  five  of  the  clock,  P.  M.  • 
and  that  the  town  sergeant  duly  attend  said  committee  ;  and  that  all  the  proceed- 
inss  of  said  committee,  be  lodged  on  file  at  the  town  clerk's  office. 


Proceedings  of  the  People  of  Providence,  in  Town  Meeting. 

Providence,  December  24,  1774. 

At  a  town  meeting,  held  here,  on  Saturday  last,  the  following  gentlemen  were  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  see  that  the  association  agreement,  entered  into  at  the  late 
Continental  Congress,  be  faithfully  and  inviolably  adhered  to,  in  this  town,  viz. : 

WiUiam  Earle,  Nicholas  Cooke,  Benjamin  Man,  Zephaniah  Andrews,  Arthur  Fen- 
ner,  Jr.,  Ambrose  Page,  Nicholas  Power,  George  Corlis,  Paul  Allen,  David  Law- 
rence, Joseph  Eussell,  Job  Sweeting,  Joseph  Bucklin,  Jonathan  Arnold,  Bernard 
Eddy,  Aaron  Mason,  Joseph  Brown  and  Nathaniel  Wheaton.  The  committee  is  to 
meet  on  the  third  Wednesday,  of  every  month,  at  the  council  chamber. 

A  committee  was  last  week  appointed  at  Newport,  for  the  same  purpose. 

Report    of  the    Committee   of   Inspection,  for    the    Town   of 
Providence. 

At  a  meeting  of  the  committee  of  inspection,  for  the  town  of  Providence,  ap- 
pointed to  observe  the  conduct  of  all  pei-sons,  touching  the  association  entered  into 
by  the  American  Continental  Congress,  held  at  Philadelphia,  the  5th  day  of  Sep- 
tember, 1774: — 

We,  the  committee  of  inspection,  for  the  town  of  Providence,  with  a  vicAv  of  pre- 
venting as  much  as  we  can,  any  violation  or  departure  from  the  agreement  and  as- 
sociation of  the  Continental  Congress,  aforesaid,  have  agreed  to  represent  to  the  in- 
habitants of  this  town,  in  brief,  such  particulars  contained  in  the  said  association,  as 
will  be  incumbent  on  them  all  to  observe. 

1.  That  they  do  not  import  any  goods  from  Great  Britain  or  Ireland,  or  from 
any  other  place,  any  such  goods  as  shall  have  been  exported  from  Great  Bi'itain  or 
Ireland  ;  nor  any  India  tea  from  any  part  of  the  world  ;  nor  any  molasses,  syrups 
paneles,  coffee  or  pimento,  from  the  British  ^plantations,  or  from  Dominica  ;  nor  wines 
Irom  Madeira,  or  the  Western  Islands  ;  nor  foreign  indigo. 

2.  That  they  do  not  import  or  purchase  any  slave  imported  since  the  1st  of  De- 
cember inst.,  and  that  they  wholly  discontinue  the  slave  trade. 

3.  That  they  do  not  purchase  or  use  any  tea,  imported  on  account  of  the  East 
India  Company,  or  any  on  which  a  duty  has  been  paid ;  and  that,  from  and  after 
the  1st  day  of  March  next,  they  do  not  purchase  or  use  any  East  India  tea' 
whatever. 


286  RECORDS    OP    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

4.  That  on  the  10th  day  of  September  next,  they  suspend  all  exportation  td 
Great  Britain,  Ireland  and  the  West  Indies ;  except  rice,  to  Europe. 

5.  That  such  merchants  as  have  sent  orders  to  Great  Britain  or  Ireland,  for 
goods,  do  immediately  countermand  the  same,  according  to  the  fifth  article  of  the 
association  agreement. 

6.  That  owners  of  vessels  give  orders  to  their  captains  or  masters  not  to  receive 
on  board  any  goods  prohibited  by  the  non-importation  agreement. 

7.  That  they  use  their  utmost  endeavors,  to  improve  the  breed  of  sheep,  and  in^ 
crease  their  number  to  the  greatest  extent ;  that,  to  that  end,  they  kill  them  as 
sparingly  as  may  be,  especially  those  of  the  most  profitable  kind ;  that  they  do  not 
export  any  to  the  West  Indies,  or  elsewhere ;  and  those  who  are,  or  may  be,  over- 
stocked with,  or  can  conveniently  spare  any  sheep,  do  dispose  of  them  to  their 
neighbors  ;  especially  the  poorer  sort,  on  moderate  terms. 

8.  That  they  encourage  frugality,  economy  and  industry ;  and  promote  agriculture, 
arts  and  the  manufactures  of  this  country  ;  especially,  that  of  wool ;  discountenance 
and  discourage  horse-racing,  gaming,  cock-fighting,  expensive  shows,  plays  and 
diversions;  that,  on  the  death  of  a  friend,  they  do  not  go  into  any  fuither  mourning 
than  a  black  crape  or  ribbon,  on  the  arm  or  hat,  for  gentlemen ;  and  a  black  ribbon 
OT.'  necklace,  for  ladies;  and  discontinue  the  giving  of  gloves  and  scarfs,  at  funerals. 

9.  That  such  as  are  venders  of  goods  or  merchandize,  will  not  take  advantage  of 
the  scarcity  of  goods  that  may  be  occasioned  by  the  association  ;  but  that  they  sell 
the  same  at  the  rates  they  have  been  respectively  accustomed  to  do,  for  twelve 
months  past ;  and  if  any  vender  of  goods  or  merchandize,  shall  sell  any  such  goods 
on  higher  terms,  or  shall  in  any  manner,  or  by  any  device,  whatsoever,  violate  or 
depart  from  this  agreement,  no  person  ought,  nor  will  any  of  us  deal  with  such 
person,  or  his  or  her  factor,  or  agent,  at  any  time  thereafter,  for  any  commodity, 
whatever. 

10.  That  any  goods  or  merchandize,  imported  after  the  1st  day  of  December, 
and  before  the  1st  day  of  February,  be,  at  the  election  of  the  owner,  either  re-shipped, 
or  delivered  to  the  committee,  to  be  stored  or  sold,  agi-eeably  to  the  tenth  ai'ticle  of 
the  association. 

11.  That  all  manufoctures  of  this  country  be  sold  at  reasonable  rates,  so  that  no 
undue  advantage  be  taken  of  a  future  scarcity  of  goods. 

In  all  and  every  of  which  matters,  we  request  all  persons  in  this  town,  to  yield 
the  strictest  conformity  ;  and  in  general,  a  full  observance  of  every  thing  at  large, 
in  the  proceedings  of  the  congress  ;  as  they  would  avoid  such  contempt  and  incon*. 
venience,  as  otherwise  they  would  incur ;  recommending  a  frequent  perusal  of  the 
said  proceedings,  tq  the  end  that  they  may  fully  know  their  duty  with  respect  to 
said  agreement  entered  into,  as  a  great  means  for  extricating  this  country  from  im- 
pending ruin  and  slavery. 

And  we  earnestly  request  all  persons,  both  in  town  and  country,  who  deal  or  trade 
in  this  place,  and  all  othei's,  to  give  us  information  of  the  names  of  such  as  shall 
violate  any  part  of  the  association,  that  they  may  meet  with  such  discouragement  as 
the  congress  have  directed. 

Voted,  that  all  persons,  who  shall  in  future,  bring  goods  into  this  town,  either  by 
land  or  water,  shall  produce  a  certificate  from  the  committee  of  inspection,  for  the 
place  from  whence  the  goods  may  be  brought,  of  their  being  imported  before  the 
1st  day  of  December ;  or,  that  they  were  bought  at  vendue,  according  to  the  regu- 
lation of  the  American  Congress,  as  contained  in  the  tenth  article. 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  287 

Voted,  that  tlie  chairman  of  this  committee,  or  any  three  of  the  members,  be  em- 
powered to  give  certificates  to  any  person  who  shall  apply,  for  goods  imported  into 
this  town,  a<];reeably  to  the  regulations  of  the  congress. 

NICHOLAS  COOKP; 

Chairman. 


CORRESPONDENCE  AVITH,  AND  PROCEEDINGS  OF,  THE  COLONIES, 
RELATIVE  TO  THE  ENCROACHMENTS  OF  PARLIAMENT,  ON 
THEIR  LIBERTIES. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly  of  New  York. 

City  of  New  York,  20th  January,  1774. 

The  House,  according  to  order,  resolved  itself  into  a  committee  of  the  whole 
House,  upon  the  letters  received  from  the  speakers  of  several  of  the  Houses  of 
Assembly  on  this  continent,  enclosing  the  resolutions  entered  into  by  them  re- 
spectively. 

After  some  time  sj^ent  therein,  Mr.  Speaker  resumed  the  chair,  and  Col.  Seaman 
reported  from  the  committee,  that  they  had  directed  him  to  report  to  the  House  the 
following  resolutions,  to  wit : 

Resolved,  nemine  contradlcente^  that  it  is  the  opinion  of  this  committee,  that  a  stand- 
ing committee  of  correspondence  and  inquiry  be  appointed,  to  consist  of  the  following 
persons,  to  wit :  John  Cruger,  Esq.,  speaker ;  James  DeLancey,  James  Jauncey,  Jacob 
Walton,  Benjamin  Seaman,  Isaac  Wilkins,  Frederic  Phillips,  Daniel  Kissam,  Zebulon 
Seaman,  John  Rapalje,  Simon  Boemm,  John  Denoyellis  and  George  Clinton,  Esqs. 
or  any  seven  of  them,  whose  business  it  shall  bo,  to  obtain  the  most  early  and  au- 
thentic intelligence  of  all  such  acts  and  resolutions  of  the  British  Parliament,  or  pro- 
ceedings of  the  administration,  as  do,  or  may  relate  to,  or  affect,  the  liberties  and 
privileges  of  His  Majesty's  subjects  in  the  British  colonies  in  America  ;  and  to  keep 
up  and  maintain  a  correspondence  and  communication  with  our  sister  colonies,  re- 
specting these  important  considerations ;  and  the  result  of  their  proceedings  to  lay 
before  the  House. 

Resolved  also,  nemine  contradicenle,  that  it  is  the  opinion  of  this  committee,  that 
the  speaker  of  this  House  prepare  draughts  of  letters  to  the  speakers  of  the  Assem- 
blies on  the  continent  of  America,  enclosing  these  resolutions,  and  requesting 
them  to  lay  the  same  before  their  respective  Assemblies ;  and  that  he  do  return 
the  thanks  of  this  House  to  the  Burgesses  of  Virginia,  for  their  early  attention  to 
the  liberties  of  America. 

Which  resolutions,  having  been  read  a  second  time, — 

Resolved,  that  this  House  doth  agree  with  the  committee  in  the  said  resolutions. 
By  order  of  the  General  Assembly,  for  the  colony  of  New  York. 

GERARD  BANCKER, 

Assistant  Clerk. 


288  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  1774. 


Proceedings  of  the  House  of  Assemhhj  of  New  Jersey. 

House  of  Assembly,  ) 

New  Jersey.  Tuesday,  February  8th,  1774.      j 

The  House  resumed  the  consideration  of  the  several  letters  and  resolutions  of  the 
other  Houses  of  Assembly,  on  the  subject  matter  of  the  common  rights  and  liberties 
of  the  colonies.     And — 

The  House  resolved  itself  into  a  committee  of  the  Avhole  House,  upon  the  mat- 
ters aforesaid ;  and  after  some  time  spent  therein,  Mr.  Speaker  resumed  the  chair  ; 
and  Mr.  Crane,  chairman  of  the  committee,  by  order  of  the  House,  reported  the 
resolutions  of  the  committee,  as  follows,  viz. : 

1.  Resolved,  that  it  is  the  opinion  of  this  committee,  that  the  House  should 
heartily  accept  of  the  invitation  to  a  mutual  correspondence  and  intercourse  with 
our  sister  colonies. 

To  which,  the  House  agreed  nemine  contradicenie, 

2.  Resolved,  that  it  is  the  opinion  of  this  committee,  that  a  standing  committee  of 
correspondence  and  inquiry,  be  appointed,  to  consist  of  the  following  persons,  to 
wit :  James  Kinsey,  Stephen  Crane,  Hendrick  Fisher,  Samuel  Tucker,  John  Weth- 
erill,  Robert  Friend  Price,  John  Hinchman,  John  Mehelm  and  Edward  Taylor, 
Esqs.,  or  any  five  of  them,  whose  business  it  shall  be,  to  obtain  the  most  early  and 
authentic  intelligence  of  all  acts  and  resolutions  of  the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain, 
or  the  proceedings  of  the  administration,  that  may  have  any  relation  to,  or  may 
affect  the  liberties  and  privileges  of  His  Majesty's  subjects  in  the  British  colonies  in 
America ;  and  to  keep  up  and  maintain  a  correspondence  and  communication  with 
our  sister  colonies,  i-especting  those  important  considerations ;  and  that  they  do  oc- 
casionally lay  their  proceedings  before  the  House. 

To  which,  the  Hou$e  agreed  nemine  contradicenfe. 

3.  Resolved,  that  it  is  the  opinion  of  this  committee,  that  the  said  committee  of 
correspondence  do  write  letters  to  the  several  speakers  of  the  Assemblies  on  the  con- 
tinent of  America,  enclosing  these  resolutions,  and  requesting  them  to  lay  the  same 
before  their  respective  Assemblies ;  and  that  they  do  return  the  thanks  of  the  House 
to  the  Burgesses  of  Virginia,  for  their  early  attention  to  the  liberties  of  America. 

To  which,  the  House  agreed  nemine  contradicenfe. 

A  true  copy,  from  the  journals.  RICHARD  S:\nTH, 

Clerk  of  the  Assembly. 


John  Cruger,  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  New 
York,  to  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Deputies, 
of  Rhode  Island. 

New  York,  March  1st,  1774. 
Sir : — Your  letter,  of  the  1 5th  of  INIay  last,  together  with  the  resolves  of  the  Honorable 
House  of  Deputies,  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  which  they  entered  into  on  the  7th 
May  last,  enclosed  therein,  I  laid  before  the  General  Assembly,  of  this  colony,  at  the 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  289 

opening  of  the  present  session  ;  who  being  sensible  that  they  arc  of  the  utmost  im- 
portance to  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  American  colonies,  came  to  the  enclosed 
resolutions,  which  they  directed  me  to  communicate  to  you  ;  and  to  desire  that  you 
will  lay  them  before  your  House  of  Deputies,  at  their  next  meeting. 

I  am.  sir,  &c,,  &c., 
JOHN  CRUGER,  Speaker. 
To  the  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Esq.,  ■» 

Speaker  of  the  House  of  Deputies,  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  j 

The  Committee  of  Correspondence^  of  New  Jersey,  to  the  Speaker 
of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Burlington,  March  16th,  1774. 
Sir : — The  representatives  of  this  colony  having  received  a  letter  from  the  truly 
patriotic  House  of  Burgesses,  in  Virginia,  enclosing  their  resolutions  to  obtain  the 
most  early  intelligence  of  all  such  acts  and  resolutions  of  the  Bi-itish  Parliament,  or 
proceedings  of  the  administration,  as  may  relate  to,  or  ntfect  the  British  colonies 
and  to  maintain  a  mutual  correspondence  and  communication,  concerning  these  im- 
portant considerations,  have  come  to  the  enclosed  resolutions,  which  we  have  the 
honor  to  send  you. 

The  utility  of  the  plan  proposed,  at  a  time  when  claims  are  made  on  the  colonies 
to  which  they  cannot  give  their  assent,  appeared  so  evident,  that  they  unanimously 
and  cheerfully  adopted  the  design  of  uniting  in  every  prudent  and  constitutional 
measure,  necessary  to  defeat  every  attempt  to  deprive  them  of  the  inestimable  rights 
and  privileges  of  British  subjects. 

The  committee  of  correspondence  request  the  favor  of  you,  to  direct  any  intelli- 
gence which  your  Honorable  House  may  conceive  necessary,  to  be  communicated  to 
the  colony,  to  James  Klnsey,  Esq.,  in  the  city  of  Burlington,  New  Jersey. 

AVe  are,  with  great  respect,  &c.,  &c., 
J.  KINSEY,  J.  WETHERILL, 

SAM.  TUCKER,  JN.  HINCHMAN. 

HEND'K  FISHER, 
The  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Esq. 

The  Committee  of  Correspondence,  of  Westerly,  to  the  Committee 
of  Correspondence,  at  Boston. 

Westerly,  May  19,  1774. 

Gentlemen : — With  mingled  concern  and  indignation,  the  committee  of  corres- 
pondence for  this  town,  have  seen  an  act  for  blocking  up  the  harbor  of  Boston. 

Rome,  designing  to  destroy  the  city  of  Carthage,  barbarously  required  of  the  Car- 
thagenians  that  they  should  forsake  their  city,  and  remove  their  habitations  twelve 
miles  from  the  sea.  The  consideration  of  the  inveterate  hatred,  occasioned  by  the 
long  and  bloody  wars  which  had  subsisted  between  Rome  and  Carthage ;  the  re- 
membrance of  several  hundred  thousand  Romans  killed  in  those  wars,  and  several 
hundred  towns  plundered  by  the  Carthagejiians,  are  some  excuse  for  the  Roman 

VOL.  VII.         37 


290  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1774. 

severity ;  but  the  cruel  and  unnatural  treatment  which  the  town  of  Boston  has  re- 
ceived from  Great  Britain,  will  admit  of  no  palliation. 

The  metropolis  of  a  most  affectionate  and  loyal  colony,  which  in  all  the  wars  of 
Great  Britain  hath  gloriously  supported  the  British  interest  in  America  ;  and  even 
by  their  wise  and  vigorous  efforts  made  a  conquest  which  gave  peace  to  Europe,  is 
now  threatened  with  destruction,  for  no  other  cause,  but  because  the  people  have 
bravely  determined  not  to  become  slaves. 

We  have  long  felt  for  the  town  of  Boston ;  we  heartily  sympathize  with  our  breth_ 
ren  upon  this  alarming  occasion  ;  we  are  much  pleased  with  the  noble  firmness  with 
which  this  cruel  edict  is  received  in  Boston. 

We  highly  approve  the  measures  taken  by  the  town  ;  and  are  entirely  of  opinion, 
that  the  joint  resolution  of  the  colonies,  to  stop  all  importations  from,  and  exporta- 
tions  to,  Great  Britain  and  the  West  Indies,  uniil  the  act  is  repealed,  will  infallibly 
produce  the  desired  effect. 

The  country  which  we  possess,  blessed  be  God !  affords  every  necessary  of  life. 
We  are  morally  certain,  that,  with  the  common  blessings  of  Heaven  upon  our  in- 
dustry and  frugality,  we  can  live  comfortably,  without  importing  a  single  article 
from  Great  Britain  or  the  West  Indies ;  and  we  are  equally  certain,  that  neither 
England  nor  the  West  Indies  can  subsist  long  without  us ;  their  own  preservation, 
therefore,  will  compel  them  to  do  us  justice. 

This  horrid  attack  upon  the  town  of  Boston,  we  consider  not  as  an  attempt  upon 
that  town  singly,  but  upon  the  whole  continent. 

We  are  therefore,  determined  to  use  our  whole  influence  for  the  support  of  the 
town  of  Boston,  in  the  same  manner  as  if  the  attack  had  been  made  on  the  metrop- 
olis of  this  colony ;  and  we  doubt  not  but  the  other  colonies  will  consider  this  arbi- 
trary and  tyrannical  edict  in  the  SBme  light,  and  heartily  unite  with  the  friends  of 
liberty  in  Boston,  in  support  of  the  common  cause. 

That  infinite  Avisdom  may  direct  and  preserve  all  the  colonies,  is  the  ardent 
prayer  of,  &c.,  &c. 

The  Committee  of  Correspondence  of  Newport,  to  the  Committee 
of  Correspondence  of  Boston. 

Newport,  May  20th,  1774. 
Gentlemen : — Your  letters,  together  with  one  from  Mr.  Adams,  upon  the  late 
most  alarming  occasion  of  shutting  up  the  port  of  Boston,  was  considered  in  a  full 
meeting  of  the  freemen  of  the  town,  legally  assembled  this  day ;  and  the  enclosed 
resolutions  entered  into,  with  not  more  than  two  or  three  dissenting  voices. 

AVe  have  no  doubt  but  an  hearty  union  of  the  colonies  in  the  measures  necessary 
to  be  taken  in  this  important  crisis,  will  open  the  eyes  of  our  fellow  subjects  in  Great 
Britain,  and  operate  effectually  to  the  redress  of  the  grievances  of  the  colonies. 

We  deplore  the  present  unhappy  situation  of  our  brethren  in  Boston,  and  assure 
you  that  every  consolation  and  relief  in  the  power  of  Newport,  may  be  expected  and 
depended  upon.  We  are,  gentlemen,  &c.,  &c., 

Signed  by—  JOHN  COLLINS,  AVILLIAM  VERNON, 

SAMUEL  FOWLER,      HENRY  WARD, 

Committee  of  Correspondence. 
To  the  Committee  of  Correspondence,  of  Boston. 


1774.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  291 


The  Committee  of  Correspondence^  of  Boston,  to  the  Committee 
of  Correspondence,  of  Newport. 

Boston,  May—,  1774. 

Gentlemen  : — We  have  just  received  the  copy  of  an  act  of  the  British  Parhament, 
passed  the  present  session,  whereby  the  town  of  Boston  is  treated  in  a  manner  the 
most  ignominious  and  unjust. 

The  ParHament  have  taken  upon  them,  from  the  representation  of  our  Governor, 
and  other  persons,  inimical  to,  and  deeply  prejudiced  against  the  inhabitants,  to  try, 
condemn,  and  by  an  act,  to  punish  them  unheard ;  which  would  have  been  in  viola- 
tion of  natural  justice,  even  if  they  had  an  acknowledged  jurisdiction. 

They  have  ordered  our  port  to  be  entirely  shut  up,  leaving  us  barely  so  much  of 
the  means  of  subsistence,  as  to  keep  us  from  perishing  with  cold  and  hunger;  and 
it  is  said  that  a  fleet  of  British  ships  of  war  is  to  shut  up  our  harbor,  until  we  shall 
make  restitution  to  the  East  India  Company  for  the  loss  of  tlieir  tea,  Avhich  was  de- 
stroyed therein,  the  winter  past ;  obedience  paid  to  the  laws  and  authority  of  Great 
Britain,  and  the  revenue  is  duly  collected. 

This  act  fills  the  inhabitants  with  indignation.  The  more  thinking  part  of  those 
who  have  hitherto  been  in  favor  of  the  measures  of  the  British  government,  look 
upon  it  as  not  to  have  been  expected  even  from  a  barbarous  state. 

This  attack,  though  made  immediately  upon  us,  is  doubtless  designed  for  every 
other  colony,  who  will  not  surrender  their  sacred  rights  and  liberties  into  the  hands 
of  an  infamous  ministry. 

Now  therefore,  is  the  time,  when  all  should  be  united,  in  opposition  to  this  viola- 
tion of  the  liberties  of  all.     Their  grand  object  is  to  divide  the  colonies. 

We  are  well  informed,  that  another  bill  is  to  be  brought  into  Parliament,  to  dis- 
tinguish this  from  the  other  colonies,  by  repealing  some  of  the  acts  which  have  been 
complained  of,  and  ease  the  American  trade ;  but,  be  assured,  you  will  be  called 
upon  to  surrender  your  rights,  if  ever  tjiey  should  succeed  in  their  attempts  to  sup- 
press the  spirit  of  liberty  here. 

The  single  question  then  is,  whether  you  consider  Boston  as  now  suffering  in  the 
common  cause,  and  sensibly  feel  and  resent  the  injury  and  affront  offered  her  ?  If 
you  do  (and  we  cannot  believe  otherwise),  may  we  not,  from  your  approbation  of 
our  former  conduct  in  defence  of  American  hberty,  rely  on  your  suspending  your 
trade  Avith  Great  Britain,  at  least ;  which,  it  is  acknowledged,  will  be  a  great  but 
necessary  sacrifice  to  the  cause  of  hberty,  and  will  effectually  defeat  the  designs  of 
this  act  of  revenge.  If  this  should  be  done,  you  will  please  to  consider  it  will  be 
thought  a  voluntary  suffering,  greatly  short  of  what  we  are  called  to  endure  under 
the  immediate  hand  of  tyranny. 

We  desire  your  answer,  by  the  bearer ;  and  after  assuring  you,  that,  not  in  the 
least  intimidated  by  this  inhuman  treatment,  we  are  still  determined,  to  the  utmost 
of  our  abiUties,  to  maintain  the  rights  of  America, 
We  are,  gentlemen, 

Your  friends  and  fellow  countrj-men, 

WILLIAM  COOPER,  Clerk. 

Signed  by  order,  and  in  behalf  of  the  Committee  of  Correspondence,  for  Boston. 


292  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

N.  B.  The  above  was  -(vritten  witli  the  concurrence  of  the  committee  of  corres- 
pondence of  the  towns  of  Charlestown,  Cambridge,  Brookline,  Newton,  Roxburj', 
Dorchester,  Lexington  and  Lynn. 

The  Committee  of  Correspondence,  of  Virginia,  to  the  Committee 
of  Correspondence,  of  Rhode  Island. 

"Williamsburg,  Virginia,    ) 
May  28th,  1774.         j" 
Gentlemen  : — The  enclosed  papers  will  explain  to  you  our  present  political  state 
here,  with  respect  to  the  unhapp}'  dispute  with  our  mother  country. 

The  propriety  of  appointing  deputies  from  the  several  colonies  of  British  America, 
to  meet  annually  in  general  congress,  appears  to  be  a  measure  extremely  important  and 
extensively  useful,  as  it  tends  so  effectually  to  obtain  the  united  wisdom  of  the 
whole,  in  every  case  of  general  concern. 

We  are  desired  to  obtain  your  sentiments  on  the  subject,  which  you  will  be 
pleased  to  furnish  us  with.  Being  veiy  desirous  of  communicating  to  you,  the 
opinion  and  conduct  of  the  late  representatives  on  the  present  posture  of  American 
aflairs,  as  quickly  as  possible,  we  beg  leave  to  refer  you  to  a  future  letter,  in  which 
we  shall  more  fully  express  our  sentiments  on  these  subjects. 

"We  are,  with  great  respect,  gentlemen,  &c.,  &c., 

PEYTON  RANDOLPH, 
K  C.  NICHOLAS, 
DUDLEY  DIGGE, 
Committee  of  Correspondence,  &c. 
To  the  Committee  of  Correspondence,  for  Rhode  Island. 

Resolution  of  the  House   of  Representatives,  of  Massachusetts, 
relative  to  the  Closing  of  the  Port  of  Boston. 

Province  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  •> 

In  the  House  of  Representatives,  May  26th,  1774.  \ 
Resolved,  that  the  committee  of  correspondence  be,  and  they  hereby  are,  directed 
to  write  to  the  committees  of  correspondence  of  all  the  British  colonies  on  this  con- 
tinent, enclosing  a  copy  of  an  unprecedented  act  of  the  British  Parliament,  for 
shutting  up  the  port  of  Boston,  and  otherwise  punishing  the  inhabitants  of  that 
town;  and  desire  their  immediate  attention  to  an  act,  designed  to  suppress  the 
spirit  of  hberty  in  America. 
A  true  copy,  attest- 


1774.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  293 

The  Committee,  of  Correspondence  of  Massachusets,  to  the 
Committee  of  Correspondence,  of  Rhode  Island,  relative  to 
certain  -proceedings  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  that 
Colony. 

Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,    i 
May  28th,  1774.  | 

Gentlemen  : — By  order  of  tlie  House  of  Representatives,  of  this  Province,  we  en- 
close you  an  act  passed  in  the  late  session  of  the  British  Parliament,  entitled  "  An 
act  to  discontinue  in  such  manner,  and  for  such  time,  as  are  therein  mentioned,  the 
landing  and  discharging,  lading  or  shipping  of  goods,  wares  and  merchandize,  at  the 
town,  and  within  the  harbor  of  Boston,  in  the  Province  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  in 
North  America." 

We  think  that  the  archives  of  Constantinople  might  be  in  vain  searched  for  a  par^ 
allel.  To  reason  Upon  such  an  act,  would  be  idleness.  You  will  doubtless  judge 
every  British  American  colony  deeply  concerned  in  it,  and  contemplate  and  deter- 
mine upon  it,  accordingly.  We  are,  with  great  regard. 

Your  friends  and  fellow  countrymen, 
THOMAS  GUSHING,  THOS.  GARDNEPt, 

SAMUEL  ADAMS,  JOSEPH  HAWLEY, 

JAS.  WARREN,  WM.  HEATH, 

Committee  of  Correspondence,  &c. 
To  the  gentlemen  the  Committee  of  Correspondence,  appointed  by  the  Honorable 
House  of  Deputies,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island. 

^'  J  0  i  n    or    Die!" 

The  act  of  Parliament,  for  blocking  up  the  harbor  of  Boston,  in  order  to  reduce 
its  spirited  inhabitants  to  the  most  servile  and  mean  compliances  ever  attempted  to 
be  imposed  on  a  free  people,  is  allowed  to  be  infinitely  more  alarming  and  danger- 
ous to  our  common  liberties,  than  even  that  hydra,  the  stamp  act  (which  was  de- 
feated by  our  firmness  and  union),  and  must  be  i-ead  with  a  glowing  indignation,  by 
every  real  friend  of  freedom  in  Europe  and  America. 

Though  the  town  of  Boston  is  now  intended  to  be  made  a  victim  to  ministerial 
wrath  ;  yet  the  insult  and  indignity  offered  to  our  virtuous  brethren  in  that  capital, 
who  have  so  nobly  stood  as  a  barrier  against  slavery,  ought  to  be  viewed  in  the  same 
odious  light  as  a  direct,  hostile  invasion  of  every  province  on  the  continent,  Avhose 
inhabitants  are  now  loudly  called  upon,  by  interest,  honor  and  humanity,  to  stand 
forth,  with  firmness  and  unanimity,  for  the  relief,  support  and  animation  of  our 
brethren  in  the  insulted,  besieged  capital  of  Massachusetts  Bay. 

The  generals  of  despotism  are  now  drawing  the  lines  of  circumvallation  around 
our  bulwarks  of  liberty ;  and  nothing  but  unity,  resolution  and  perseverance,  can 
save  ourselves  and  posterity  from  what  is  worse  than  death — slavery  I 

Newport,  Rhode  Island,  May  30,  1774. 


294  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE  ISLAND  [1774. 


The  Committee  of  Correspondence^  of  Connecticut,  to  the  Com- 
mittee of  Correspondence  J  of  Boston. 

Hartford,  June  3d,  1774. 

Gentlemen : — The  lower  House  of  Assembly,  at  their  session,  at  this  place, 
which  closes  this  day,  came  into  sundry  resolutions,  relative  to  their  rights  and 
privileges ;  an  extract  from  which,  you  have  enclosed,  which  we  take  the  earliest 
opportunity  of  sending  you;  and  on  the  important  subject,  take  the  liberty  to  add,  as 
our  opinion,  that  a  congress  is  absolutely  necessary,  previous  to  almost  every  other 
measure.  Since,  as  the  injury  is  general,  the  mode  taken  for  redress,  ought  to  be 
commensurate ;  which  can  be,  by  no  means,  short  of  a  general  conference  and 
union. 

The  resolves  of  merchants,  in  any  individual  town  or  province,  however  gener- 
ously designed,  must  be  partial ;  and  when  considered  in  respect  to  the  whole  of  the 
colonies,  in  one  general  view,  at  best  defective  ;  while  on  the  other  hand,  every 
measure  recommended,  every  resolve  come  into,  by  the  whole  united  coh  nies,  must 
carry  weight  and  influence  on  the  minds  of  the  people,  and  efTectually  silence  those 
base  insinuations  which  our  enemies  aro  ever  ready  to  throw  out,  of  interested  mo- 
tives, sinister  views,  unfair  practices  and  the  like;  for  the  vile  purposes  of  sowing 
the  seeds  of  jealousy  between  the  colonies,  to  divide  and  render  abortive  all  our  de- 
signs in  favor  of  the  liberties  of  America. 

We  conceive  that  little,  or  nothing,  need  be  added  on  this  subject,  as  the  pro- 
priety and  utility  of  the  measure,  is  acknowledged  by  all.  The  time  and  place  seems 
only  to  be  fixed  on,  for  the  first ;  the  earlier,  consistent  with  having  the  principal 
provinces  notified  and  present,  the  better  ; — say  the  last  Wednesday  in  July,  or  first 
in  August ;  by  which  time,  all,  as  far  as  Virginia,  may  be  informed  of,  and  invited  to 
attend  it. 

For  the  place.  New  York  is  as  near  the  center ;  but  the  season  of  the  year  makes 
us  prefer  some  agreeable  town  to  a  city,  in  which  there  will  be  more  avocations,  be- 
ides  its  being  disagreeable  in  these  months.  Norwalk  or  Fairfield,  are  towns  in  which 
gentlemen  men  may  be  well  accommodated,  in  this  colony.  But  we  submit  this,  as 
well  as  the  time,  to  your  opinions,  which  we  shall  expect  as  soon  as  possible. 

We  conceive,  as  a  committee  of  correspondence  and  inquiry  are  appointed  in 
every  considerable  colony,  by  their  Assemblies,  they  are  the  proper  persons  to  at- 
tend, or  to  appoint  others  for  that  business. 

But  of  this,  the  gentlemen  in  your  colony  are  the  proper  judges;  and  we  hint 
this,  as  the  Assemblies  of  some  of  the  most  respectable  colonies  will  hardly  have  an 
opportunity  of  meeting  again  until  next  winter,  and  consequently  will  not  be  able  to 
appoint  in  any  season. 

We  have  only  to  add,  that  we  are  sensibly  affected  with  your  distressed  situation. 
We  are,  gentlemen. 

Your  friends,  and  fellow  countrymen, 

SILAS  DEAN, 
Signed  per  order  of  the  Committee  of  Correspondence,  for  Connecticut. 

P.  S.  Yours,  of  the  31st  ultimo,  in  reply  to  ours,  of  the  26th,  is  before  us.  The 
situation  of  the  town  of  Boston,  particularly  of  the  poor,  and  such  as  must  now  be 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  296 

deprived  of  employ  and  reduced  to  straits,  was  considered  by  both  Houses  of  As- 
sembly, and  a  resolution  come  into,  to  contribute  to  their  relief,  which  passed  both 
the  Houses  of  Assembly  ;  but  the  time  and  mode  for  carrying  it  into  execution,  is 
deferred,  until  they  hear  more  directly  from  you  ;  which  doubtless  they  will,  before 
their  next  meeting. 

To  the  Committee  of  Correspondence,  for  Boston. 

The  Committee  of  Correspondence,  of  Connecticut,  to  the  Com- 
mittee of  Correspondence,  of  Newport, 

Hartford,  June  4th,  1774. 
Gentlemen  : — You  have,  enclosed,  the  copy  of  our  letter  to  the  committee  of  cor- 
respondence, at  Boston,  of  even  date,  herewith. 

Confident  you  have  not  been  inattentive  to  the  present  alarming  proceedings,  re- 
specting the  colonies,  we  shall  not  detain  you,  by  attempting  to  suggest  any  thing 
new,  on  the  subject ;  but  to  desire,  if  you  are  of  the  same  sentiment  with  us,  in  the 
enclosed,  that  you  will  give  us  seasonable  notice  of  the  measures  you  take,  in  car- 
rying the  proposal  into  execution. 

We  are,  with  great  regard,  gentlemen. 

Your  friends,  and  fellow  countrymen, 

SILAS  DEAN, 
Signed  per  order  of  the  Committee  of  Correspondence,  for  Connecticut. 
To  the  Committee  of  Correspondence,  Newport,  Rhode  Island. 

The  Committee  of  Correspondence,  of  Massachusetts,  to  the  Com- 
mittee of  Correspondence,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  ■> 
Boston,  June  4,  1774.  | 

Gentlemen  : — We  take  the  earliest  opportunity  to  enclose  you  copies  of  two  bills 
brought  into  Parhament,  and  before  this  time,  probably  enacted,  which  we  have  just 
received  by  a  vessel,  in  thirty-six  days  from  Bristol. 

It  is  also  confidently  reported,  that  a  third  bill  is  to  be  brought  into  Parliament, 

for  the  better  regulating  the  governments  of  the  other  provinces  in  North  America  , 

Tliese  edicts,  cruel  and  oppressive  as  they  are,  we  consider  as  but  bare  specimens 

of  what  the  continent  are  to  expect  from  a  Parliament,  who  claim  a  right  to  make 

laws  binding  us  in  all  cases,  whatsoever. 

We  are  your  friends  and  fellow  countrymen, 
THOMAS  GUSHING,  JOSEPH  HAWLEY, 

SAMUEL  ADAMS,  THOMAS  GARDNER, 

Committee  of  Correspondence. 
To  the  gentlemen  the  Committee  of  Correspondence,  appointed  by  the  House  of 
Deputies,  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island. 


296  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE  ISLAND         [1774. 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  THE  SEVERAL  COLONIES,  WITH  RESO. 
LUTIONS  RELATIVE  TO  THE  MEETING  OF  A  GENERAL  CON- 
GRESS OF  THE  COLONIES  IN  PHILADELPHIA. 


The  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives^  of  Massachmetts^ 
to  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives^  of  Rhode 
Island. 

Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,    "i 
June  17th,  1774.  ) 

Sir : — Agreeably  to  the  directions  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  this 
Province,  I  have  the  honor  to  transmit  you  a  copy  of  certain  resolves  they  entered 
into,  in  their  present  session  ;  by  which,  you  will  perceive  that  it  is  their  opinion  tha* 
a  meeting  of  committees  from  the  several  colonies  on  this  continent,  is  highly  expe- 
dient and  necessary  ;  and  that  they  propose  that  such  meeting  be  at  the  city  of  Phil- 
adelphia, on  the  1st  day  of  September  next;  and  that,  for  the  purposes  mentioned 
in  said  resolves,  they  have  appointed  a  committee  of  five,  on  the  part  of  this 
Province,  whom  they  have  directed  to  repair  to  Philadelphia,  at  the  time  before- 
mentioned. 

This  appears  to  be  a  measure  absolutely  necessary  for  the  establishment  of  the 
rio-hts  and  liberties  of  the  colonies,  upon  a  just  and  solid  foundation  ;  and  for  the  re- 
storation of  union  and  harmony  between  both  countries. 

It  is  not  doubted,  but  it  will  be  agreed  to  in  your  colony,  if  it  should,  it  is  desired 
that  as  early  notice  as  possible  might  be  transmitted  to — 

Sir,  your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

THOMAS  CUSHING, 

Speaker. 
To  the  Honorable  the  Speaker  of  the  Honorable  House  of  Deputies,  of  the  colony 
of  Rhode  Island. 

P.  S.  If  this  letter  cannot  be  communicated  seasonably  to  your  Honorable  House, 
it  is  desired  it  may  be  communicated  to  their  committee  of  correspondence. 

Resolutions  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Massachusetts. 

Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  ^ 

In  the  House  of  Representatives,  June  17th,  1774.    ) 

This  House  having  duly  considered,  and  being  deeply  affected  with,  the  unhappy 
differences  which  have  long  subsisted  and  are  increasing  between  Great  Britain  and 
the  American  colonies, — 

Do  i-esolve,  that  a  meeting  of  committees  from  the  several  colonies  on  this  conti- 
nent, is  highly  expedient  and  necessary,  to  consult  upon  the  present  state  of  the 
colonies,  and  the  miseries  to  which  they  are,  and  must  be,  reduced  by  the  operation 
of  certain  acts  of  Parliament,  respecting  America  ;  and  to  deliberate  and  determine 
upon  wise  and  proper  measures,  to  be  by  them  recommended  to  all  the  colonies,  for 


1774.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  297 

the  recovery  and  establishment  of  their  just  rights  and  hberties,  civil  and  religious ; 
and  the  restoration  of  union  and  harmony  between  Great  Britain  and  the  colonies, 
most  ardently  desired  by  all  good  men. 

Therefore,  resolved  that  the  Hon.  James  Bowdoin,  Esq.,  the  Hon.  Thomas 
Cushing,  Esq.,  Mr.  Samuel  Adams,  John  Adams  and  Robert  Treat  Paine,  Esqs.,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  on  the  part  of  this  Province,  for  the 
purposes,  aforesaid ;  any  three  of  whom,  to  be  a  quorum,  to  meet  such  committees  or 
delegates  from  the  other  colonies,  as  have  been,  or  may  be,  appointed,  either  by 
their  respective  Houses  of  Burgesses,  or  Representatives,  or  by  convention ;  or  by 
the  committees  of  correspondence,  appointed  by  the  respective  Houses  of  Assembly, 
jn  the  city  of  Philadelphia  ;  or  any  other  place  that  shall  be  judged  most  suitable  by 
the  committees,  on  the  1st  day  of  September  next ;  and  that  the  speaker  of  the 
House  be  directed,  in  a  letter  to  the  speakers  of  the  Houses  of  Burgesses,  or  Repre- 
sentatives, in  the  several  colonies,  to  inform  them  of  the  substance  of  these  resolves. 
A  true  copy,  attest :  SAMUEL  ADAMS,  Clerk. 

The  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island, 
to  the  several  British  Colonies,  in  North  America. 

Newport,  June  20,  1774. 
Sir : — Agreeably  to  the  directions  of  the  General  Assembly,  I  have  the  honor  to 
enclose  you  a  copy  of  certain  resolutions  entered  into  by  them,  respecting  the  very 
alarming  situation  of  the  colonies. 

I  have  also  to  inform  you,  that,  upon  this  occasion,  the  Assembly  have  adjourned 
to  the  fourth  INIonday  in  August  next. 

I  am,  with  very  great  regard,  sir, 

Your  most  humble  servant, 
METCALFE  BOWLER,  Speaker.* 

The  Committee  of  Correspondence,  of  New   York,  to  the   Com- 
mittee of  Correspondence,  of  Connecticut. 

New  York,  June  24th,  1774. 

Gentlemen: — We  have  your  letter  of  June  4th,  before  us,  enclosing  the  resolves 
■of  your  Assembly,  and  a  letter  to  the  committee  of  correspondence,  of  Boston  ;  and 
we  agree  with  you,  that  at  this  alarming  juncture,  a  general  congress  of  deputies 
fi-om  the  several  colonies,  would  be  a  very  expedient  and  salutary  measure. 

Such  a  congress,  consisting  of  men  of  coolness,  prudence  and  understanding, 
would,  we  conceive,  be  the  best  means,  under  Providence,  of  restoring  that  jieace 
and  harmony  between  Great  Britain  and  her  colonies,  which  is  the  surest  foun- 
dation of  happiness  to  both ;  and  which  every  good  man,  every  well-wisher  to  his 
(country fought  to  labor  strenuously  to  establish. 

We  are  sorry,  therefore,  that  we  are  not  sufficiently  empowered  to  take  any  steps 
in  relation  to  so  salutary  a  measure ;  for  we  are  a  committee  of  correspondence, 

*  The  resolutions,  referred  to,  which  were  transpaitted  to  the  several  British  colonies,  will 
be  found  on  page  246 . 

VOL.  VII.  38 


298  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

and  cannot  consistently  with  good  order  and  jDropriety,  interfere  in  a  matter  of 
such  importance,  without  the  appointment  and  concurrence  of  our  whole  House  of 
Representatives. 

After  what  has  been  said,  it  would  be  needless  to  mention  any  thiuo-  about  the 
place  of  meeting  ;  only  this,  that,  if  the  other  colonies,  who  may  have  authority  for 
so  doing,  should  meet  in  congress,  in  or  near  this  city,  we  shall  most  gladly  and  wil- 
lingly assist  with  our  advice,  &c.,  if  necessary  ;  which,  circumstanced  as  we  are  at 
present,  is  all  we  are  enabled  to  do. 

We  should  be  glad,  however,  to  know  before  we  come  to  any  final  determination 
on  this  matter,  what  steps  will  be  taken  by  the  other  colonies,  who  are  in  the  same 
situation  with  us,  by  not  having  an  opportunity  of  knowing  the  sentiments  of  their 
Houses  of  Representatives,  when  the  measures  proposed  to  be  adopted  by  them, 
shall  be  communicated  to  us,  we  shall  be  better  able  to  judge  what  plan  will  be 
most  likely  to  procure  a  redress  of  om'  present  grievances,  and  promote  the  union 
and  prosperity  of  the  mother  country  and  the  colonies ;  and  we  expect  daily  to  re- 
ceive accounts  of  these  matters,  of  which  we  shall  send  you  the  most  early  intelh- 
gence.  We  are,  Avith  great  esteem,  gentlemen. 

Your  most  obedient  servants, 
JOHN  CRUGER,  JOHN  RAPALJE, 

JA.  JAUNCEY,  DANIEL  KISSAM, 

FRED'K  PHILIPSE,  ZEB.  SEAMAN,  late 

JA]\IES  DeLANCEY,  ZEB.  WILLIAMS, 

JACOB  WALTON,  BENJMIESI  SEAMAN, 

SBION  BOEMM,  Committee,  &c. 

To  the  Con^mittee  of  Correspondence,  of  the  General  Assembly,  of  Connecticut. 

John  Cruger,  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of 
New  York,  to  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives, of  Rhode  Island. 

New  York,  June  27,  1774. 

Sir : — Your  letter  of  the  20th  of  June,  enclosing  the  resolutions  of  your  House  of 
Representatives,  respecting  the  alarming  situation  of  the  colonies,  was  received  the 
day  after  our  committee  of  correspondence  broke  up,  and  the  members  returned  to 
the  country. 

The  enclosed  letter,  to  the  conunittee  of  correspondence,  of  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives, of  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  will  convey  to  you  their  sentiments  of  the 
propriety  of  a  general  congress,  and  of  the  power  wliich  they  conceive  given  to 
them,  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony. 

W^e  shall  doubtless  soon  receive  accounts  of  the  delibei-ations  of  the  colony  of 
Virginia  and  the  other  Southern  colonies,  on  these  important  matters,  when  we 
shall  again  call  together  our  committee,  and  communicate  to  you  their  resolutions 
thereon.  I  have  the  honor  to  be  with  great  regard,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  CRUGER. 

To  the  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Esq. 


1774.] 


AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


299 


Census  of  Rhode  Island,  taken  in  June,  1774  ;  as  published  in 
the  Providence  Gazette,  July  2,  1774. 

The  number  of  inhabitants  in  this  colony,  according  to  the  hsts  given  in  by  the 
several  towns,  at  the  late  session  of  Assembly,  is  as  follows : 


County  of  NeiL'port. 
Newport         .        .        .        . 
Portsmouth        -         -         - 
Jamestown     -        -        -        - 
IVIiddletown        -         .         - 
Tiverton         .        .        -        - 
Little  Compton  - 
NcAV  Shoreham 


Kings  County. 

9,209  North  Kingstown  -         -         -  2,472 

1,512  South  Ivingstown      -         -         -  2,835 

563  Westerly      -----  1,812 

881  Charlestown     -        -        -        -  1,821 

1,957  Exeter 1,864 

1,232  Richmond         -         .         -         -  1,257 

575  Hopkinton   -----  1,805 


15,929 

County  of  Kent 
County  of  Providence.  AVarwick  ... 

Providence       -        -        -        -       4,321  West  Greenwich  - 
Smithfield 2,888  East  Greenwich 


Scituate  - 
Glocester     - 
Cranston 
Cumberland 
Johnston  - 
North  Providence 


3,601  Coventry 

-  2,945 
1,834 

-  1,756 

1,031  Bristol     - 

-  [830  Warren 

Barrington 

19,206 


County  of  Bristol. 


13,866 

2,438 
1,764 
1,663 
2,023 

7,888 

1,209 
979 
601 

2,789 


Whites 
Indians 
Blacks 


Total 


54,435 
1,482 
3,761 

59,678 


Proceedings  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  New  Hampshire, 
July  21,  1774. 


Province  of  New  Hampshire. 

At  a  meeting  of  deputies,  appointed  by  the  several  towns,  in  this  province,  held  at 
Exeter,  in  the  county  of  Rockingham,  21st  of  July,  1774,  for  the  election  of  dele- 
gates, on  behalf  of  this  province,  to  join  the  general  congress  proposed. 

Present,  eighty-five  members. 

The  Hon.  John  Wentworth,  Esq.,  in  the  chair. 


300  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

It  being  moved  from  the  chair,  whether  it  was  expedient  to  send  delegates  on  the 
part  of  this  province,  to  the  general  congress, — 

Resolved  vmanimously,  that,  under  the  present  perplexed  situation  of  the  public 
affairs  of  the  colonies,  it  is  expedient  and  necessary,  to  send  such  delegates  to  the 
general  congress. 

Voted,  that  Col.  Nathaniel  Folsom  and  Major  John  Sullivan,  Esqs.,  be  appointed 
and  empowered,  as  delegates,  on  the  part  of  this  province,  to  attend  and  assist  in  the 
general  congress  of"  delegates  from  the  other  colonies,  at  such  time  and  place  as  may 
be  appointed,  to  devise,  consult  and  adopt  such  measures  as  may  have  the  most 
likely  tendency  to  extricate  the  colonies  from  their  present  difficulties  ;  to  secure  and 
perpetuate  their  rights,  liberties  and  privileges,  and  to  restore  that  peace,  harmony 
and  mutual  confidence,  which  once  happily  subsisted  between  the  parent  country, 
and  her  colonies. 

Voted,  that  the  £200,  lawful  money,  generously  contributed  by  the  several  towns, 
and  sent  by  their  respective  deputies,  agreeably  to  the  recommendation  of  the  mem- 
bers of  the  late  House  of  Representatives,  be  paid  to  the  treasurer  that  may  be  ap- 
pointed to  receive  the  same,  to  defray  the  expense  of  sending  the  delegates. 

A^oted,  that  John  Giddinge,  Esq.,  be  appointed  treasurer  to  receive  the  same 
money  or  any  other,  that  may  be  given  for  that  purpose ;  and  to  pay  the  same  to  the 
delegates,  and  take  their  receipts  therefor. 

Voted,  that  the  Hon.  John  Wentworth,  Esq.,  the  Hon.  Meseach  Weare,  Col.  Jo- 
siah  Bartlett,  Col.  Christopher  Toppau  and  John  Pickering,  Jr.,  Esqs.,  be  a  com- 
mittee, in  behalf  of  the  deputies  appointed  by  the  several  towns,  to  give  general 
instructions  to  the  delegates,  chosen  in  behalf  of  this  province ;  that  the  same  com- 
mittee be  invested  with  fuU  power,  by,  and  in  behalf  of,  the  deputies  present,  in  case 
one  or  both  the  delegates  elected,  should  be  providentially  hindered  from  going  to 
the  general  congress,  to  elect  other  delegate  or  delegates  in  his  or  their  room ; 
and  that  the  delegate  shall  account  with  the  committee,  for  the  money  received. 

Voted  unanimously,  that  the  deputies  recommend  it  to  their  respective  towns,  to 
take  into  consideration  the  distressed,  unhappy  condition  of  the  town  of  Boston,  and 
liberally  to  contribute  towards  the  relief  of  the  poor  of  that  town,  according  to  the 
noble  and  laudable  example  of  their  sister  colonics. 

Proceedings  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Pennsylvania. 

In  Assembly,  ^ 

Pennsylvania.  July  22d,  1774.     A.M.    ^ 

The  House  taking  into  their  most  serious  consideration,  the  unfortunate  differ- 
ences which  have  long  subsisted  between  Great  Britain  and  the  American  colonies, 
and  have  been  greatly  increased  by  the  operation  and  effects  of  divers  late  acts  of 
the  British  Parliament, — 

Resolved,  that  there  is  an  absolute  necessity  that  a  congress  of  deputies  from  the 
several  colonies,  be  held  as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be,  to  consult  together  upon 
the  present  unhappy  state  of  the  colonies;  and  to  form  and  adopt  a  plan  for  the 
purposes  of  obtaining  a  redress  of  American  grievances,  ascertaining  American 
rights  upon  the  most  sohd  and  constitutional  principles,  and  for  establishing  that 
union  and  harmony  between  Great  Britain  and  the  colonies,  which  is  indispensably 
necessary  to  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  both  ;  therefore— 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  301 

Resolved,  that  the  Hon.  Josej^h  Galloway,  speaker ;  Samuel  Rhoads,  Thomas 
lliffliu,  Charles  Humphreys,  John  Morton,  George  Ross  and  Edward  Biddle,  Esqs., 
be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  on  the  part  of  this  jwovince,  for 
the  purposes,  aforesaid  ;  and  that  they,  or  any  four  of  them,  do  meet  such  commits 
tees  or  delegates,  from  the  other  colonies,  as  have  been,  or  may  be,  appointed,  either 
by  their  respective  Houses  of  Representatives,  or  by  convention,  or  by  the  provin- 
cial or  colony  committees,  at  such  time  and  jjlace,  as  shall  be  generally  agreed  on 
by  such  committees  ;  and  that  the  speaker  of  this  House  be  directed,  in  a  letter  to 
the  speakers  of  the  Houses  of  Representatives,  of  the  other  colonies,  to  inform 
them  of  these  resolves. 

Extract  from  the  journals :  CHARLES  MOORE, 

Clerk  of  Assemblv. 


The  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Pennsylvania, 
to  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Rhode 
Island. 

Philadelphia,  July  24th,  1774. 
Sir : — By  order  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Pennsylvania,  I  have  the 
honor  to  enclose  a  copy  of  certain  resolutions  entered  into  by  them,  respecting  the 
present  alarming  state  of  the  colonies ;  and  appointing  a  committee,  to  meet  the 
committees  of  the  other  colonies,  in  congress. 

I  am,  with  great  respect,  sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  GALLOWAY,  Speaker. 
To  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island. 

The  Committee   of  Correspondence,  of  North  Carolina,  to  the 
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island. 

North  CaroUna,  28th  July,  1774. 
Sir  : — We  are  favored  with   your  letter   of  the  20th  of  June,  directed  to  the 
speaker  of  late  House  of  Assembly,  of  this  province. 

The  Governor,  some  time  before  we  had  notice  of  the  proceedings  of  the  British 
Parliament,  relative  to  the  town  of  Boston,  dissolved  the  Assembly  of  this  province, 
and  has  not  hitherto  thought  proper  to  convene  the  members,  who  have  been  since 
elected. 

We  are  now  endeavoring  to  procure  a  meeting  of  the  representatives  as  soon  as 
possible ;  and  doubt  not  but  they  will  agree  in  sentiment,  and  adopt  similar  resolu- 
tions with  your  Assembly.  We  are,  with  the  greatest  respect,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient  servants, 
JOHN  HARVEY,  WILL.  HOOPER, 

EDWARD  VAIL,  SAM'L  JOHNSTON, 

JOHN  ASHE,  JOSEPH  HEWES, 

Committee,  &c.,  &c. 
To  the  speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives  of  Rhode  Island. 


302  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1774. 


The  Committee  of  Correspondence,  of  Delaware,  to  the  Speaker 
of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Kewcastle-upou-Delaware,    ) 
August  2d,  1774.  \ 

Sir : — "We  are  ordered  by  the  representatives  of  the  freemen  of  the  government  of 
the  counties  of  Newcastle,  Kent  and  Sussex,  upon  Delaware,  who  assembled  here  yes- 
terday, at  the  request  of  the  said  freemen,  and  adjourned  until  this  day,  to  inform  you 
that  they  have  unanimously  appointed  Cffisar  Kodney,  Thomas  M'Kean  and  George 
Read,  Esqs.,  or  any  two  of  them,  dejiuties,  in  behalf  of  this  colony,  to  attend  at  the 
much  expected  congress,  for  the  British  colonies  at  Philadelphia,  on  the  first  Mon- 
day of  September  next,  or  at  such  other  time  and  place,  as  shall  be  generally 
agreed  on. 

As  the  time  and  place  agreed  upon,  have  been  proposed  by  many  of  the  other 
provinces,  we  hope  they  will  prove  agreeable. 

We  are,  sir,  with  the  utmost  regard,  the  committee  of  correspondence,  for  said 
govei-nment,  appointed  by  the  House  of  Assembly, — 

And  your  most  obedient,  humble  servants, 
CiESAR  RODNEY,  JNO.  M.  IQNLY, 

GEO.  READ,  THOS.  ROBINSON. 

THO.  M'KEAN, 
To  the  Honorable   the    Speaker  of  the  House  of  Assembly,    of  the  colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  to  be  communicated  to  the  Commit- 
tee of  Correspondence. 

The  Committee  of  Correspondence,  of  New  Hainpshire,  to  the 
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Province  of  New  Hampshire,    ^ 
August  8th,  1774.  ^ 

Sir  : — We  have  had,  some  time  since,  the  pleasure  of  receiving  your  favor  of  the 
20th  June,  containing  the  resolutions  of  your  colony,  upon  the  alarming  situation  of 
the  American  governments ;  and  have  now  the  satisfaction  to  enclose  you  the  pro- 
ceedings of  this  province,  upon  the  same  important  matters. 

From  the  unanimity  in  sentiments  and  measures,  which  prevail  in  aU  the  colonies, 
we  are  constrained  to  flatter  ourselves,  that  a  firm  and  steady  perseverance  therein, 
win  soon  work  out  our  political  salvation. 

We  are,  sir,  with  the  greatest  regard. 

Your  most  humble  servants, 

SA3IUEL  CUTTS. 
Signed  per  order  of  the  Committee  of  Correspondence,    } 
for  the  Province  of  New  Hampshire.  ) 

To  the  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Esq. 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  303 


Subscription  for   the  Relief  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Boston  and 
CharJestown,  in  the  town  of  East  Greenwich. 

East  Greenwich,  August  29,  1774. 
We,  the  subscribers,  inliabitants  of  the  town  of  East  (Greenwich,  in  the  colony  of 
Rhode  Island,  taking  into  the  most  serious  consideration  the  present  alarming  situa- 
tion of  our  brethren  in  the  towns  of  Boston  and  Charlestown,  in  the  Province  of  the 
Massachusetts  Bay,  occasioned  by  the  late  crixel,  mahguant  and  worse  than  savage 
acts  of  the  British  ParUament ;  and  whereas,  a  tame  submission  to  the  first  ap- 
proaches of  lawless  power,  will  undoubtedly  involve  this  extensive  continent  in  one 
scene  of  misery  and  servitude,  than  which,  a  glorious  death,  in  defence  of  our  un- 
questionable rights,  is  far  more  eligible  ;  convinced  likewise,  that  the  only  true 
glory  and  unfading  grandeur  of  the  British  monarch  consists  in  governing  his  ex- 
tensive empire  with  equal  and  impartial  laws,  founded  in  reason,  and  rendered 
sacred  by  the  wisdom  of  ages ;  and  that  every  attempt  to  impair  that  noble  constitu- 
tion, which  hath  ever  been  the  envy  and  terror  of  Europe,  constitutes  the  blackest 
treason — from  the  most  unfeigned  loyalty  to  our  sovereign — from  the  most  settled 
abhorrence  to  the  deep  laid  schemes  of  his  prime  minister,  whom  we  esteem  th^ 
most  determined  foe  to  royalty ;  and  from  an  ardent  love  to  our  country,  which 
nothing  but  death  can  abate,  we  do  promise  and  engage  to  pay,  by  the  1st  day  of 
October  next,  the  respective  sums  to  our  names  annexed,  to  James  Mitchell  Varnum, 
Esq. ;  Messrs.  Preserved  Pearce,  A.  Mumford  and  WiUiam  Pearce,  to  be  laid  out 
and  expended  in  such  articles  of  provisions,  for  our  said  distressed  brethren,  as  the 
majoi-ity  of  us  shall  agree  upon,  to  be  sent  to  the  committee  of  ways  and  means  for 
employing  the  poor  In  Boston,  by  the  first  conveyance. — Providence  Gazette. 

Declaration  of  Stephen  Arnold,  of  East   Greenwich ,  relative  to 
certain  tumultuous  proceedings,  in  the  Town  of  Providence. 

Providence,  September,  1774. 

At  2  o'clock,  in  the  morning,  on  Tuesday  last,  an  express  arrrived  in  this  town, 
from  East  Greenwich,  in  the  county  of  Kent,  with  advice  that  a  mob  was  raised, 
consisting  of  some  hundreds  of  people,  who  threatened,  and  were  hourly  expected 
to  come  and  destroy  said  town  of  East  Greenwich,  in  order  to  show  their  resent- 
ment of  the  injury  which  they  said  had  been  offered  to  Stej)hen  Arnold,  of  War- 
wick, Esq.,  one  of  the  justices  of  the  inferior  covn-t  of  common  pleas  In  that  county, 
who  had  been  charged  with  industriously  jiropagatlng  principles  unfriendly  to 
American  liberty,  and  had  been  hung  In  effigy,  by  some  of  the  people  at  East 
Greenwich. 

This  inteUigence  was  immediately  communicated  to  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, who  ordered  the  sheriff,  with  the  companies  of  Cadets  and  Light  Infantry  of 
this  town,  and  others  of  the  militia,  to  arm  themselves,  and  proceed  immediately  to 
East  Greenwich,  to  assist  the  sheriff  of  said  county  In  dispei'sing  said  mob. 

The  companies  of  militia  accordingly  armed,  marched  immediately,  and  arrived 
there  by  9  o'clock,  the  same  morning,  where  a  committee  was  appointed  and  sent  to 
the  mob,  about  two  miles  distant  from  the  town,  to  Avarn  them  of  the  bad  conse- 


304  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  1774. 

quences  of  their  unlawful  proceedings,  and  to  demand  some  of  the  principal  person  s 
among  them,  to  come  immediately  into  town,  and  settle  the  aflfair. 

Whereupon,  the  said  Stephen  Arnold,  Esq.,  and  some  others,  came  from  the  mob, 
and  met  the  militia  ;  and  a  great  number  of  peojile  convened  at  the  court  house, 
■where,  after  being  made  acquainted  with   their   resolute  determination,  he  signed 

the  following  declaration  and  confession: 

Confession. 

"  Whereas,  I,  the  subscriber,  having  lately  in  this  town,  received  great  indignity,  by 
being  hung  in  effigy,  by  some  evil  minded  persons,  to  me  unknown ;  and  from  many 
reports  which  have  been  circulated  in  the  country,  I  was  led  to  think  my  person  and 
family  unsafe  ;  and  being  actuated  by  the  motives  of  fear  and  resentment,  without 
maturely  considering  the  consequences,  have  been  concerned,  by  officiating  with 
diij^ers  people  of  this  country,  with  the  intention  of  repairing  to  this  town,  and  mak- 
ing a  declaration  of  that  right,  which  as  a  subject,  I  apprehended  I  was  entitled  to. 

And  whereas,  the  said  assembly,  was  unlawful,  which  hath  occasioned  much  fear 
and  distress  to  the  inhabitants  of  this  town  in  particular,  and  many  others,  in 
general ;  for  all  which,  I  do  hereby  express  my  hearty  sorrow,  and  wish  to  obtain 
the  favorable  opinion  of  this  public  assembly ;  especially,  as  I  am  a  friend  to  the 
liberty  of  my  country,  and  disapprove  of  those  measures  which  have  been  calculated 
to  tax  America,  without  her  consent.  STEPHEN  ARNOLD." 

"East  Greenwich,  September  13,  1774. 
P.  S.     I  do  further  declare,  that  I  will  discourage  to  the  utmost  of  my  power,  all 
such  unlawful  assemblies  for  the  future,  and  that  already  assembled  in  particular. — 
Providence  Gazette.  STEPHEN  ARNOLD." 

Samuel  Ward  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Philadelphia,  October  3,  1774. 

Sir: — We  should,  with  pleasure,  have  communicated  to  you,  the  proceedings  of  the 
congress  from  time  to  time,  but  the  resolution  to  let  nothing  transpire  without  expressi 
direction,  would  not  admit  it ;  but  we  may,  with  propriety,  we  beheve,  observe,  that 
from  the  resolutions  unanimously  come  into  by  the  congress,  upon  the  resolves  of  the 
county  of  Suffialk,  whicJi  were  immediately  pubhshed  with  those  resolves,  some  esti- 
mate may  be  formed  of  the  general  sentiments  of  the  congress. 

We  take  this  early  opportunity  of  acquainting  Your  Honor,  that  a  non-importa-. 
tion  from  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  is  agreed  upon,  to  take  place  the  1st  day  of 
December  next,  and  a  general  non-exportation  on  the  10th  day  of  September  next. 
Non-exportation  of  several  commodities  to  different  parts,  to  commence  immediately, 
or  very  soon,  is  under  consideration,  and  we  think  will  probably  be  resolved  upon. 

Whenever  any  measures  are  adopted,  the  communication  of  which,  will  either  give 
pleasure  to  the  colony,  or  promote  its  interest,  we  shall  (the  moment  we  are  at 
liberty,)  give  you  the  earliest  intelligence  of  them. 

The  magnitude  of  the  subjects  before  the  congress,  the  peculiar  circumstances  of 
delicacy  and  intricacy  in  which  they  are  involved,  the  danger  of  taking  a  false  step 
in  a  matter  of  such  vast  importance,  and  the  necessity  of  adopting  of  every  proper 
measure,  cannot  fail  to  lengthen  the  session. 

What  has  been  done,  we  hope  will  be  honored  with  the  approbation  of  the  colony., 


1774.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  305 

Much  still  remains  to  be  done ;  and  however  striking  the  ideas  of  our  friends  and 
connexions  at  home  may  be,  after  a  long  absence,  wo  shall  cheerfully  continue  hei-e 
as  long  as  the  service  of  our  country  requires  it ;  and  we  hope  foithfully  to  exert  our 
utmost  endeavors  in  this  arduous  undertaking  for  the  common  good  of  America. 
We  are,  with  regard, 

Your  Honor's  most  obedient,  and  most  humble  servants, 

SAM.  WARD. 
To  the  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.. 

P.  S.  When  the  above  was  written,  Mr.  Hopkins  was  expected  in  town ;  but 
not  being  yet  returned,  and  the  vessel  ready  to  sail,  I  am  forced  to  write  singly. 

Lord  Dartmouth  to  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Istand. 

Circular.]  Whitehall,  19th  October,  1774. 

Gentlemen : — His  Majesty  having  thought  fit,  by  his  order  in  Council,  this  day,  to 
prohibit  the  exjiortation  from  Great  Britain,  of  gunpowder,  *  «  *  *  * 
or  any  sort  of  arms  or  ammunition,  I  herewith  enclose  to  you  a  copy  of  the  order ; 
and  it  is  His  Majesty's  command,  that  you  do  take  the  most  effectual  measures  for 
arresting,  detaining  and  securing  any  *  *  *  gunpowder,  or  any  sorts  of 
arms  or  ammunition,  which  may  be  attempted  to  be  imported  into  the  province 
under  your  government,  unless  the  master  of  the  ship,  having  such  military  stores  on 
board,  shall  produce  a  license  from  His  Majesty,  or  the  Privy  Council,  for  the  ex- 
portation of  the  same,  from  some  of  the  ports  of  this  kingdom. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

DAPtTMOUTH. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

Lord  Dartmouth  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Istand. 

Circular.]  Whitehall,  November  2,  1774. 

Sir : — The  lords  commissioners  for  trade  and  plantations,  having  complained  that 
they  are  frequently  put  under  great  difficulties  from  the  Governors  of  His  Majesly's 
colonies  neglecting  to  transmit,  at  regular  periods,  returns  of  the  state  of  their  re- 
spective Councils,  I  am  commanded  by  the  King,  to  signify  to  you.  His  Majesty's 
pleasure,  that  you  do  regularly,  every  three  months,  or  oftener,  transmit  to  their 
lordships  a  list  of  the  names  of  the  Council  of  the  province  under  your  government ; 
noting  such  as  are  absent,  for  vphat  time  they  have  been  absent,  and  with  what  license. 
I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

DARTiAIOUTH. 

To  Governor  Wanton. 

Lord  Dartmouth  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Istand. 

Circular.]  ^^Tiitehall,  December  ^Q,  1774. 

Sir  : — Enclosed,  I  send  you,  by  His  Majesty's  commands,  printed  copies  of  His, 
Majesty's  most  gracious  speech  to  his  Parliament,  and  of  the  address  and  answer 
thereto,  which  were  passed  in  both  Houses,  by  a  very  great  majca"ity. 

VOL.  VII.         39 


306  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1774. 

The  declaration  which  His  Majesty  has  been  most  graciously  pleased  to  make,  of 
his  firm  and  steadfast  resolution  to  -withstand  every  attempt  to  weaken  or  impair  the 
authority  of  the  supreme  legislature  over  all  His  Majesty's  dominions  ;  the  I'esolution 
of  both  Houses,  to  support  those  great  constitutional  principles  by  which  His  Maj- 
esty's conduct  hath  been  governed,  and  their  entire  approbation  of  the  steps  His  Maj- 
esty has  taken,  for  carrying  into  execution  the  laws  passed  in  the  last  session,  will,  I 
trust,  have  the  efi'ect  to  remove  those  false  impressions  which  have  been  made  upon 
the  minds  of  His  Majesty's  subjects  in  America,  and  jKit  an  end  to  those  expecta- 
tions of  support  in  their  unwarrantable  pretensions,  which  have  been  held  forth  by 
artful  and  designing  men. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

DARTMOUTH. 

To  Governor  Wanton. 

Extract  of  a  letter  from  Captain  Wallace,  to  Vice  Admiral 
Graves^  dated  on  board  His  Majestfs  ship  Rose,  at  Neivport, 
Rhode  Island,  December  12,  1774. 

"  Yesterday  I  arrived  in  this  port,  with  His  Majesty's  ship  under  my  command, 
from  New  London,  on  a- cruise,  of  which  I  had  the  honor  to  acquaint  you,  the  8th. 
instant. 

Since  my  absence  from  tliis  place,  I  find  tlie  inhabitants  (they  say  here  of  Provi- 
dence) have  seized  upon  the  King's  cannon  that  was  upon  Fort  Island,  consisting  of 
six  twenty-four  pounders,  eighteen  eighteen-poundei-s,  fourteen  six-pounders  and  six 
four-pounders  (the  latter,  they  say,  formerl)-  belonged  to  a  jirovince  sloop  they  had 
here),  and  conveyed  them  to  Providence. 

A  procedure  so  extraordinary,  caused  me  to  wait  upon  the  Governor,  to  inquire 
of  him,  for  your  information,  why  .such  a  step  had  been  taken.  He  very  frankly 
told  me,  they  had  done  it  to  prevent  their  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  King,  or  any 
of  liis  servants ;  and  that  they  meant  to  make  use  of  them,  to  defend  themselves 
against  any  power  that  shall  offer  to  molest  them. 

I  then  mentioned,  if,  in  the  course  of  carrying  on  the  King's  service  here,  I 
should  ask  assistance,  whether  I  might  expect  any  from  him,  or  any  others  in  the 
government. 

He  answered,  as  to  himself,  he  had  no  power ;  and  in  respect  to  any  otlicr  part 
of  the  government  I  should  meet  with  nothing  but  opposition  and  difficulty.  So 
much  from  Governor  Wanton. 

Then  I  endeavored  to  get  the  best  information  of  what  they  were  at,  from  all 
quarters,  and  enclosed  I  send  it  to  you.  Among  some  of  their  votes,  you  will  find 
they  intend  to  procure  powder  and  ball  and  mihtary  stores  of  all  kinds,  whenever 
they  can  get  them." 


1775.]  AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  307 


[The  speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island,  received  the  fol. 
lowing  letter  from  Messrs.  Bollan,  Franklin  and  Lee,  three  of  the  colony  agents.] 

William  Bollan,  Benjamin  Franklin  and  Arthur  Lee,  Agents  in 
London  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  to  Metcalfe  Bowler, 
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives. 

London,  December  24,  1774. 
Sir : — This  is  just  to  inform  you,  that,  having  received  the  petition  of  the  General 
Congress,  to  the  King,  we  immechately  communicated  the  same  to  Lord  Dartmouth? 
secretary  of  state,  for  the  American  department,  as  the  regular  oflicial  method,  and 
that  by  which  only  we  could  have  expectation  of  obtaining  an  answer. 

His  Lordship  this  day  informed  us,  that  he  had  laid  the  same  before  the  King ; 
that  His  Majesty  had  been  pleased  to  receive  it  very  graciously,  and  to  say  it  was  of 
so  great  importance,  that  he  should,  as   soon  as  they  met,  lay  it  before  his  two 
Houses  of  Parliament.     We  can  only  add,  that — 
We  are,  Avith  great  respect,  sir, 

Your  most  obedient,  and  most  hmnble  servants, 
WILLIAM!  BOLLAN, 
BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN, 
ARTHUR  LEE. 
To  the  Honorable  the  (Speaker  of  the  lo\ver  House  of  Assembly,  of  the  colonj'  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence, 
on  the  22d  day  of  April,  1775. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Thomas  Freebody  and 
William  Greene,  and  Joshua  Babcock,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby,  appointed  a  committee  to  proportion  to  the  several 
towns  in  this  colony  two  thousand  five  hundred  pounds  of  the 
powder,  and  one  quarter  part  of  the  lead,  bullets  and  flints,  be-- 
longing  to  the  colony  ;   and  that  the  following  persons  be,  and 


308  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

hereby  are,  appointed  to  procure  and  receive  each  town's  pro- 
portion thereof,  to  wit  : 

For  Newport,  Mr.  Thomas  Freebody  ;  for  Providence,  Col. 
John  Mathewson  ;  for  Portsmouth,  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Esq.  ; 
for  Warwick,  Mr.  Samuel  Tillinghast ;  for  Westerly,  ]Mr.  Da- 
vid Maxson  ;  for  New  Shoreham,  the  town  treasurer  for  that 
town  ;  for  North  Kingstown,  Mr.  Benjamin  Davis  ;  for  South 
Kingstown,  William  Potter,  Esq.  ;  for  East  Greenwich,  Mr. 
Gideon  Mumford  ;  for  Jamestown,  the  town  treasurer  for  that 
town  ;  for  Smithfield,  Mr.  Arnold  Pain  ;  for  Scituate,  Col. 
Ezekiel  Cornell ;  for  Glocester,  Jonah  Steere,  Esq.  ;  for 
Charlestown,  Mr.  Joseph  Hoxsie  ;  for  West  Greenwich,  Mr. 
Nathaniel  Brown ;  for  Coventry,  Mr,  James  Waterman  ;  for 
Exeter,  John  Chapman,  Esq.  ;  for  Middletown,  Mr.  John  Bar- 
ker ;  for  Bristol,  Mr.  John  Howland  ;  for  Tiverton,  Capt. 
John  Cooke  ;  for  Little  Compton,  Mr.  George  Wood  ;  for 
Warren,  Mr.  Shubael  Burr  ;  for  Cumberland,  Mr.  John  Dex- 
ter ;  for  Richmond,  George  Webb,  Esq.  ;  for  Cranston,  Mr. 
Peter  Burlingame,  3d  ;  for  Hopkinton,  Mr.  Jesse  Maxson  ; 
for  Johnston,  Edward  Fenner,  Esq. ;  for  North  Providence,  Mr. 
Joseph  Oluey  ;   for  Barrington,  Mr.  Thomas  Allen. 

Whereas,  the  Company  of  the  Train  of  Artillery,  and  the 
Company  of  Fuziliers,  and  other  inhabitants  of  the  town  of 
Providence,  preferred  a  petition  unto  this  Assembly,  praying 
that  the  charter,  with  the  said  petition  presented,  for  uniting 
the  said  companies  into  one,  may  be  granted  ;  that  Daniel  Til- 
linghast, Esq.,  may  be  appointed  colonel;  Daniel  Hitchcock, 
Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel ;  John  Crane,  Esq.,  major  ;  and  Levi 
Hall,  captain  of  the  said  united  company ;  and  that  £40, 
lawful  money,  may  be  granted  to  the  said  company,  for  fur- 
nishing pioneers,  to  draw  the  cannon,  or  field  pieces  ;  and  the 
said  petition  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sam.e  be,  and  hereby  is, 
granted  ;  and  that  the  sum  of  £40,  therein  mentioned,  be  paid 
out  of  the  general  treasury  to,  and  be  under  the  direction  of, 
the  officers  of  the  said  company. 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  309 


An  Act  for  establishing  a  military  company,  by  the  name  of 
the  United  Company  of  the  Train  of  Artillery,  in  the  town 
of  Providence. 

Whereas,  the  committee  appointed  to  proportion  the  powder, 
&c.,  to  the  several  towns,  reported  the  following  proportion  to 
each  town,  to  wit : 

Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  to  proportion  the  Powder^  §x\, 
to  the  several  Towns. 

Lbs.  powder.    Lbs.  lead.     Flints.  Lbs.  powder.    Lbs.  lead.    I'liuts. 


Newport 

389 

623 

2492 

Coventry 

56 

90 

360 

Frovidence 

148 

237 

948 

Exeter     - 

60 

97 

388 

Warwick 

110 

190 

760 

Middletown  - 

81 

130 

520 

Portsmouth 

115 

184 

738 

Bristol      - 

68 

108 

422 

Westerly 

i\d 

110 

440 

Tiverton 

89 

142 

568 

New  iShoreliam 

31 

49 

196 

Little  Compton 

78 

125 

500 

North  Kingstown 

120 

180 

480 

Warren 

24 

38 

152 

South  Kingstown, 

2 -27 

372 

1488 

Cumberland      - 

44 

71 

284 

East  Greenwich,  - 

59 

95 

380 

Richmond     - 

44 

71 

284 

Jamestown 

50 

80 

320 

Cranston  - 

83 

132 

528 

Smithfield 

121 

194 

776 

Hopkinton    - 

58 

93 

372 

Scituate 

90 

143 

572 

Joluis^ton  - 

34 

54 

216 

Glocester     - 

77 

123 

492 

North  Providence, 

29 

47 

188 

Charlestown     - 

57 

91 

370 

Barringtou 

26 

42 

168 

West  Greenwich  - 

42 

67 

268 

And  the  said  report  being  duly  considered, — 
It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the   same   be,  and  hereby  is, 
accepted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  11th  day  of  May  next,  be 
set  apart  as  a  day  of  fisting,  prayer  and  humiliation  ;  and  that 
His  Honor  the  ^Governor,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  rec^uested  to 
issue  a  proclamation,  accordingly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Hon.  Samuel  Ward,  Esq. 
and  William  Bradford,  Esq.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  wait  on  the  General  Assembly  of  the 


'310  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

colony  of  Connecticut,  to  consult  with  them,  upon  measures  for 
the  common  defence  of  the  four  New  England  colonies  ;  and 
that  they  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  at  the  next  session. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  James  Angell,  Col.  John 
Mathewson  and  Col.  Joseph  Nightingale,  be,  and  they,  or  the 
major  part  of  them,  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  take 
the  care  and  have  the  direction  of  all  the  cannon,  powder  and 
all  other  warlike  stores,  in  the  magazine,  at  Providence  ;  and 
to  deliver  the  same  out,  agreeably  to  the  orders  of  the  General 
Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  trustees  appointed  in  the 
several  towns,  to  receive  the  powder,  lead  and  flints,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby,  authorized  to  deliver  the  same  out  to  the 
captain  or  commanding  officer  of  each  company,  in  their  re- 
spective towns,  taking  receipts  for  the  quantities  so  delivered  ; 
and  that  the  captain  or  commanding  officer  of  each  company 
distribute  the  same  amongst  the  soldiery,  as  occasion  may  re- 
quire ;  he  keeping  a  regular  account  thereof,  and  holding  his- 
-company  accountable  for  all  such  quantities  as  are  not  con- 
sumed in  the  government's  service  ;  which  shall  not  be  ac- 
counted for  in  value,  but  in  the  articles  themselves. 

At  this  very  dangerous  crisis  of  American  affairs  ;  at  a  time 
when  we  are  surrounded  with  fleets  and  armies,  which  threaten 
our  immediate  destruction  ;  at  a  time  when  the  fears  and 
anxieties  of  the  people,  throw  them  into  the  utmost  distress, 
and  totally  prevent  them  from  attending  to  the  common  occu- 
pations of  life  ;  to  prevent  the  mischievous  consequences  that 
must  necessarily  attend  such  a  disordered  state,  and  to  restore 
peace  to  the  minds  of  the  good  people  of  this  colony,  it  appears 
absolutely  necessary  to  this  Assembly,  that  a  number  of  men 
be  raised  and  embodied,  properly  armed  and  disciplined,  to 
continue  in  this  colony,  as  an  army  of  observation,  to  repel  any 
insult  or  violence  that  may  be  offered  to  the  inhabitants. 

And  also,  if  it  be  necessary  for  the  safety  and  preservation  of 
any  of  the  colonies,  to  march  out  of  this  colony,  and  join  and 
co-operate  with  the  forces  of  the  neighboring  colonies. 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  fifteen  hundred  men 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  311 

be  enlisted,  raised  and  embodied,  as  aforesaid,  with  all  the 
expedition  and  dispatch,  that  the  nature  of  the  thing  will  ad- 
mit of. 


Protest   of    Governor    Wanton,  and  others,  against  the  above 
Resolution. 

We,  the  subscribers,  professing  true  allegiance  to  His  Majesty  King  George  the 
Third,  beg  leave  to  dissent  from  the  vote  of  the  House  of  Magistrates,  for  enlisting, 
raising  and  embodying  an  army  of  obesrvation,  of  fifteeen  hundred  men,  to  repel 
any  insult  or  violence  that  may  be  offered  to  the  inhabitants ;  and  also,  if  it  be  ne- 
cessary for  the  safety  and  preservation  of  any  of  the  colonies,  to  march  them  out  of 
this  colony,  to  join  and  co-operate  with  the  forces  of  the  neighboring  colonies. 

Because  we  are  of  opinion  that  such  a  measure  will  be  attended  with  the  most 
fatal  consequences  to  our  charter  pri^dleges  ;  involve  the  country  in  all  the  horrors 
of  a  civil  war ;  and,  as  we  conceive,  is  an  open  violation  of  the  oath  of  allegiance 
which  we  have  severally  taken,  upon  our  admission  into  the  respective  offices  we  now 
hold  in  the  colony.  JOSEPH  WANTON,  THOMAS  WICKES, 

DARIUS  SESSIONS,  WILLIAM  POTTER. 

In  the  LTpper  House,       "i 

Providence,  April  25,  1775.  \ 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  small  arms  belonging  to 
the  colony,  dispersed  and  being  in  the  several  towns,  be  forth- 
with repaired,  and  fitted  with  bayonets,  at  the  charge  of  the 
colony.. 

That  all  such  persons  who  have,  at  their  own  expense,  so 
repaired  any  of  the  colony  arms,  upon  bringing  in  their  bills, 
shall  be  paid  therefor,  out  of  the  general  treasury  ;  and  that 
the  same  persons  who  are  appointed  to  receive  each  town's 
proportion  of  powder,  &c.,  take  care  to  procure  said  arms  to  be 
fitted  up. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  military  officers  throughout 
the  colony,  or  any  other  gentlemen  who  shall  be  willing,  do 
forthwith  enlist  fifteen  hundred  good,  effective  men,  for  the 
service  of  the  colony  ;  and  that  each  man  who  shall  enlist, 
shall  receive  a  bounty  of  $4,  and  be  entitled  to  the  monthly 
wages  of  £1  I65. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Nathaniel  Greene,  be,  anci 
he  is  hereby,  appointed  in  the  room  of  the  Hon.  Samuel  Ward, 


312  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1775. 

Esq.  (who  is  going  to  the  Continental  Congress),  to  wait  on 
the  General  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  to  consult 
upon  measures  for  the  common  defence  of  the  four  New  Eng- 
land governments. 

Inasmuch,  as  there  is  a  most  apparent  urgent  occasion,  that 
the  Greneral  Assembly  should  be  holden  in  some  place,  other 
than  the  town  of  Newport,  at  the  approaching  annual  election, 
for  the  year  1775  ; — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  General  Assem- 
bly, for  the  election  of  general  officers,  and  for  the  transacting 
such  business  as  may  be  laid  before  them,  on  the  first  Wednes- 
day in  iMay  next,  be  held  at  the  colony  house,  in  Providence  ; 
and  that  the  secretary  publish  a  copy  of  this  vote  in  the  next- 
Newport  Mercury  and  Providence  Gazette. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly ,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence, 
the  first  Wednesday  of  May,  1775. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Darius  Sessions,  Deputy  Governor. 

The  following  officers,  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged  : 

The  Hon,  Nicholas  Cooke,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Samuel  Dyre,  Mr.  James  Arnold, 

Mr.  John  Collins,  Mr.  Jonathan  Randall, 

Mr.  Ambrose  Page,  Mr.  Peter  Phillips, 

Mr.  John  Sayles,  Jr.,  Mr.  Joseph  Hazard, 

Mr.  John  Jepson,  Mr.  Thomas  Church, 


1775.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


3i: 


Newport. 
Mr.  John  Wanton, 
Providence. 
Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Mr.  John  Jenckes, 
Mr.  John  Smith, 
Col.  John  Matthewson. 

Portsmouth. 
Mr.  Metcalfe  Bowler, 
Mr.  Jonathan  Freeborn, 
Mr.  Job  Durfee. 

Warwick. 
Mr.  Jacob  Greene, 
Mr.  Thomas  Holden, 
Mr.  John  Low. 

Westerly. 
Mr.  Joshua  Babcock. 
North  Kingstown. 
Mr.  John  Northup, 
Mr.  Sylvester  Gardner. 

South  Kingstoion. 
Mr.  John  Potter, 
Mr.  Carder  Hazard. 

East  Greenvnch. 
Mr.  Job  Gardner, 
Mr.  Allen  Johnson. 

Smithfield. 
Mr.  Daniel  Mowry,  Jr., 
Mr.  Stephen  Whipple. 

Scituate. 
Mr.  Ezekiel  Cornell, 
Mr.  Rufus  Hopkins. 

Glocester. 
Mr.  Silas  Williams, 
Mr.  Daniel  Owen. 
VOL.  VII.  40 


DEPUTIES. 

Charlestoiun. 
Mr.  Joseph  Hoxsie, 
Mr.  Samuel  Kinyon. 
West  Greenwich- 
Mr.  William  Nichols, 
Mr.  Thomas  Gorton. 

Coventry. 
Mr.  John  Rice, 
Mr.  Nathaniel  Greene,  Jr. 

Exeter. 
Mr.  George  Pierce, 
Mr.  Jeffrey  Wilcox. 

Bristol. 
Maj.  Gen.  Simeon  Potter^ 
Mr.  William  Bradford. 

Tiverton. 
Capt.  John  Cooke. 

Little  Compton. 
Capt.  Thomas  Brownell, 
Mr.  William  Richmond. 

Warren. 
Mr.  Cromwell  Child. 

Cumberland. 
Mr.  John  Dexter, 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Whipple. 

Richmond. 
Mr.  George  Webb, 
Mr.  Richard  Bailey,  Jr. 

Cranston. 
Capt.  Richard  Searle, 
Mr.  William  Field. 
Hopkinton. 
Capt.  Abel  Tanner, 
Mr.  Thomas  Wells,  3d. 


314  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1775. 


DEPUTIES. 

Johnston.  Barrington. 

Mr.  Emrnor  Olney,  Col.  Nathaniel  Martin, 

Mr.  Ebenezer  Sprngue.  Mr.  Thomas  Allen. 

North  Providence. 
Mr.  Joseph  Olney, 
Major  Thomas  Olney. 

The  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  speaker  ;  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk* 

Mr.  Henry  Ward,  secretary. 

Mr.  Henry  Marchant,  attorney  general. 

Mr.  Joseph  Clarke,  general  treasurer. 

Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  chief  justice  of  the  superior  court 
of  judicature,  court  of  assize  and  general  jail  delivery. 

SHERIFFS    OF   THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

Newport  county — Mr.  Jabez  Champlin.  Providence  county 
— Mr.  Paul  Tew.  Kings  county — Mr.  Beriah  Brown.  Bris- 
tol county — Mr.  Eichard  Smith.  Kent  county — Mr.  Henry 
Rice. 

FIELD    OFFICERS    OF    THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

William  Bradford,  Esq.,  major  general  of  the  forces  of  this 
colony. 

Newport  county — Mr.  John  Malbone,  colonel ;  Mr.  George 
Champlin,   lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  John  Cooke,  major. 

Providence  county,  first  regiment  of  militia — Mr.  James 
Angell,  colonel ;  Mr.  Jabez  Bowen,  lieutenant  colonel ;  Mr. 
John  Innis  Clark,  major. 

Second  regiment — Mr.  Chad  Brown,  colonel  ;  Mr.  Elisha 
Mowrey,  lieutenant  colonel ;  Mr.  John  Fisk,  major. 

Third  regiment — Mr.  Christopher  Lippitt ;  Mr.  John  Col- 
well,  Jr.,  lieutenant  colonel ;   Mr.  Joseph  Knight,  major. 


1775.]         AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  315 

Kings  county,  first  regiment — Mr.  Joseph  Noyes,  colonel  ; 
Mr.  Jesse  Champlin,  lieutenant  colonel  ;  Mr.  Jesse  Maxson, 
major. 

Second  regiment — Mr.  Robert  Brown,  colonel  ;  Mr.  George 
Peirce,  lieutenant  colonel ;   Mr.  Joshua  Davis,  major. 

Kent  county,  first  regiment — Mr.  John  Waterman,  colonel; 
Mr.  John  Low,  lieutenant  colonel  ;   Mr.  Joseph  Fry,  major. 

Second  regiment — Mr.  Stephen  Potter,  colonel  ;  Mr.  Na- 
thaniel Brown,  lieutenant  colonel ;  Mr.  Archibald  Kasson, 
major. 

Bristol  county — Mr.  Nathaniel  Martin,  colonel ;  Mr.  Thomas 
Gray,  lieutenant  colonel ;   Mr.  Benjamin  Bos  worth,  major. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  general  treasurer  remove, 
with  the  colony's  treasure,  to  the  town  of  Providence  ;  and 
that,  for  the  charge  of  his  removing,  together  with  the  extra- 
ordinary trouble  he  is  likely  to  have  in  doing  the  business  of 
the  said  office,  during  the  present  year,  he  be  allowed  the  sum 
of  <£90,  lawful  money,  including  his  annual  salary. 

Whereas,  the  secretary  hath  removed  the  colony's  records, 
and  his  office,  to  the  town  of  Providence,  and  prayed  this 
Assembly,  in  case  the  removal  be  approved,  to  order  the  ex- 
pense thereof  to  be  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury  ;  on  con- 
sideration w^hereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  removal  of  the  colo- 
ny's records,  be,  and  it  is  hereby,  approved  ;  and  that  an  ac- 
count of  the  expense  thereof,  be  laid  before  this  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler, 
Esq.,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  appointed  to  receive  the  town  of 
Portsmouth's  proportion  of  the  colony's  arms,  in  the  room  of 
the  town  treasurer,  whose  religious  principles  will  not  admit  of 
his  receiving  the  same. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  that  part  of  the  militia  act, 
obliging  the  companies  to  train  once  in  every  month,  be,  and 
the  same  is  hereby,  suspended  for  three  months,  fron;  and  aftev 
the  rising  of  this  Assembly, 


816  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  1775. 

It  is  voted  find  resolved,  that  Col.  James  Mitchel  Varnum, 
Col.  Daniel  Hitchcock  and  Col.  John  Mathewson,  be,  and  they 
are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  prepare  a  bill  for  the 
regulation  of  the  army,  ordered  to  be  raised  for  the  defence  of 
the  colony. 

That  they  also  prepare  the  form  of  a  commission  for  the  offi- 
cers of  the  said  army  ;  and  that  they  lay  the  same  before  this 
Assembly. 

Whereas,  the  collector  of  taxes,  for  the  town  of  South 
Kingstown,  hath  refused  to  serve  in  the  said  office  ;  and  the 
time  limited  for  the  payment  of  the  said  town's  proportion  of 
the  last  colony's  tax  is  expired, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  general  treasurer 
be,  and  he  is  hereby,  empowered  and  directed  to  issue  his 
warrant  to  such  collector  as  shall  be  appointed  by  the  said 
town,  to  collect  the  said  tax,  with  the  interest,  in  as  full  and 
ample  a  manner  as  though  such  warrant  had  been  timely 
granted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  each  of  the  gentlemen  ap- 
pointed delegates,  to  represent  this  colony  in  the  Continental 
Congress,  to  be  holden  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  on  the  10th 
instant,  draw  the  sum  of  £60,  lawful  money,  out  of  the  general 
treasury,  to  bear  their  expenses. 

V/hereas,  Daniel  M'Cann,  of  Providence,  in  the  county  of 
Providence,  tailor,  preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto 
this  Assembly,  that  on  the  13th  day  of  September,  A.  D. 
1774,  he  was  committed  to  His  Majesty's  jail,  in  the  county, 
afores?id,  by  virtue  of  a  mittimus,  signed  by  the  judges  of  His 
Majesty's  superior  court,  charging  him  with  felony,  in  maiming 
and  wounding  Joseph  Nightingale,  Esq.,  in  which  jail  he  hath 
been  confined  ever  since. 

That,  at  the  court  of  assize,  held  in  said  county,  in  March, 
A.  D.  1775,  he  was  indicted,  not  for  the  felony  he  was  charged 
with,  in  the  mittimus,  but  for  a  a  riot,  and  was  fined  £o,  and 
ordered  to  stand  committed,  until  he  should  pay  the  same,  to- 
gether with  all   the  charges  of  prosecution  ;   and  that,  by  his 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  317 

being  so  long  confined,  he  is  reduced  to  an  absolute  state  of  in- 
digence, and  rendered  utterly  incapable  of  paying  the  said  fine 
and  cost. 

And  thereupon,  the  said  Daniel  M'Cann  prayed  this  Assem- 
bly, to  give  him  relief,  either  by  remitting  the  said  fine  and 
cost,  or  by  letting  him  go  at  large,  whereby,  he  may  be  ena- 
bled to  earn  the  money  to  pay  the  same  ;  and  the  said  petition 
being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be  granted,  upon 
condition  that  the  petitioner,  with  his  family,  leave  this  colony 
immediately,  under  the  conduct  of  an  officer  ;  and  that,  if  he 
be  found  in  the  colony,  after  the  officer  shall  leave  him,  he  be 
re-committed  to  jail. 

An  Act  for  embodying,  supplying  and   paying,  the    army  of 

observation   ordered   to  be   raised   for   the    defence  of  the 

colony. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority of  the  same  it  is  enacted,  that  the  fifteen  hundred  men 
ordered  to  be  raised  by  this  colony,  be  formed  into  one  brig- 
ade, under  the  command  of  a  brigadier  general ;  and  consist  of 
three  regiments,  each  of  which  shall  be  commanded  by  one 
colonel,  one  lieutenant  colonel,  and  one  major. 

That  there  be  one  adjutant  of  brigade,  or  adjutant-major,  for 
such  purposes  as  appertain  to  that  office. 

That  there  be  one  adjutant,  one  surgeon,  one  surgeon's 
mate,  and  one  quartermaster,  to  each  regiment. 

That  each  regiment  consist  of  eight  companies  ;  each  field 
officer's  company  to  be  commanded,  under  such  field  officer,  by 
one  captain-lieutenant,  one  lieutenant  and  one  ensign ;  and 
each  of  the  other  companies  by  one  captain,  one  lieutenant  and 
one  ensign  ;  and  that  one  of  the  companies  be  a  train  of  ar- 
tillery, and  have  the  use  of  the  colony's  field  pieces. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
each  regiment  be  placed  in  the  said  brigade  upon  the  flanks, 
and  in  the  center,  by  rotation,  so  that  a  perfect  equality  in 
rnnk,  be  preserved  ;  and  that  a  similar  equality  be  preserved 


318 


RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE    ISLAND 


[1775. 


among  the  field  officers  of  the  different  regiments,  by  the  briga- 
dier general,  in  all  the  duties  of  a  campaign. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
each  able  bodied,  effective  man,  who  shall  enlist  into  the  ser- 
vice, and  find  himself  a  small  arm,  bayonet  and  other  accou- 
trements, shall  be  allowed  and  paid  forty  shillings,  as  a  bounty  ; 
and  each  able  bodied,  effective  man,  not  finding  himself  a  small 
arm,  bayonet  and  other  accoutrements,  shall  receive  twenty- 
four  shillings,  as  a  bounty. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
each  ofiicer  and  soldier  shall  receive  the  following  monthly 
wages,  while  in  the  service,  to  wit : 


£    s. 

£      5. 

Each  colonel 

15  00 

Each  adjutant  of  a  reg- 

" lieutenant  colonel. 

12  00 

iment 

5  10 

"  major 

10  00 

"  surgeon 

7  10 

The  adjutant  of  brig- 

" surgeon's  mate 

4  00 

ade,  or  adjutant  ma- 

" quartermaster 

3  00 

jor,   - 

9  00 

"  sergeant 

2  08 

Each  captain  and  cap- 

" corporal     - 

2  04 

tain-]  ieutenant. 

6  00 

"  drummer  and  fifer 

2  04 

"  lieutenant 

4  00 

"  each  private  man 

40 

"  ensign 

3  00 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
each  field  officer  be  allowed  ten  shillings  per  week,  and  each 
other  officer  and  soldier,  six  shillings  per  week,  for  billet, 
while  in  this  colony,  after  enlistment,  and  before  the  regi- 
ments are  embodied  ;  and  each  soldier  shall  also  have  a  blanket 
and  knapsack,  given  him  by  the  colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
each  officer  and  soldier  be  paid  his  wages,  and  the  weekly 
billet  that  shall  be  due,  as  soon  as  may  be  ;  and  that  one 
month's  wages  be  paid  in  advance,  before  the  troops  march  out 
of  the  colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  319 

each  soldier  be  enlisted,  by  signing  the  following  enlistment, 
to  wit : 

Form  of  the  Oath  of  Enlistment. 

"  Ij  the  subscriber,  hereby  solemnly  engage  and  enlist  my- 
self as  a  soldier  in  His  Majesty's  service,  and  in  the  pay  of  the 
colony  of  Rhode  Island,  for  the  preservation  of  the  liberties  of 
America,  from  the  day  of  my  enlistment,  to  the  last  day  of  De- 
cember next,  unless  the  service  admit  of  a  discharge  sooner, 
which  shall  be  at  the  discretion  of  the  General  Assembly  ;  and 
I  hereby  promise  to  submit  myself  to  all  the  orders  and  regula- 
tions of  the  army,  and  faithfidly  to  observe  and  obey  all  such 
orders  as  I  shall  receive  from  time  to  time,  from  my  officers." 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
no  officer  or  soldier  be  arrested,  prosecuted,  or  detained  in  jail, 
for  any  debt,  whatsoever,  less  than  d£l5,  lawful  money,  due  to 
one  creditor  ;  and  that  every  apprentice  who  shall  enlist  into 
the  said  army,  shall  be  entitled  to  the  whole  of  the  bounty, 
and  one  half  of  his  wages  ;  his  master  receiving  the  other 
half. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that, 
for  supplying  the  troops  with  arms,  provisions,  &c.,  five  hun- 
dred barrels  of  flour,  three  hundred  barrels  of  pork,  one  hun- 
dred barrels  of  beef,  fifteen  hundred  blankets  and  knapsacks, 
and  fifteen  hundred  small  arms  and  bayonets,  with  suitable  ac- 
coutrements, be  immediately  procured  on  the  colony's  account. 

And,  that  the  said  troops  may  be  supplied  with  clothing 
and  other  necessaries, — 

It  is  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  a  com- 
missary be  appointed,  who  shall  go  suttler  to  the  troops,  and 
have  one  and  an  half  per  cent,  upon  all  the  business  he  shall 
transact. 

And  such  commissary  is  hereby  directed  and  required  to  de- 
liver unto  the  soldiers  such  things  as  the  colony  shall  send,  for 


320  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

the  use   of  the  regiments,  at   the   prime   cost,  including  all 
charges  that  may  accrue  thereon. 

Provided,  that  the  said  officer  deliver  nothing  to  any  soldier, 
M^thout  an  order  from  the  captain*  or  commanding  officer  of 
the  company,  for  the  time  being,  to  which  such  soldier 
belongs  ;  and  the  officers  are  hereby  restricted  and  forbid 
drawing  any  order  or  orders  on  the  commissary,  exceeding  the 
monthly  wages  due  to  the  soldier  that  applies  for  the  same. 

And  it  is  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
whoever  shall  be  appointed  commissary  and  sutler,  shall  give 
security  to  the  general  treasurer,  in  the  penal  sum  of  £2,000, 
for  the  faithful  performance  of  his  duty  ;  and  shall  not  carry 
with  him,  on  his  own  account,  any  necessaries  of  the  same 
kind  with  those  that  shall  be  sent  by  the  government. 

And  as  such  commissary  may  want  assistance,  he  is  hereby 
authorized  to  appoint  a  deputy  or  deputies  under  him ;  he  be- 
ing accountable  for  the  conduct  of  his  deputies. 

And  for  the  purposes  aforesaid, — 

Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  a  com- 
mittee of  safety,  be  chosen  by  this  Assembly  ;  one  of  whom, 
shall  reside  in  each  county,  excepting  the  county  of  Provi- 
dence, which  shall  have  two,  to  furnish  and  pay  the  officers 
and  soldiers  in  such  county  ;  and  that  each  committee-man 
shall  give  bond,  with  surety,  to  the  general  treasurer,  in  the 
sum  of  £1,000,  lawful  money,  for  the  faithful  discharge  of  his 
trust. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  said  committee  provide  arms,  tents,  provisions  and  every 
other  accoutrement,  necessary  for  the  army  ;  and  that  they  be 
allowed  one  and  an  half  per  cent,  for  transacting  the  business. 

And  for  supplying  the  general  treasury, — 

Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  the 
sum  of  £20,000,  lawful  money  bills,  be  immediately  printed 
and  signed  by  the  Honorable  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Esq.,  Henry 
Ward,  Joseph  Clarke,  John  Cole  and  Thomas  Greene,  Esqs.  ; 
that  all  bills  under  five  shillings,  be  signed  by  one  of  the  com- 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  321 

mittee,  and  all  the  other  bills,  by  two  of  the  committee  ;  that 
the  same  shall  be  a  lawful  tender,  in  discharge  of  all  contracts, 
debts,  dues  and  demands,  whether  of  a  public  or  private  na- 
ture ;  that  one-half  of  the  said  bills  shall  be  redeemed  within 
two  years,  and  the  other  half  within  five  years  from  the  time  of 
the  emission  ;  together  with  the  interest  thereon  accruing,  at 
the  rate  of  two  and  an  half  per  cent,  per  annum,  by  a  general 
tax,  to  be  levied  on  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony  ;  and  that 
the  bills  shall  be  of  the  following  value,  to  wit : 

2,000  bills,  of  forty  shillings,  each       -         -      £4,000 

"  -    -    -  6,000 

4,000 

"  -    -    -  2,000 

1,000 

"  -    -    -   800 

600 

"  -    -    -   600 

500 

"  -    -    -   300 

200 


4,000 

thirty     " 

4,000 

twenty    " 

4,000 

ten 

4,000 

five        " 

4,000 

four        " 

4,000 

three      " 

6,000 

two         " 

10,000 

one         " 

8,000 

nine  pence 

8,000 

six 

£20,000 


Which  bills,  shall  be  of  the  following  form  : 

"  The  possessor  of  this  bill^  shall  be  paid,  by  the  treasurer'  of  the 

colony  of  Rhode  Island, -,  lawful  money,  at  the  rate  oj 

six  shillings  and  nine  pence  for  one  ounce  of  silver,  within  five 
years  from  the  date  hereof,  ivith  interest  at  two  and  an  half  per 
cent,  per  annum,  until  paid.     By  order  of  Assembly. 

Providence,  the  od  day  of  May,  1775." 

And  on  the  said  bills,  there  shall  be  the  same  impression  and 
motto  as  on  the  lawful  money  bills,  heretofore  emitted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  safety  be, 
and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  to  receive  the  colony's  arms, 

VOL.  VII.  41 


322  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

and  distribute  them  where  they  are  wanted,  amongst  the  sol- 
diers that  shall  enlist  into  the  army  of  observation. 

That  the  said  committee,  or  any  four  of  them,  be,  and  they 
are  hereljy,  appointed  and  fully  empowered,  during  the  recess 
of  the  General  Assembly,  to  fill  up  all  vacancies  that  shall  hap- 
pen amongst  the  officers  that  shall  be  appointed  by  the  General 
Assembly  for  the  said  army  ;  and  that  they  procure  all  neces- 
saries not  particularly  mentioned  in  the  act  for  raising  said 
army. 

Both  houses  being  joined  in  a  grand  committee,  chose  the 
followino;  officers,  to  wit  : 


•G 


Names  of  the  Committee  of  Safety. 

For  the  county  of  Newport — William  Richmond,  Esq. 
For  the  county  of  Providence — Mr.  John  Smith  and  Daniel 
Tillinghast,  Esq. 

For  the  county  of  Kings  county — John  Northup,  Esq. 
For  the  county  of  Bristol — William  Bradford,  Esq. 
For  the  county  of  Kent — Mr.  Jacob  Greene. 

Names  of  the  Officers  rf  the  Armu  of  Observation. 

Nathaniel  Greene,  Jr.,  Esq.,  brigadier  general. 

Peter  Phillips,  Esq.,  commissary. 

Thomas  Church,  Esq.,  colonel ;  William  Turner  Miller,  Esq., 
lieutenant  colonel;  and  John  Forrester,  Esq.,  major  of  the 
regiment  of  the  counties  of  Newport  and  Bristol. 

Daniel  Hitchcock,  Esq.,  colonel  ;  Ezekiel  Cornell,  Esq., 
lieutenant  colonel ;  and  Israel  Angell,  Esq.,  major  of  the  regi- 
ment of  the  county  of  Providence. 

James  Mitchell  Varnura,  Esq.,  colonel  ;  James  Babcock, 
Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  ;  and  Christopher  Greene,  Esq.,  major 
of  the  regiment  of  King's  county  and  Kent. 

John  Crane,  captain  ;  and  Joseph  Batch,  captain-lieutenant, 
of  the  Train  of  Artillery. 

William  Ladd,  captain-lieutenant  ;  Nathaniel  Church,  lieu- 
tenant ;  and  Cornelius  Briggs,  ensign  of  the  colonel's  com- 
pany, of  the  regiment  of  Newport  and  Bristol. 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  323 

Matthew  Allen,  captain-lieutenant ;  James  Smith,  lieuten- 
ant;  and  James  Brown,  Jr.,  ensign  of  the  lieutenant  colonel's 
company,  of  the  regiment  of  Newport  and  Bristol. 

John  Topham,  captain-lieutenant ;  George  Tenant,  lieuten- 
ant ;  and  Stephen  Tripp,  ensign,  of  the  major's  company,  of 
the  regiment  of  Newport  and  Bristol. 

Sion  Martindale,  captain  ;  Benjamin  Diamon,  lieutenant  ; 
and  James  Child,  2d,  ensign  of  a  company  in  the  regiment  of 
Newport  and  Bristol. 

Thomas  Tew,  captain  ;  Jonathan  Simmons,  lieutenant  ;  and 
Christopher  Bennett,  ensign  of  a  company  in  the  regiment  of 
Newport  and  Bristol. 

Jonathan  Brownell,  captain  ;  Sylvanus  Shaw,  lieutenant  ; 
and  Godfrey  Brown,  ensign,  of  a  company  in  the  regiment  of 
Newport  and  Bristol. 

Benjamin  Seabury,  captain  ;  Gilbert  Manchester,  lieuten- 
ant ;  and  Israel  Church,  ensign,  of  a  company  in  the  regiment 
of  Newport  and  Bristol. 

Simeon  Thayer,  captain-lieutenant ;  John  Spurr,  lieuten- 
ant ;  and  William  Potter,  ensign,  of  the  colonel's  company  of 
the  regiment  of  Providence. 

Stephen  Kimball,  captain-lieutenant  ;  Jonathan  Smith, 
ieutenant ;  and  George  Dorrance,  Jr.,  ensign,  of  the  lieu- 
tenant colonel's  company  of  the  regiment  of  Providence. 

John  Field,  captain-lieutenant  ;  David  Richmond,  lieu- 
tenant ;  and  Samuel  Black,  ensign,  of  the  major's  company  of 
the  regiment  of  Providence. 

Andrew  Waterman,  captain  ;  William  Aldrich,  lieutenant ; 
and  David  Dexter,  Jr.,  ensign,  of  a  company  in  the  regi- 
ment of  Providence. 

John  Angell,  captain  ;  Coggeshall  Olney,  lieutenant ;  and 
Stephen  Olney,  ensign,  of  a  company  in  the  regiment  of 
Providence. 

Christopher  Olney,  captain;  Ephraim  Bowen,  Jr.,  lieuten- 
ant ;  and  Cyprian  Sterry,  ensign,  of  a  company  in  the  regi- 
ment of  Providence. 

Jeremiah  Olney,  captain  ;    Levi  Tower,   lieutenant  ;    and 


324  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1775* 

Nathaniel  Field,  ensign,  of  a  company  in  the  regiment  of 
Providence. 

Nathaniel  Blackmar,  captain ;  Samuel  Thornton,  lieuten- 
ant ;  and  Abraham  Tourtellot,  ensign,  of  {i  company  in  the 
resfiment  of  Providence. 

Archibald  Crary,  captain-lieutenant  ;  and  John  Singer 
Dexter,  lieutenant,  of  tho  colonel's  company  of  the  regiment 
of  Kings  county  and  Kent. 

John  Iloxie,  captain-lieutenant;  Jonathan  Bates,  Jr.,  lieu- 
tenant ;  and  Joseph  Hollo  way,  ensign,  of  the  lieutenant  colo- 
nel's company  of  the  regiment  of  Kings  county  and  Kent. 

Edmund  Johnson,  captain-lieutenant  ;  John  Reynolds,  lieu- 
tenant ;  John  Ilolden,  son  of  Charles,  ensign,  of  the  major's 
company  of  the  regiment  of  Kings  county  and  Kent. 

Thomas  Holden,  captain  ;  Joseph  Barton,  lieutenant ;  and 
Joseph  Arnold,  son  of  Caleb,  ensign,  of  a  company  in  the 
regiment  of  Kings  county  and  Kent. 

Samuel  Ward,  Jr.,  captain  ;  Elijah  Lewis,  lieutenant ;  and 
Joshua  Collins,  ensign,  of  a  company  in  the  regiment  of  Kings 
county  and  Kent. 

James  Gardner,  captain  ;  Thomas  Phillips,  lieutenant ;  and 
Samuel  Bissell,  ensign,  of  a  company  in  the  regiment  of  Kings 
county  and  Kent. 

Christopher  Gardner,  Jr.,  captain  ;  Nathaniel  Hawkins, 
lieutenant ;  and  William  Potter,  son  of  Ichabod,  ensign,  of  a 
company  in  the  regiment  of  Kings  county  and  Kent. 

John  Randall,  captain  ;  Oliver  Clarke,  lieutenant ;  and  Ste- 
phen Wells,  ensign,  of  a  company  in  the  regiment  of  Kings 
county  and  Kent. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  safety  in  the 
several  counties,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  muster- 
masters  of  the  troops  now  ordered  to  be  raised  for  their  respec-^ 
tive  counties. 

Whereas,  the  ministry  and  Parliament  of  Great  Britain, 
sacrificing  the  glory  and  happiness  of  their  sovereign,  and  the 
good  of  Britain  and  the  colonies,  to  their  own  ambitious  and 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  325 

lucrative  views,  have  entered  into  many  arbitrary,  illegal  reso- 
lutions, for  depriving  His  Majesty's  subjects  in  America  of 
every  security  for  the  enjoyment  of  life,  liberty  and  property  ; 
and  sent,  and  are  still  sending,  troops  and  ships  of  war  into 
these  colonies,  to  enforce  their  tyrannical  mandates  ;  and  have 
actually  begun  to  shed  the  blood  of  the  innocent  people  of  these 
colonies  ;  in  consequence  whereof,  this  Assembly,  at  the  session 
held  on  the  22d  day  of  April  last,  passed  an  act  for  raising  fif- 
teen hundred  men,  as  an  army  of  observation,  and  to  assist  any 
of  our  sister  colonies. 

And  whereas,  the  Honorable  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  then 
Governor  of  this  colony,  did  enter  a  protest  against  the  said 
act,  conceived  in  such  terms  as  highly  to  reflect  upon  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly,  and  upon  the  united  opposition  of  all  America, 
to  the  aforesaid  tyrannical  measures. 

And  whereas,  the  said  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  hath  neglected 
to  issue  a  proclamation  for  the  due  observation  of  Thursday, 
the  11th  of  May,  instant,  as  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer,  agree- 
ably to  an  act  passed  at  the  said  session. 

And  whereas,  the  said  Joseph  AVanton,  Esq.,  hath  been 
elected  to  the  office  of  Governor  of  this  colony,  for  the  present 
year,  and  been  duly  notified  thereof,  by  this  Assembly  ;  not- 
withstanding which,  he  hath  not  attended  at  this  General  As- 
sembly, and  taken  the  oath  required  by  law. 

And  whereas,  the  said  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  hath  positively 
refused  to  sign  the  commissions  for  the  officers  appointed  to 
command  the  troops  so  ordered  to  be  raised  ;  by  all  which,  he 
hath  manifested  his  intentions  to  defeat  the  good  people  of 
these  colonies,  in  their  present  glorious  struggle  to  transmit 
inviolate  to  posterity,  those  sacred  rights  they  have  received 
from  their  ancestors. 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  Deputy  Governor 
and  assistants  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  forbidden  to  administer 
the  oath  of  office  to  the  said  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  unless  in 
free  and  open  General  Assembly,  according  to   the  unvaried 


326  RECORDS    OF   TEE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

practice  in  this  colony,  and  with  the  consent  of  such  Assem-  ' 
bly  j  that  until  the  said  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  shall  have 
taken  the  oath  of  office,  as  aforesaid,  it  shall  not  be  lawful  for 
him  to  act  as  Governor  of  this  colony,  in  any  case,  whatever  ; 
and  that  every  act  done  by  him,  in  the  pretended  capacity  of 
Governor,  shall  be  null  and  void  in  itself ;  and  shall  not  ope- 
rate as  a  warrant  or  discharge  to  any  person  acting  by  his  or- 
ders, cr  under  his  authority.* 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
Henry  Ward,  Esq.,  secretary  of  the  colony,  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  directed,  and  fully  authorized  and  empowered,  to  sign 
the  commissions  for  all  officers,  civil  and  military,  chosen  by 
this  Assembly,  as  well  those  going  in  the  service,  abovesaid,  as 
others  ;  he  receiving  therefor,  out  of  the  general  treasury,  two 
shillings  and  eight  pence,  for  each  commission. 

And  that  such  commission,  so  signed,  with  the  colony  seal 
affixed,  shall  be  as  full  and  eftectual  warrant  and  warrants  to 
every  and  all  such  officer  and  officers  so  chosen,  for  the  faithful 
discharge  of  his  and  their  duty,  as  if  the  same  were  signed  by 
a  Governor  of  this  colony,  duly  elected  and  engaged,  according 
to  law  ;  any  law,  custom  or  usage,  to  the  contrary,  hereof, 
in  any  wise,  notwithstanding. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor,  be  requested,  and  fully  au- 
thorized and  empowered,  to  call  the  General  Assembly  to- 
gether, upon  any  emergency,  to  meet  at  such  time  and  place 
as  he  shall  think  most  for  the  interest  of  the  colony. 

Whereas,  the  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  who  is  elected 
Governor  of  this  colony,  for  the  present  year,  hath  not  attended 
this  Assembly,  and  taken  the  oath  of  office,  and  cannot  there- 
fore appoint  a  naval  officer,  until  he  shall  be  sworn  in  before 
the  General  Assembly  ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  naval  office  be  kept 
by  James  Clarke,  Esq.,  who  hath  for  some  time  past  kept  it, 

*  See  documents  printed  at  the  close  of  the  proceedings  of  this  session. 


1775.]  AND  PROVIDENCE  plant'ations.  327 

until  further  orders  from  this  Assembly  ;  and  that  he  account 
to  this  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  safety  be, 
and  they  are  hereby,  directed  to  make  out  the  account  of  the 
expenses  of  raising  and  equipping  the  fifteen  hundred  men  or- 
dered to  be  raised  by  this  colony,  as  an  army  of  observation, 
and  for  the  assistance  of  any  of  the  neighboring  colonies,  as  soon 
as  the  said  troops  are  fully  equipped,  and  transmit  the  same  to 
the  delegates  of  this  colony,  at  the  Continental  Congress,  to  be 
by  them  laid  before  the  Congress  ;  that  the  colonies  which  have 
not  been,  or  shall  not  be,  at  a  proportionate  expense,  in  the 
defence  of  our  common  rights,  may  contribnte  their  proportion 
towards  reimbursing  this  colony  such  part  of  the  expenses  of 
raising  and  equipping  the  said  fifteen  hundred  men,  as  shall 
be  more  than  this  colony's  proportion  towards  the  common 
defence. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of 
Newport,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  directed  to  deliver  to  William 
Richmond,  Esq.,  who  is  one  of  the  committee  of  safety  for  the 
said  county,  all  the  colony  arms,  pistols,  cutlasses,  &c.,  which 
are  in  the  town  of  Newport. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  John  Carter  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  empowered  to  receive  of  the  general  treasurer,  the 
plates,  escutcheons  and  other  ornaments,  for  printing  bills  of 
credit  ;  that  he  draw  money  out  of  the  general  treasury,  for 
purchasing  paper  for  that  purpose. 

And  that  David  Wilkinson,  Esq.,  and  Mr.  Ebenezer  Thomp- 
son, be  appointed,  one  or  the  other  of  them,  to  attend  the  press 
continually,  during  the  time  the  bills  are  printing. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  lieutenant  general,  briga- 
dier general,  and  the  committee  of  safety,  be,  and  they,  or  the 
major  part  of  them,  are  hereby  fully  authorized  and  empow- 
ered, to  order  and  direct  when  and  in  what  manner  the  forces, 
or  any  part  thereof,  shall  march  out  of  this  colony,  to  the  as- 
sistance of  any  colony  in  distress. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  brigadier  general  draw  up 


328  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775, 

the  several  regiments  to  be  raised  in  this  colony,  either  singly 
or  together  ;  and  that  the  captains  of  the  several  companies, 
not  belonging  to  the  field  officers,  thereof,  shall  draw  lots  for 
their  places  and  stations  in  the  regiments,  aforesaid. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  form  of  a  commission  to  a 
colonel  of  a  regiment,  in  the  army  of  observation,  now  laid  be- 
fore this  Assembly,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  approved  ;  and 
that  similar  commissions,  mutatis  mutandis,  be  issued  to  the 
other  officers  of  said  army. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  speaker  of  the  lower  House 
be,  and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  transmit  to  the  speaker  of 
the  House  of  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  and  to 
the  committee  of  inspection  for  the  city  of  New  York,  copies 
of  the  proceedings  of  this  Assembly,  relative  to  the  present 
disputes  between  Great  Britain  and  the  colonies. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  any  military  officer,  commis- 
sioned to  command  any  part  of  the  army  of  observation,  be  re- 
moved for  any  misbehavior,  or  neglect  of  duty  ;  and  another 
appointed  in  his  stead,  by  a  general  court  martial,  to  be  holden 
for  that  purpose. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Joshua  Babcock,  Esq.,  be  re- 
quested to  carry  the  proceedings  of  this  General  Assembly,  re- 
specting the  raising  an  army  of  observation,  &c.,  to  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Connecticut ;  and  to  request  of 
them  to  transmit  to  this  Assembly  their  proceedings  and  trans- 
actions, relative  to  the  present  alarming  crisis  of  affairs. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  following  monthly  wages 
shall  be  allowed  and  paid,  unto  the  following  respective  officers 
and  men,  in  the  army  of  observation  ;   that  is  to  say  : 

£    s.  d. 

To  the  brigadier  general,  in  the  Train  of  Artillery,        20  00  0 

captain         -         -         -         -         _         _         9  00  0 

"       captain-lieutenant 7  04  0 

'*       first  lieutenant      -         -         -         -         _         5  08  0 
^'       second  lieutenant 3  12  0 


e 

s.  d. 

3 

12  0 

2 

14  0 

2 

08  0 

2 

06  0 

2  04  0 

1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS,  329 


To  the  lieutenant  fire-worker      .  •         -         - 

"       two  bombardiers,  each        -         _         _ 

"       two  sergeants,  each         _         _         -         _ 

''       four  gunners,  each    -  -  -  - 

"        privates  and  fifers  _  _  _  _ 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  that  an  embargo  be  set 

on  all  provisions  going  out  of  this  colony,  excepting  what  shall 

be  necessary  for  victualing  vessels  sailing  out  of  this  colony, 

find  for  the  use  of  the  army  ;   and   that  this   act  be  in  force 

immediately. 

God  save  the  King. 

Address  of  both  Houses    of  Parliament^    to  the  King, 
February  7,  1775. 

Most  gracious  sovereign  : — We,  Your  Majesty's  most  dutiful  and  loyal  subjects, 
tlie  **********  Commons,  in  Parliament  assembled,  return 
Your  Majesty  our  most  humble  thanks  for  having  been  graciously  pleased  to  com- 
municate to  us,  the  several  papers  relating  to  the  present  state  of  the  British  colo- 
nies in  America,  Avhich,  by  Your  Majesty's  commands,  have  been  laid  before  us. 

We  have  taken  them  into  our  most  serious  consideration  ;  and  Ave  find  that  a  part 
of  Your  Majesty's  subjects,  in  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  have  pro- 
ceeded so  far  to  resist  the  authority  of  the  supreme  legislature,  that  a  rebellion 
at  this  time,  actually  exists  within  the  said  Province ;  and  Ave  see,  with  the  utmost 
concern,  that  they  have  been  countenanced  and  encouraged  by  unlawful  combina- 
tions and  engagements  entered  into  by  Your  Majesty's  subjects  in  several  of  the 
other  colonies,  to  the  injury  and  oppression  of  many  of  their  innocent  fellow  sub- 
jects, resident  within  the  kingdom  of  Great  Britain,  and  the  rest  of  Your  IMajesty's 
dominions. 

This  conduct,  on  their  part,  appears  to  us  the  more  inexcusable,  when  we  consider 
with  how  much  temper  Your  Majesty  and  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament  have  acted 
in  support  of  the  laAvs  and  constitution  of  Great  Bi-itain. 

AVe  can  never  so  far  desert  the  trust  reposed  in  us,  as  to  relinquish  any  part  of 
the  sovereign  authority  over  all  Your  Majesty's  dominions,  which,  by  law,  is  vested 
in  Your  Majesty  and  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament;  and  the  conduct  of  many  per- 
sons in  several  of  the  colonies,  during  the  late  disturbances,  is  alone  sufficient  to  con- 
vince us  hoAv  necessary  this  power  is,  for  the  protection  of  the  lives  and  fortunes  of 
all  Your  Majesty's  subjects. 

We  have  ever  been,  and  always  shall  be,  ready  to  pay  attention  and  regard  to 
any  real  grievances  of  any  of  Your  Majesty's  subjects  which  shall,  in  a  dutiful  and 
constitutional  manner,  be  laid  before  us ;  and  whenever  any  of  the  colonies  shall 
make  a  proper  application  to  us,  we  shall  be  ready  to  afford  them  every  just  and 
reasonable  indulgence. 

VOL.  VII.         42 


330  EECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    KHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

At  the  same  time,  we  eonsider  it  as  oiu-  indispensable  duty,  Immbly  to  beseech 
Your  Majesty,  that  vou  will  take  the  most  efiectual  measures  to  enforec  due  obedi- 
ence to  the  laws  and  authority  of  the  supreme  legislature ;  and  we  beg  leaye,  in  the 
most  solemn  manner,  to  assure  Your  Majesty,  that  it  is  our  fixed  resolution,  at  the 
hazard  of  our  lives  and  properties,  to  stand  by  Yoin-  Majesty  against  all  rebellious 
attempts  in  the  maintenance  of  the  just  rights  of  Your  Majesty,  and  the  two  Houses 
of  rarliameni. 

The  King's  Ansiccr  to  the  Address. 

« 

My  Lords  and  Gentlemen  : — I  thank  you  for  this  vei'y  dutiful  and  loyal  address, 
and  for  the  affectionate  and  solemn  assurances  }ou  gi\e  me  of  your  support  In  main, 
taining  the  just  rights  of  my  crown,  and  of  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament ;  and  you 
may  depend  on  my  taking  the  most  speedy  and  effectual  measures  for  enforcing  due 
obedience  to  the  laws  and  the  authority  of  the  supreme  legislature. 

Whenever  any  of  my  colonics  shall  make  a  proper  and  dutiful  a})plication,  I  shall 
be  ready  to  concur  with  you  In  affording  them  every  just  and  reasonable  indulgence; 
and  it  is  my  ardent  wish  that  this  disposition  may  have  a  liappy  eff(>ct  on  the  temper 
and  conduct  of  my  subjects  in  America. 

Resolution  of  the  House  of  Commons,  Februarij  27,  1775. 

Resolved,  that  it  is  the  opinion  of  this  committee,  that  when  the  governor,  council, 
and  assembly,  or  general  court,  of  any  of  His  Majesty's  provinces  or  colonies,  in 
America,  shall  propose  to  make  provision,  according  to  the  condition,  circumstances 
and  situation  of  such  pro^•ince  or  colony,  for  contributing  their  proportion  to  the 
common  defence  (such  proportion  to  be  raised  under  the  authority  of  the  general 
court,  or  general  assembly  of  such  province  or  colony,  and  disposable  liy  Parlia- 
ment), and  shall  engage  to  make  provision  also  for  the  support  of  the  civil  govern- 
ment, and  the  administration  of  justice,  in  such  province  or  colony,  it  will  be  proper 
if  such  proposal  shall  be  approved  by  His  Majesty  and  the  two  Houses  of  Parlia- 
ment ;  and  for  so  long  as  such  provision  shall  be  made  accordingly,  to  forbear,  in  re- 
spect of  such  province  or  colony,  to  levy  any  duty,  tax,  or  assessment,  or  to  impose 
any  fui-ther  duty,  tax,  or  assessment,  except  only  such  duties  as  may  be  expedient 
to  continue  to  levy  or  to  Impose  for  the  regulation  of  commerce  ;  tlie  nett  pro- 
duce of  the  duties  last  mentioned,  to  be  carj-ied  to  the  account  of  such  province  or 
colony,  respectively. 

The   Earl   of  Dartmouth   to   the   Governor  and  Company  of 
Rhode  Island. 

Circular.]  Whitehall,  3d  March,  1775. 

Gentlemen  : — You  will  Iiave  seen  in  the  King's  answer  to  the  joint  address  of  both 
Houses  of  Parliament  on  the  7th  of  February  (which  address  and  answer,  have  al- 
ready been  transmitted  to  you),  how  much  attention  His  Majesty  Avas  graciously 
pleased  to  give  to  the  assurance  held  out  in  that  address,  of  the  readiness  of  Pai'lia- 
meut  to  afford  every  just  and  reasonable  indulgence  to  the  colonies,  whenever  they 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  331 

sliould  make  a  proper  application  on  the  -jround  of  any  real  grievance  they  might 
have  to  complain  of;  and  therelbre,  I  have  the  kv<s  occasion  now  to  enlarge  upon 
the  satisfaction  it  hath  given  His  ]\Iajesty  to  see  that  address  followed  by  the  en- 
closed resolution  of  the  House  of  Commons  ;  which,  whatever  may  be  the  effect  of  it 
(I  trust  a  happy  one),  will  for  ever  remain  an  evidence  of  their  justice  and  modera- 
tion ;  and  manifest  the  temper  which  lias  accompanied  their  deliberations  upon  that 
question,  which  has  been  the  source  of  so  much  disquiet  to  His  ^Majesty's  subjects 
in  America,  and  the  pretence  for  acts  of  such  criminal  disorder  and  disobedience. 

His  Majesty,  ardently  Avishing  to  see  a  reconciliation  of  the  unhappy  differences 
which  haA'e  produced  those  disorders,  by  every  means  through  which  it  may  be  ob- 
tained, without  prejudice  to  the  just  authority  of  Parhament,  which  His  Majesty  will 
never  suffer  to  be  violated,  approves  the  resolution  of  his  faithlul  Conmions,  and 
commands  me  to  transmit  It  to  you,  not  doubting  that  this  happy  disposition  to  coin- 
ply  Avith  every  just  and  reasonable  wish  of  the  Ivlng's  subjects  In  America,  will  meet 
with  such  a  return  of  duty  and  affection  on  their  part,  as  will  lead  to  a  happy  Issue 
of  the  present  disputes,  and  to  a  re-establishment  oi'  the  public  tranquility  on  those 
grounds  of  ecjuity,  justice  and  moderation  which  this  resolution  holds  forth. 

The  King  has  the  greater  satisfaction  in  this  resolution,  and  the  greater  couh- 
<lence  in  the  good  effects  of  It,  from  having  seen,  that,  amidst  all  the  Intemperance 
Into  which  a  people,  jealous  of  liberties,  have  been  unfortunately  misled,  they  have 
nevertheless  avowed  the  justice,  and  the  propriety  of  subjects  of  the  same  state,  con- 
tributing according  to  their  abilities  and  situation,  to  the  public  burthens  ;  and  I  think 
I  am  warranted  in  saying,  that  this  resolution  holds  no  proposition  beyond  that. 

I  am  unwilling  to  suppose  that  any  of  the  King's  subjects  In  the  colonies,  can 
have  so  far  forgotten  the  benefits  they  have  received  from  the  parent  state,  as  not  to 
acknowledge  that  It  Is  to  her  support,  held  forth  at  the  expense  of  her  blood  and 
ti-easure,  that  they  principally  owe  that  security  wiiieh  has  raised  them  to  their  pre- 
sent state  of  opulence  and  Imj)ortance. 

In  this  situation,  therefore,  justice  requires  that  they  should  In  return  contribute 
according  to  their  respective  abilities  to  the  common  defence  ;  and  their  own  welfare 
and  Interest  demand  that  tlieir  civil  establishment  should  be  supported  with  a  be- 
coming dignity. 

It  has  been  the  care,  and  I  am  persuaded  it  is  the  firm  determination,  of  Parlia- 
ment, to  see  that  both  these  ends  are  answered  ;  and  their  wisdom  and  moderation 
have  suggested  the  propriety  of  leaving  to  each  colony  to  judge  of  the  ways  and 
means  of  making  due  provision  for  those  purposes ;  reserving  to  tliemselves  a  discre- 
tionary power  of  approving  or  disapproving  what  shall  be  offered. 

The  resolution  neither  points  out  what  the  civil  establishment  should  be,  nor  de- 
mands any  specific  sum,  In  aid  of  the  public  burthens ;  in  both  these  respects,  It 
leaves  full  scope  for  that  justice  and  liberality,  which  may  be  expected  from  colo- 
nies, that,  under  all  their  prejudices  have  never  been  wanting  in  expressions  of  an 
affectionate  attachment  to  the  mother  country,  and  a  zealous  regard  for  the  general 
welfare  of  the  British  empire. 

And  therefore,  the  King  trusts  that  the  provision  they  will  engage  to  make  for 
the  support  of  the  civil  government,  will  be  adecjuate  to  the  rank  and  station  of  every 
necessary  ofhcer ;  and  that  the  sum  to  be  given  In  contribution  to  the  common  de- 
fence, will  be  offered  on  such  terms,  and  proposed  In  such  a  way,  as  to  Increase  or 
diminish,  according  as  the  public  burthens  of  this  kingdom  are,  from  time  to  time, 
augmented  or  reduced.  In  so  far  as  those  burthens  consist  of  taxes  and  duties,  which 
are  not  a  security  for  the  national  debt. 


332  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1*775. 

Bv  such  a  mode  of  contribution,  the  colonies  will  have  full  security  that  they  can 
never  be  required  to  tax  themselves  without  Parliament's  taxing  the  subjects  of  this 
kingdom  in  a  far  greater  proportion. 

And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  any  pi-oposition  of  this  nature,  made  by  any  of 
the  colonies,  and  accompanied  with  such  a  statement  of  their  facilities  and  abilities 
as  mav  evince  the  equity  of  the  proposal,  will  be  received  with  every  possible  indul- 
gence ;  ])rovided.  it  be  at  the  same  time  unaccompanied  with  any  declarations,  and 
unmixed  with  any  claims  which  will  make  it  impossible  for  the  King,  consistent  with 
his  own  dignity,  or  for  Parliament,  consistent  with  their  constitutional  rights,  to  re- 
ceive it. 

But  I  will  not  suppose  that  any  of  the  colonies  will,  after  this  example  of  the  tem- 
pei*  and  moderation  of  Parliament,  adopt  such  a  conduct.  On  the  contrary.  I  will 
cherish  the  pleasing  hope,  that  the  public  peace  will  be  restored,  and  that  the  colo- 
nies, forgetting  all  other  trivial  and  groundless  complaints,  wliicli  ill  humor  hath 
produced,  will  enter  into  the  consideration  of  the  resolution  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, with  that  calmness  and  deliberation  which  the  importance  of  it  demands ;  and 
with  that  good  will  and  inclination  to  a  reconciliation,  Avhich  are  due  to  the  candor 
and  justice  with  which  Parliament  has  taken  up  this  business,  and  at  once  declared 
to  the  colonies  what  will  be  ultimatelj'  expected  from  tliem. 

I  have  already  said  that  the  King  entirely  appror^es  the  resolution  of  tlje  House 
of  Commons  ;  and  His  Majesty  commands  me  to  say,  that  a  compliance  therewith, 
by  the  General  Assembly  of  Ehode  Island,  will  be  most  graciously  considered  by 
His  Majesty,  not  only  as  a  testimony  of  their  reverence  for  Parliament ;  but  also,  as 
a  mark  of  their  <luty  and  attachment  to  their  sovereign,  who  has  no  olyect  nearer 
to  his  heart,  than  the  peace  and  ])i'ospcrity  of  his  subjt'cts  in  every  ])art  of  his 
dominions. 

At  the  same  time.  His  Majesty  considers  himself  as  boinul  by  every  tie,  to  exert 
those  means  the  constitution  has  placed  in  his  hands,  for  preserving  that  constitution 
entire,  and  to  resist  with  firmness  every  attempt  to  violate  the  rights  of  Parliament, 
to  distress  and  obstruct  the  lawful  commerce  of  his  subjects ;  and  to  encourage  in  the 
colonies  ideas  of  indi-pendence,  inconsistent  with  their  connection  with  this  kingdom. 
I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

DARTMOUTH. 

To  the  Governor  antl  Company  of  llhode  Island. 

Message  of  Governor  Wanton  to  the  General  Assemblij  of  Rhode 
Island. 

Z^ewport,  May  2d,  1775. 
To  the   General  Assembly  of  the   English   colony  of  Rhode   Island,   &c.,   to   be 
holden   at  Providence,  within  and  for  said  colony,  on  the  third  Wednesday  in 
I\Iay,  1775: 

Gentlemen : — As  indisposition  prevents  my  meeting  you  in  General  Assembly, 
that  candor  which  I  have  so  often  experienced  from  the  repi-esentatives  of  the  free- 
men of  this  colony,  encourages  me  to  hope  that  you  will  excuse  my  personal  attend- 
ance at  this  session. 

Since  the  last  session  of  the  General  Assembly,  at  Providence,  I  have  had  the 
honor  of  receiving  a  letter  from  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  one  of  His  Majesty's  princi- 
al    secretaries  of  state,  dated  Whitehall,  the  3d  March;  1775,  enclosing  the  resolu- 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  333 

tion  of  the  House  of  Commons,  respecting  the  jirovision  which  they  expect  each 
colony  or  province,  in  America,  to  make  for  the  oonmion  defence  ;  and  also  for  the 
support  of  the  civil  government,  and  the  administration  of  justice  in  such  colony 
both  Avhich,  I  have  directed  to  be  laid  before  you  ;  and  also  a  letter  from  the  com- 
mittee of  the  provincial  congress,  which  are  all  the  public  letters  I  have  received 
during  the  recess. 

As  the  dispute  between  Great  Britain  and  the  colonies,  is  now  brought  to  a  most 
alarming,  dangerous  crisis,  and  this  once  happy  country  threatened  with  all  the 
horrors  and  calamities  of  a  civil  war,  I  consider  myself  bound  by  every  tie  of  duty 
and  affection,  as  well  as  from  an  ardent  desire  to  see  a  union  between  Britain  and 
her  colonies,  established  upon  an  ecjuitable,  permanent  basis,  to  entreat  }ou  to  enter 
into  the  consideration  of  the  resolution  of  the  House  of  Commons;  and  also  His 
Lordship's  letter,  which  accompanied  that  resolution,  with  that  temper,  calmness  and 
deliberation  which  the  importance  of  them  demands  ;  and  with  that  inclination  to  a 
reconciliation  with  the  parent  state,  which  will  recommend  your  proceedings  to  His 
Majesty  and  both  Houses  of  Parliament. 

The  prosperity  and  happiness  of  this  colony,  is  founded  in  its  connexion  with 
Great  Britain  ;  ''for  if  once  Ave  are  separated,  where  shall  we  find  another  Britain 
to  supply  our  loss  V  Torn  from  the  body  to  which  we  are  united  by  religion,  liberty, 
laws  and  commerce,  we  must  bleed  at  every  vein." 

Your  charter  privileges  are  of  too  much  importance  to  be  forfeited  ;  aou  wih 
therefore  duly  consider  the  interesting  matters  now  before  you  with  the  most  atten. 
tive  caution,  and  let  me  entreat  you  not  to  suffer  your  proceedings  for  accommodat- 
ing those  disputes,  which  have  already  too  long  subsisted  between  both  countries,  to 
have  the  least  appearance  of  anger  or  resentment ;  but  that  a  kind,  respectful  be- 
havior towards  His  Majesty  and  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  accompany  all  vour 
deliberations. 

I  shall  always  be  ready  to  join  with  you,  in  every  measure  which  will  secure  the 
full  possession  of  our  invaluable  charter  privileges  to  the  latest  posterity,  and  pre- 
serve the  good  people  of  this  colony  from  that  ruin  and  destruction,  which,  in  my 
opinion,  some  of  the  orders  of  the  late  Assembly,  must  invariably  involve  them  in 
if  they  are  not  speedily  repealed ;  for  besides  the  fatal  consequences  of  levying  war 
against  the  King,  the  immense  load  of  debt  that  will  be  incurred,  if  the  late  resolu- 
tions for  raising  an  army  of  observation  of  fifteen  hundred  men  within  this  colony, 
be  carried  into  execution,  will  be  insupportable,  and  must  unavoidably  bring  on 
universal  bankruptcy  throughout  this  colony. 

If  I  have  the  honor  of  being  re-elected,  I  shall,  as  I  ever  have  done,  cheerfully  unite 
with  you  in  every  proceeding  (which  may  be  consistent  with  that  duty  and  allegi- 
giance  which  I  owe  to  the  King  and  the  British  constitution),  for  increasing  the 
welfare  and  hajopiness  of  this  government. 

I  am,  with  great  respect,  and  esteem,  gentlemen. 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

J.  WANTON. 

To  the  General  Assembly. 


S34  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1775. 


Metcalfe  Bowler,  Speaker  of  the    House    of  Representatives,  of 
Rhode  Island,  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Providence,  May  Sd,  1775. 

!Sir: — 1  am  reiiuested  l)y  tlic  General  Assembly,  to  inform  Your  Honor  that  you 
are.  by  the  neneral  eleetlnn,  lieM  here  this  day,  chosen  Governor  of  tlie  colony;  and 
to  desirt'  yuu  -would  return  liiein  au  innnediate  answer  Avhether  you  will  accept  of 
the  oHice  of  (iiivernur  of  tlie  colony  or  not;  and  if  you  accept,  you  would  be  pleased 
lo  attend  the  Assemlily,  as  soon  as  possible. 

This  }ou  will  receive  jjer  ^h\  Tears,  wlio  is  dispatched  express  tor  Your  Honor's 
answer.  I  am,  with  due  regard,  Your  Honor's,  &c., 

METCALFE  BOWLER,  Speaker. 

To  the  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq. 

Governor  Wanton  to  Metcalfe  Bolder,  Speaker  of  the  House  of 
Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Newport,  4th  May,  17  75.  ' 
Sir: — 1  recei\ed  your  favor  Ijy  Mi-.  Tears;  and  in  answi-r  thereto,  say:  that  the 
honor  done  me,  by  the  freemen  of  the  colony,  in  I'C-eleeting  me  their  chief  magis- 
trate, I  shall  accept  of,  as  I  wrote  the  Asssembly  of  the  2d  instant ;  but  cannot  pos- 
sibly attend  this  session,  on  account  of  my  indisposition,  unless  should  be  better  than 
at  present. 

I  am,  with  regards  to  the  gentlemen  of  the  Assembly,  theirs,  and — 

Youi-  friend,  and  humble  servant, 

J.  AVANTOX. 
To  the  Hon.  .Metcalfe  Bowler,  Es(i. 

Metcalfe    Boioler,  Speaker  of  the    House  of  Representatives  of 
Rhode  Island,  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Providence,  May  the  5th,  1775. 
Sir  : — f  am  ref[ueste'l  by  the  General  Assembly,  to  transmit  to  Your  Honor,  the 
form  of  a  blank  connnission,  proposed  to  be  given  to  the  commissioned  officers  of 
the  troops  that  are  already  voted  to  be  raised  by  this  colony,  as  an  army  of  observa- 
tion, and  rerjuest  A'our  Honor's  immediate  answer  wdiether  Your  Honor  will  sign, 
as  commander  in  chief  of  this  colony,  such  commissions,  when  they  are  presented  to- 
Your  Honor,  for  that  purpcjse  V 

This  is  sent  express,  per  Mr.  Tears,  who  is  ordered  to  riiturn  immediately  with 
Your  Honor's  answer  ;  as  this  Assembly  does  not  propose  to  rise  before  the  return 
of  this  ex})rcss. 

1  am,  with  regard,  Y(jur  Hrmor's  most  ol)edient  servant, 

METCALFE  BOWLER,  Speaker. 
To  the  Hon.  Joseph  Wanton,  Escp 


1775.]  AND   TROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  335 


Governor  Wanton,  to  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Speaker  of  the  House  of 
Representatives,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Newport,  .Jth  ]May,  1775. 
Sir  : — Tn  answer  to  your  favor  of  this  date,  reqiiestinu'  to  know  whethor  I  would 
sign,  as  commander  in  chief  of  this  colony,  the  commissions  of  the  olficers  of  the 
army  about  to  be  raised,  say  :  that  1  cannot  comply  with  it ;  having  heretofore  pro- 
tested against  the  vote  for  raising  men,  as  a  measure  inconsistent  witli  my  duty  to 
the  King,  and  repugnant  to  the  true  and  real  interest  of  this  government. 
I  am,  with  regards  to  the  gentlemen  of  the.  Assembly,  theirs,  and — • 

Your  friend,  and  humble  servant, 

J.  WANTON. 
To  tlie  lion.  ^Metcalfe  Bowler,  Esq. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colon//  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  East  Green- 
wich, on  the  second  Monday  in  June,  1775. 

The  Hon.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  Job  Randall,  Stephen  Hopkins  and  Charles  Har- 
ris, Esqs,  who  were  appointed  a  committee  to  revise  the  road 
called  Plainfield  Road,  presented  unto  this  Assembly,  a  plan 
of  the  said  road,  as  revised  by  them,  and  the  following  report, 
to  wit : 

Report  of  the  Committee,  appointed  by  the   General  Assembly, 
relative  to  the  Plainfield  Road. 

In  pursuance  of  our  appointment,  by  the  General  Assembly, 
we  have  revised  the  road,  called  Plainfield  Road,  from  a  black 
birch  pole,  in  Bennett's  Brook,  near  Jonathan  Olney's,  to  the 
Seven  Mile  Line,  or  to  Scituate  east  boundary  ;  and  do  pre^ 
sent  this  as  a  plan,  thereof.  JOB  RANDALL, 

STEPHEN  HOPKINS, 

Providence,  Dec.  10,  1774.        CHARLES  HARRIS. 


336  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND.         [1775. 

And  the  said  report  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
accepted. 

This  Assembly,  at  the  session  held  at  Providence,  on  the 
first  Wednesday  in  May  last,  having  passed  an  act  prohibiting 
His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor,  and  assistants,  from  admin- 
istering the  oath  of  office  to  the  Honorable  Joseph  Wanton, 
Esr[.,  who  was  elected  Governor  of  this  colony,  fur  the  present 
year  ;  and  declaring  all  acts  by  him  done  in  the  pretended  ca- 
pacity of  Governor,  null  and  void,  until  he  shall  be  engaged  in 
open  General  Assembly,  and  with  the  consent  of  the  General 
Asembly,  &c  ;  and  the  said  Joseph  Wanton  having  appeared 
before  this  Assembly,  and  demanded  that  the  oath  of  office  be 
administered  to  him  ;  and  this  General  Assembly  having  taken 
the  same  into  consideration, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
said  Joseph  Wanton  hath  not  given  satisfaction  to  this  Assem- 
bly ;  that  the  said  recited  act,  passed  at  the  last  session,  con- 
tinue and  be  in  force  until  the  rising  of  the  General  Assembly 
at  the  next  session  ;  and  that  this  act  be  immediately  pub- 
lished, by  inserting  a  copy,  thereof,  in  the  Newport  ^Mercury, 
and  Providence  Gazette,* 

*  Governor  Wanton  to  the  General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island. 

East  Greenwich,  June  iSth,  1775. 

Gentlemen: — The  charter  of  this  colony,  granted  by  His  Majesty  King  Charles  the 
Second,  expressly  ordains,  "that  all  and  every  Governor,  elected  and  chosen  by  virtue  of 
that  charter,  shall  give  his  engagement  before  two  or  more  of  the  assistants  of  the  colony, 
for  the  time  being ;"  notwithstanding  which,  I  observe,  by  an  act  of  3-ours,  passed  at  the  ses- 
sion, at  Providence, on  the  first  Wednesday  in  May,  and  published  in  the  ^'ewport  Mercury, 
you  have  thought  fit  to  forbid  the  Deputy  Governor  or  assistants  to  administer  the  oath  of 
office  to  me,  until  I  appear  in  open  Assembly;  and  even  then,  not  without  your  consent. 

As  I  had  the  honor  of  being  choSen  Governor  of  this  polony  at  the  election  held  at  Provi- 
dence, on  the  first  Wednesday  in  May  ;  but  through  indisposition  could  not  attend  at  that 
session,  I  now  appear,  in  order  to  take  the  oath  of  office  prescribed  by  law,  and  request  that 
you  would  give  the  necessary  directions  for  the  due  administering  of  the  same. 

As  you  have  been  pleased  to  arraign  my  administration,  by  charging  me  with  manifest- 
ing an  intention  to  defeat  these  colonies  in  their  struggles  for  the  preservation  of  their 
rights,  I  shall  here  take  the  freedom  to  answer  the  several  allegations  you  have  exhibited 
against  me,  with  as  much  conciseness  as  possible. 

I  have  ever  cpnsidered  it  as  the  distinguishing  privilege  of  an  Englishman,  to  give  his 
opiuiou  ypon  any  public  transaction,  wherein  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  the  community 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  337 

An  Act  for  dividing  the   First   Company  of  Trained  Bands  in 
Scituate,  in  the  County  of  Providence,  into  two. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor be,  and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  write  to  James  Wal- 
lace, Esq.,  commander  of  His  Majesty's  ship  Rose,  now  in  the 
harbor  of  Newport,  and  demand  of  him  the  reason  of  his  con- 
duct towards  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  in  stopping  and  de- 


to  which  he  belonged,  was  immediately  concerned,  without  incuiring  a  public  censure 
therefor. 

Upon  this  principle,  I  presumed  to  exercise  the  right  of  private  judgment,  when  I  pro- 
tested against  the  vote  for  raisin'-  troops  within  this  colony  ;  for  I  conscientiously  believed 
it  was  a  measure  replete  with  the  most  injurious  consequences  to  the  good  people  of  this 
government ;  and  therefore,  from  an  anxious  concern  for  their  happiness,  bore  my  public 
testimony  against  it.  I  cannot  conceive  that  in  so  doing,  I  have  been  guilty  of  any  misde- 
meanor, and  consequently  not  reprehensible  for  that,  which  ought  only  be  considered  by 
those  of  a  different  sentiment,  as  an  error  in  judgment. 

As  to  the  second  allegation,  for  not  issuing  a  proclamation  for  the  due  observance  of  the 
11th  of  May,  as  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer  throughout  the  colony,  I  shall  only  observe  that 
the  proclamation  was  begun  and  would  have  been  published  and  sent  into  the  colony,  on 
Monday,  the  8th  of  May,  had  you  not,  by  your  own  vote,  on  the  7th,  divested  me  of  that 
power  which  might  have  been  thought  necessary  for  enjoining  the  due  observation  thereof 
I  had  no  design  to  counteract  your  intentions  in  that  matter  ;  for  in  a  time  of  such  universal 
distress,  it  is  mv  opinion,  we  cannot  act  a  more  proper  and  rational  part,  than  confessing 
our  manifold  sins  before  Almighty  God,  and  deprecating  his  judgments. 

The  third  allegation,  you  have  thought  proper  to  adduce  against  me,  of  non-attendance  at 
the  session,  in  Providence,  is  without  the  least  colorable  pretext,  after  having  twice  in- 
formed you,  during  that  session,  that  indisposition  prevented  my  attending;  I  again  con- 
firm it,  and  am  extremely  sorry  to  find,  by  any  of  your  proceedings,  it  should  be  doubted. 

To  the  fourth  allegation,  you  have  been  pleased  to  exhibit  against  me,  of  not  signing  the 
commissions  for  the  officers  appointed  to  command  the  troops  to  be  raised  by  this  colony, 
the  following  observation,  I  imagine,  if  considered  with  candor,  will  be  a  sufficient  justifi- 
cation of  my  conduct,  ia  that  affair. 

The  vote  for  raising  of  men,  upon  very  mature  deliberation,  I  had  considered,  as  a  mea- 
sure pregnant  with  the  most  fatal  consequences  to  the  good  people  of  this  colony;  upon 
that  principle,  I  protested  against  the  vote  ;  it  would,  therefore,  have  been  highly  improper 
jn  me  to  have  given  commissions  for  the  execution  of  a  measure,  which,  in  my  opinion,  was 
subversive  of  the  true  interest  of  this  government. 

Upon  the  strictest  examination  into  my  past  administration,  I  cannot  impeach  myself 
with  the  least  intention  of  having  designedly  executed  any  measure,  which  might  prove 
detrimental  to  the  rights  of  this  colony. 

I  am  closely  united  to  the  inhabitants,  by  every  endearing  tie  ;  and  their  happiness  I  con- 
sider as  inseparably  connected  with  mine ;  I  shall  therefore,  whether  in  public  or  pri- 
vate life,  constantly  pursue  such  a  line  of  conduct,  as,  in  my  opinion,  will  have  a  tendency 
to  increase  the  reputation  and  felicity  of  every  part  of  this  once  happy  colony. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  your  sincere  friend  and  humble  servant, 

J.  WANTON. 

To  the  Hon.  the  General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,    i 
now  sitting  at  East  Greenwich.  ) 

VOL.  VII.         43 


3S8  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

taining  their  vessels  ;   and  also  to  demand  of  him  the  packets 
which  he  detains.* 

Whereas,  Mr.  John  Carter  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly, 
an  account,  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  printing 
fifty-eight  thousand  lawful  money  bills,  one  thousand  six  hun- 
dred inlistments  for  the  army  of  observation,  the  proceedings 

*  The  Deputy  Governor  of  Rhode  Island,  to  Capf.  James  Wallace, 
Commander  of  His  Majesty's  Ship  Rose. 

East  Greenwich,  June  14th,  1775. 

Sir :— Long  have  the  good  people  of  this  colony  been  oppressed  by  your  conduct,  in  in- 
terrupting their  lawful  trade,  and  preventing  the  importation  of  the  provisions  necessary 
for  their  subsistence. 

The  acts  of  the  British  Parliament,  already  filled  with  restrictions  of  trade,  oppressive  in 
the  highest  degree,  seem  by  you,  to  be  thought  too  lenient. 

Not  controlled  by  those  you  atfect  to  call  your  masters,  you  have  detained  the  persons  and 
taken  away  the  properties  of  His  Majesty's  American  subjects,  without  any  warrant  from 
the  acts  of  trade  ;  by  which,  you  have  greatly  impeded  the  intercourse  between  this  and  the 
other  colonies,  as  well  as  between  the  different  parts  of  this  colony.  The  inhabitants,  ex- 
pecting the  interposition  of  the  lawful  authority  of  the  colony,  have  borne  these  outrages 
with  a  patience  almost  criminal. 

The  Legislature  have  heard  their  complaints,  and  in  consequence  of  an  act  passed  b}'  the 
General  Assembly  this  day,  I  demand  of  you  the  reason  of  your  conduct  towards  the  inhab- 
itants of  this  colony,  in  stopping  and  detaining  their  vessels.  And  I  also  demand  of  you> 
that  you  immediately  restore  the  two  packets,  belonging  to  some  inhabitants  of  the  town  of 
Providence;  and  all  other  vessels  belonging  to  the  inhabitants,  of  this  colony  which  you 
have  taken  and  unjustly  detained. 

So  long  as  you  remain  in  the  colony,  and  demean  yourself  as  becomes  your  otEce,  j-ou 
may  depend  upon  the  protection  of  the  laws,  apd  every  assistance  for  promoting  the  public 
service,  in  my  power.  And  you  may  also  be  assured  that  the  whole  power  of  this  colony 
will  be  exerted  to  secure  the  persons  and  properties  of  the  inhabitants  against  every  lawless 
invader. 

An  immediate  answer  is  requested  to  this  letter. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 

To  Capt.  James  Wallace. 

Copt.  James  Wallace,  of  His  Majesty's  Ship  Rose,  to  the  Deputy 
Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

His  Majesty's  Ship  Rose,  i 
Rhode  Island,  June  15,  1775.  ) 
Sir  : — I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  14th  inst. ;  although  I  am  unacquainted  with  you, 
or  what  stction  you  act  in  ;  suppose  you  write  in  behalf  of  some  body  of  people;  therefore, 
previous  to  my  giving  an  .inswer,  I  must  desire  to  know  whether  or  net,  you,  or  the  people 
on  whose  behalf  j-ou  write,  are  not  in  open  rebellion  to  your  lawful  sovereign,  and  the  acts 
of  the  Britiish  legislature! 

I  am,  sir  your  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

J  AS.  WALLACE. 
To  Nicholas  Cooke,  Esq. 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  339 

ings  of  this  Assembly,  at  the  sessions  in  April  and  May  last, 
&c.  ;   and  the  said  account  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  £59  los.  ^d.,  lawful  money,  being  the 
amount  thereof,  be  paid  the  said  John  Carter,  out  of  the  gen^ 
eral  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  no  soldier  belonging  to  the  ar- 
my of  observation,  raised  by  this  colony,  be  allowed  to  take  up 
of  the  commissary  any  more  than  one-third  part  of  his  monthly 
wages  for  his  own  use  ;  and  that  whatever  more  the  commis- 
sary shall  supply  or  pay  to  the  soldiers,  shall  be  at  his  own 
risk. 

An  Act  dividing  the  Company  of  Militia,  in  the  town  of  John- 
ston, into  two  companies. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  allowance  to  the  soldiers  in 
camp,  be  as  folio weth  to  wit : 

One  pound  of  bread,  one  pound  of  beef  or  pork,  a  half 
penny  for  vegtables,  half  a  gill  of  rice,  one  pint  of  milk,  one 
quart  of  beer  per  day,  and  one  pint  of  molasses,  per  week. 

That  once  a  week,  instead  of  meat,  they  have  a  pound  of 
fish,  an  ounce  of  butter  and  half  a  pint  of  vinegar  ;  that  if  they 
have  no  milk,  they  be  allowed  a  gill  and  an  half  of  rice  per 
day  ;  that  if  the  half  penny  per  day,  for  vegetables,  be  not 
sufficient,  the  brigadier  general  be  empowered  to  increase  the 
same  to  a  sufficient  allowance  ;  and  that  the  commissary  furnish 
them  with  the  same  quantity  of  soap  as  is  allowed  by  the  colo- 
ny of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  to  their  troops. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  William  Blodget  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  appointed  secretary  to  the  army  of  observation 
raised  by  this  colony  ;  and  that  he  be  allowed  the  wages  of 
c£4  IO5.,  lawful  money,  per  month. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  following  rules  and  orders, 
for  regulating  the  army  of  observation,  raised  by  this  colony, 
be,  and  they  are  hereby,  approved ;   and  that  the  secretary 


340  RECORDS    OP    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1775. 

procure  the  siime  to  be  printed,  and  supply  the  brigadier  g-en- 
eral,  each  field  officer,  the  commissary  and  each  commissioned 
officer,  with  a  copy  thereof. 

Rules  and  Orders  of  the  Army  of  Observation,  of  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island. 


Whereas,  the  lust  of  power,  which  of  old  oppressed,  persecuted  and  exiled  our  pious 
And  virtuous  ancestors,  from  their  fair  possessions  in  Britain,  now  pursues,  with  tenfold 
severity,  us,  their  guiltless  children,  who  are  unjustly  and  wickedly  charged  with 
licentiousness,  sedition,  treason  and  rebellion  ;  ahd  being  deeply  impressed  with  a 
sense  of  the  almost  incredible  fatigues  and  liardships  our  venerable  progenitors  en- 
countered, who  fled  from  oppression  for  the  sake  of  civil  and  religious  liberty  for 
themselves  and  their  oflTspring,  and  began  a  settlement  hero  on  bare  creation,  at 
their  own  expense. 

And  having  seriously  considered  the  duty  we  owe  to  God,  to  the  memory  of  such 
invincible  worthies,  to  the  King,  to  Great  Britain,  our  country,  ourselves  and  pos- 
terity, do  think  it  an  indispensable  duty,  by  all  lawful  ways  and  means  in  our  power, 
to  recover,  maintain,  defend  and  preserve,  the  free  exercise  of  all  those  civil  and 
1-eligious  rights  and  liberties,  for  which  many  of  our  forefathers  fought,  bled  and 
died ;  and  to  hand  them  down  entire,  for  the  free  enjoyment  of  the  latest  posterity. 

And  whereas,  the  keeping  a  standing  army  in  any  of  these  colonies,  in  times  of 
peace,  without  the  consent  of  the  legislature  of  that  colony,  in  which  such  an  army 
is  kept,  is  against  law. 

And  whereas,  such  an  army,  with  a  large  naval  force,  is  now  ])laced  in  the  harbor 
of  Boston,  for  the  purpose  of  subjecting  us  to  the  power  of  the  British  Parliament. 

And  whereas,  we  are  frequently  told  by  the  tools  of  the  administration,  dupes  to  min- 
isterial usurpation,  that  Great  Britain  will  not,  in  any  degree,  relax  in  her  measures, 
until  we  acknowledge  her  "  right  to  make  laws  binding  upon  us,  in  all  cases,  Avhat- 
soever  ;"  and  that  if  we  refuse  to  be  slaves  ;  if  we  persist  in  our  denial  of  her  claim,  the 
dispute  must  be  decided  by  arms,  in  which  it  is  said  by  our  enemies,  "  we  shall  have 
no  chance,  being  undisci])lined,  cowards,  disobedient,  impatient  of  command,  and 
possessed  of  that  spirit  of  levelling,  which  admits  of  no  order,  subordination,  rule  or 
government." 

And  whereas,  from  the  ministerial  army  and  fleet  now  at  Boston,  the  large  rein- 
forcement of  troops  expected,  the  late  circular  letters  to  the  governors  upon  the 
continent,  the  general  tenor  of  intelligence  from  Great  Britain,  and  the  hostile  pre- 
parations making  here;  as  also  from  the  threats  and  frequent  insults  of  our  enemies, 
we  have  reason  to  apprehend  that  the  sudden  destruction  of  this  colony  is  in  contem- 
plation, if  not  determined  upon. 

And  whereas,  the  great  law  of  self  preservation  hath  required  our  raising  and 
keeping  an  army  of  observation  and  defence,  in  order  to  prevent  or  repel  any  far- 
ther attempts  to  enforce  the  late  cruel  and  oppressive  acts  of  the  British  Parha- 
ment,  which  are  evidently  designed  to  subject  us,  and  the  whole  continent,  to  the 
most  ignominious  slavery. 

And  whereas,  in  keeping  such  an  army,  it  will  be  necessary  that  the  officers  and 
soldiers  in  the  same,  be  fully  acquainted  with  their  duty ;  and  that  the  articles,  rules, 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  '  341 

and  regulations  thereof,  be  made  as  plain  as  possible  ;  and  having  great  confidence 
n  the  honoi'  and  public  virtue  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  that  they  wiU 
i^eadily  obey  their  officers,  and  -will  cheerfully  do  their  duty,  when  known,  without 
any  sucll  severe  articles  and  rules  (except  in  capital  cases),  and  cruel  punishments, 
as  are  usually  practised  in  standing  armies,  and  will  submit  to  all  such  rules  and 
regulations  as  are  founded  in  reason,  honor  and  virtue. 

It  is  therefore  resolved,  that  the  following  articles,  rules  and  regulations,  for  the 
army,  raised  by  this  colony,  for  the  defence  and  security  bf  our  lives,  liberties  and  estates, 
be,  and  hereby  are,  established,  and  required  to  be  strictly  adhered  to,  by  all  offi- 
cers, soldiers  and  others  concerned,  as  Ihey  regard  their  own  honor,  and  the  public 
good ;  and  upon  the  penalties  and  forfeitures  hereinafter  mentioned. 

Ai'ticle  1.  All  officers  and  soldiers,  not  having  just  impediment,  shall  diligently 
frequent  divine  service  and  sermon,  in  the  places  appointed  for  assembling  of  the 
regiment,  troop,  or  company,  to  which  they  belong ;  and  such  as  wilfully  absent 
themselves,  or  being  present,  behave  indecently  or  irreverently,  shall,  if  commis- 
sioned officers,  be  brought  before  a  regimental  coui-t  martial,  there  to  be  publicly 
and  severely  reprimanded  by  the  president ;  if  non-commissioned  officers  or  sol- 
diers, every  person  so  offending,  shall,  for  his  first  oflfence,  forfeit  one  shilling,  to  be 
deducted  out  of  his  wages  ;  for  the  second  offence,  he  shall  not  only  forfeit  one  shil- 
ling, but  be  confined,  not  exceeding  twenty-four  hours  ;  and  for  every  like  offence, 
shall  suffer  and  pay  in  like  manner ;  which  money,  so  forfeited,  shall  be  applied  to 
the  use  of  the  sick  soldiers  of  the  troop  or  company  to  which  the  offender  belongs. 

Art.  2.  "Whatsoever  non-commissioned  officer,  or  soldier,  shall  use  any  unlawful 
oath  or  execration,  shall  incur  the  penalty  of  six  pence  ;  and  if  a  commissioned  officer 
be  thus  guilty  of  profane  cursing  and  swearing,  he  shall  forfeit  and  pay  for  each  and 
every  such  offence,  the  sum  of  nine  pence,  lawful  money. 

Art.  3.  Any  officer  or  soldier,  who  shall  behave  himself  with  contempt  or  disre- 
spect towards  the  general  or  generals,  or  commander  in  chief  of  the  Ehode  Island 
f  orces,  or  shall  speak  words  tending  to  his  or  their  hurt  or  dishonor,  shall  be  pun- 
ished according  to  the  nature  of  his  offence,  by  the  judgment  of  a  general  court 
martial. 

Art.  4.  Any  officer  or  soldier,  who  shall  begin,  excite,  cause,  or  Join  in  any  mutiny 
or  sedition,  in  ihe  regiment,  troop,  or  company,  to  which  he  belongs,  or  in  any  other 
regiment,  troop,  or  company,  of  the  Rhode  Island  forces,  either  by  land  or  sea,  or 
in  any  party,  post,  detachment,  or  guard,  on  any  pretence,  whatsoever,  shall  sutler 
such  punishment  as  by  a  general  court  martial  shall  be  ordered. 

Art.  5.  Any  officer,  non-commissioned  officer,  or  soldier,  who  being  present  at 
any  mutiny,  or  sedition;  does  not  use  his  utmost  endeavors  to  suppress  the  same  ;  or 
coming  to  the  knowledge  of  any  mutiny,  or  intended  mutiny,  does  not,  without  delay, 
give  information  thereof,  to  the  commanding  officer,  shall  be  punished  by  order  of  a 
a  general  court  martial,  according  to  the  nature  of  his  offence. 

Art.  6.  Any  officer  or  soldier,  who  shall  strike  his  superior  officer,  or  draw,  or  offer 
to  draw,  or  shall  lift  up  any  weapon,  or  offer  any  violence  against  him,  being  in  the' 
execution  of  his  office,  on  any  pretence,  whatsoever,  or  shall  disobey  an}'  lawful  com- 
mands of  his  superioi^  officer,  shall  suffer  such  punishment  as  shall,  according  to  the 
nature  of  his  offence,  be  ordered  by  the  sentence  of  a  general  court  martial. 

Art.  7.  Any  non-commissioned  officer,  or  soldier,  who  shall  desert,  or  without 
leave  of  his  commanding  oflicer,  absent  himself  from  the  troop  or  company  to  which 


S42  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  1775. 

he  belongs,  or  from  any  detachment  of  the  same,  shall,  upon  being  convicted 
thereof,  be  punished  according  to  the  nature  of  his  offence,  at  the  discretion  of  a 
general  court  martial. 

Art.  8.  What.-;oever  officer  or  soldier,  shall  be  convicted  of  having  advised  or 
persuaded  anv  other  ofticer  or  soldier  to  desert,  shall  suffer  such  punishment  as 
shall  be  ordered  by  the  sentence  of  a  general  court  martial. 

Art.  9.  All  officers,  of  what  condition  soever,  shall  have  power  to  part  and  quell 
all  quarrels,  frays,  and  disorders,  though  the  persons  concerned  should  belong  to  an- 
other regiment,  troop,  or  company,  and  either  order  officers  to  be  arrested,  or  non- 
commissioned officers  or  soldiers  to  be  confined  and  imprisoned,  till  their  proper  su- 
perior officers  shall  be  acquainted  therewith ;  and  whoever  shall  refuse  to  obey  such 
officer  (though  of  an  inferior  rank),  or  shall  draw  his  sword  upon  him.  shall  be  pun- 
ished at  the  discretion  of  a  general  court  martial. 

Art.  10.  No  officer  or  soldier  shall  use  any  reproachful  or  provoking  speeches  or 
gestures  to  another ;  nor  shall  presume  to  send  a  challenge  to  an^'  person,  to  fight 
a  duel ;  and  whoever  shall  knowingly  and  willingly  suffer  any  person,  whatsoever,  to 
go  forth  to  fight  a  duel ;  or  shall  second,  promote,  or  carry  any  challenge,  shall  be 
deemed  as  a  principal ;  and  whatsoever  officer  or  soldier  shall  Upbraid  another  foi' 
refusing  a  challenge,  shall  also  be  considered  as  a  challenger ;  and  all  such  offenders, 
in  any  of  these  or  such  like  cases,  shall  be  punished  at  the  discretion  of  a  general 
court  matial. 

Art.  11.  Every  officer,  commanding  in  quarters,  or  on  a  march,  shall  keep  good 
order,  and,  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  redress  all  such  abuses,  or  disorders,  which 
may  be  committed  by  any  officer  or  soldier  under  his  command;  if  upon  any  com- 
plaint made  to  him,  of  officers  or  soldiers,  beating,  or  otherwise  ill-treating  any  per- 
son, or  <of  committing  any  kind  of  riot,  to  the  disquieting  of  the  inhabitants  of  this 
continent ;  he,  the  said  commander,  who  shall  refuse  or  omit  to  see  justice  done  on 
the  offender  or  offenders,  and  reparation  made  to  the  party  or  parties  injured,  as  far 
as  the  offender's  wages  shall  enable  him  or  them,  shall,  upon  due  proof  thereof,  be 
punished  as  ordered  by  a  general  court  martial,  in  such  manner  as  if  he  himself  had 
committed  the  crimes  or  disorders  complained  of. 

Art.  12.  If  any  officer  shall  think  himself  to  be  wronged  by  his  colonel,  or  the 
commanding  officer  of  the  regiment,  and  shall,  upon  due  application  made  to  him, 
be  refused  to  be  redressed,  he  may  complain  to  the  genei-al,  or  conmiander  in  chief 
of  the  Rhode  Island  forces,  in  order  to  obtain  justice,  who  is  hereby  required  to  ex- 
amine into  said  complaint,  and  see  that  justice  be  done. 

Art.  13.  If  any  inferior  officer  or  soldier,  shall  think  himself  wronged  by  his 
captain  or  other  officer,  commanding  the  troop  or  company  to  which  he  belongs 
he  is  to  complain  thereof,  to  the  conmianding  officer  of  the  regiment,  who  is  hereby 
required  to  summon  a  regimental  court  martial,  for  the  doing  justice  to  the  com- 
plainant; from  which  regimental  court  martial,  either  party  may,  if  he  thinks  him- 
self still  aggrieved,  appeal  to  a  general  court  martial ;  but  if,  upon  a  second  hearing, 
the  appeal  shall  a])pear  to  be  vexatious  and  groundless,  tlie  person  so  apijealing, 
shall  be  punished  at  the  discretion  of  the  general  court  martial. 

Art.  14.  Whatsoever  non-commissioned  officer,  or  soldier,  shall  be  convicted,  at  a 
regimental  court  martial,  of  having  sold,  or  designedly,  or  through  neglect  Avasted  the 
anununition,  arms  or  provisions,  or  other  military  stores,  delivered  out  to  him,  to  be 
employed  in  the  service  of  this  colony,  shall,  if  an  officer,  be  reduced  to  a  private  sen- 


1775.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  343 

tinel ;  and  if  a  private  soldier,  shall  sufler  such  punishment  as  shall  be  ordered  l3y  a 
reyiim?ntal  court  martial. 

Art.  1.5.  All  non-commissioned  officers  and  soldiers,  shall  be  allowed  the  limits  of 
one  mile  from  the  jilace  of  encampment,  unless  the  commander  in  chief  shall  think 
proper  to  mark  out  shorter  limitations.  Every  officer  or  soldier,  found  Avithout 
those  limits,  without  leave  in  writing,  shall  suffer  such  punishment  as  shall  be  iiv 
flicted  bv  a  retrimental  court  martial. 

Art.  1(3.  No  officer  or  soldier,  shall  lie  out  of  his  quarters  or  camp,  without  leave 
from  the  commanding  officer  of  the  regiment,  upon  penalty  of  being  punished  ac- 
cording to  the  nature  of  his  offence,  by  order  of  a  regimental  court  martial. 

Art.  1 7.  Every  non-commissioned  officer  and  soldier,  shall  retire  to  his  quarters, 
or  tent,  at  the  beating  of  the  retreat ;  in  default  of  which,  he  shall  be  punished  ac- 
cording to  the  nature  of  his  offence,  by  order  of  the  commanding  officer. 

Art.  18.  No  officer,  non-commissioned  officer  or  soldier,  shall  fail  of  repairing,  at 
the  time  fixed,  to  the  place  of  parade  or  exercise,  or  other  rendezvous,  appointed  by 
the  commanding  officer,  if  not  prevented  by  sickness,  or  some  other  evident  neces- 
sity ;  or  shall  go  from  the  said  place  of  rendezvous,  or  from  his  guard,  without  leave 
fi'om  his  conimandiiig  officer,  before  he  shall  be  regularly  dismissed  or  relieved,  on 
penalty  of  being  punished  according  to  the  nature  of  his  offence,  by  the  sentence  of 
a  regimental  court  martial. 

Art.  19.  Whatsoever  commissioned  officer,  shall  be  found  drunk  on  his  guard, 
party  or  other  duty,  under  arms,  shall  be  cashiered  for  It ;  any  non-commissioned 
officer  or  soldier,  so  offending,  shall  suffer  such  punishment  as  shall  be  ordered  by 
the  sentence  of  a  regimental  court  mai'tial. 

Ai't.  20.  Whatsoever  sentinel  shall  be  found  sleeping  upon  his  post,  or  shall  leave 
it  before  he  shall  be  regularly  relieved,  shall  suffer  such  punishment  as  shall  be 
ordered  by  the  sentence  of  a  general  court  martial. 

Art.  21.  Any  person  belonging  to  the  Rhode  Island  army,  who,  by  discharging 
of  fire-arms,  beating  of  drums,  or  by  any  other  means,  whatsoever,  shall  occasion 
false  alarms,  in  'lamp  or  quarters,  shall  suffer  such  punishment  as  shall  be  ordered 
by  the  sentence  of  a  general  court  martial. 

Art.  22.  Any  officer  or  soldier,  who  shall,  without  urgent  necessity,  or  without 
leave  of  his  superior  officer,  quit  his  platoon  or  dlvisliji,  shall  be  punished  according 
to  the  nature  of  his  offence,  by  the  sentence  of  a  regimental  court  martial. 

Art.  23.  No  officer  or  soldier,  shall  do  violence,  or  offer  any  insult  or  abuse,  to 
any  person,  who  shall  bring  provisions  or  other  necessaries,  to  the  camp  or  quarters 
of  the  Rhode  Island  army ;  any  officer  or  soldier,  so  offending,  shall,  upon  complaint 
being  made  to  the  commanding  officer,  suffer  such  punishment  as  shall  be  ordered 
by  a  regimental  court  martial. 

Art.  24.  Whatsoever  officer  or  soldier,  shall  shamefully  abandon  any  post  com- 
mitted to  his  charge,  or  shall  speak  words  inducing  others  to  do  the  like,  in  time  of 
an  engagement,  shall  suffer  death  immediately. 

Art.  25.  Any  person  belonging  to  the  Rhode  Island  army,  who  shall  make 
known  the  watch-word  to  any  person  who  is  not  entitled  to  receive  it,  according  to 
the  rules  and  discipline  of  war,  or  shall  presume  to  give  a  parole  or  watch- word,  dif- 
ferent from  what  he  received,  shall  suffer  death,  or  such  other  punishment  as  shall 
be  ordered  by  the  sentence  of  a  geiieral  court  martial. 

Art.  26.     Whosoever,  belonging  to  the  Rhode  Island  army,  shall  relieve  the  enemy 


344  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

with  money,  victuals  or  amnuiiiitiou  ;  or  shall  knowingly  harbor  or  protect  an  enemy, 
shall  suffer  such  punishment  as  by  a  general  court  martial  shall  be  ordered. 

Art.  27.  Whosoever,  belonging  to  the  Rhode  Island  army,  shall  be  couvicred  of 
holding  cori-espondence  with,  or  of  giving  intelligence  to,  the  enemy,  either  directly 
or  indircctlv,  s^iall  suffer  such  punishment  as  by  a  general  court  martial  shall  be 
ordered. 

Art.  2>!.  All  jtublic  stores,  taken  in  the  enemy's  camp  or  magazines,  -whether  of 
artillery,  ammunition,  clothing  or  provisions,  shall  be  secured  for  the  use  of  the  colony 
of  lllioile  Island. 

Ai-t.  2;>.  If  any  officer  or  soldier  shall  leave  his  post  or  colors,  in  time  of  an  engage- 
ment, to  go  in  search  of  plunder,  he  shall,  upon  being  convicted  thereof,  before  a 
general  cciuit  martial,  suffer  such  piuiishment  as  by  said  court  martial  shall  be 
ordered. 

Art.  30.  If  any  commander  of  any  post,  entrenchment  or  fortress,  shall  be  com- 
pelled, by  the  officers  or  soldiers  under  his  command,  to  give  it  up  to  the  enemy,  or 
to  abandon  it,  the  commissioned  officer,  non-commissioned  officers  or  soldiers,  who 
shall  be  convicted  of  having  so  offended,  shall  suffer  death,  or  such  other  punishment 
as  may  be  inflicted  upon  them,  by  the  sentence  of  a  general  court  martial. 

Art.  .31.  All  sutlers  and  retailers  to  a  camp,  and  all  persons,  whatsoever,  serving 
with  the  Rhode  Island  army,  in  the  field,  though  not  enlisted  soldiers,  are  to  be  sub- 
ject to  the  articles,  rules  and  regulations,  of  the  Rhode  Island  army. 

Art.  32.  No  general  court  martial  shall  consist  of  a  less  number  than  thirteen  ; 
none  of  Avhich,  shall  be  under  the  degree  of  a  commissioned  officer ;  and  the  presi- 
dent shall  be  a  field  officer ;  and  the  president  of  each  and  every  court  martial, 
whether  general  or  regimental,  shall  have  power  to  administer  an  oath  to  every  wit- 
ness, in  order  to  the  trial  of  offenders ;  and  the  mernbers  of  all  courts  martial,  shall 
be  duly  sworn  by  the  president ;  and  the  next  in  rank  on  the  court  martial,  shall  ad- 
minister the  oath  to  the  president. 

Art.  33.  The  members,  both  of  general  and  regimental  courts  martial,  shall, 
when  belonging  to  different  corps,  take  the  same  rank  which  they  hold  m  the  army ; 
but  when  courts  martial  shall  be  composed  of  one  corps,  they  shall  take  their  ranks 
according  to  their  commissions,  by  which  they  are  mustered  in  the  said  corps. 

Art.  34.  All  the  members  of  a  court  martial,  are  to  behave  with  calmness,  de- 
cency and  impartiality;  and  in  the  giving  of  their  votes,  are  to  begin  with  the 
youngest  or  lowest,  in  the  commission. 

Art.  35.  No  field  officer  shall  be  tried  by  any  person  under  the  degree  of  cap- 
tain ;  nor  shall  any  proceedings  or  trials  be  carried  on,  excepting  between  the  hours 
of  eight  in  the  )nornIng,  and  three  in  the  afternoon  ;  except  in  cases  which  require 
an  immediate  example. 

Art.  36.  The  commissioned  officers  of  every  regiment,  may,  by  the  appointment 
of  their  colonel,  or  commanding  officer,  hold  regimental  courts  martial,  for  the  in- 
quiring into  such  disputes,  or  criminal  matters,  as  may  come  before  them,  and  for 
the  inflicting  corporeal  punishments  for  small  offences  ;  and  shall  give  judgment  by 
the  majority  of  voices ;  but  no  sentence  shall  be  executed  till  the  commanding  officer 
(not  being  a  member  of  the  court  martial,)  shall  have  confirmed  the  same. 

Art.  3  7.  No  regimental  court  martial  shall  consist  of  less  than  five  officers  ;  ex- 
cepting in  cases  where  that  number  cannot  be  conveniently  assembled,  when  three 
may  be  sufficient ;  who  are  lil^evyise  to  determine  upon   the  sentence   by  the  ma- 


1775.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  S45 

jorlty  of  voices  ;  whicli  sentence,  is  to  be  confirmed  by  the  commanding  officer,  not 
being,  a  member  of  the  court  martial. 

Art.  38.  Every  officer,  commanding  in  any  fort,  castle  or  barrack,  or  elsewhere, 
where  the  corps  under  his  command  consists  of  detachments  from  diffiirent  regi- 
ments, or  of  independent  companies,  may  assemble  courts  martial  for  the  trial  of  of- 
fenders, in  the  same  manner  as  if  they  were  regimental,  whose  sentence  is  not  to 
be  executed  till  it  shall  be  confirmed  by  the  said  commanding  officer. 

Art.  39.  No  person  whatsoever,  shall  use  menacing  words,  signs  or  gestures,  in 
the  presence  of  a  court  martial,  then  sitting,  or  shall  cause  any  disorder  or  riot,  so 
as  to  disturb  their  proceeding,  on  the  penalty  of  being  punished  at  the  discretion  of 
the  said  court  martial. 

Art.  40.  To  the  end  that  offenders  may  be  brought  to  justice  ;  whenever  any 
officer  or  soldier  shall  commit  a  crime  deserving  punishment,  he  shall,  by  his  com- 
manding officer,  if  an  officer,  be  put  in  arrest ;  if  a  non-commissioned  officer,  or  sol- 
dier, be  imprisoned,  till  he  shall  be  either  tried  by  a  court  martial,  or  shall  be  law- 
fully discharged  by  proper  authority. 

Art.  41.  No  officer  or  soldier,  who  shall  be  put  in  arrest  or  imprisonment,  shall 
continue  in  his  confinement,  more  than  eight  days,  or  till  such  time  as  a  court  mar" 
tial  can  be  conveniently  assembled. 

Art.  42.  No  officer  commanding  a  guard,  or  provost  marshal,  shall  refuse  to  re- 
ceive or  keep  any  prisoner  committed  to  his  charge,  by  an  officr  belonging  to  the 
Rhode  Island  forces ;  which  officer  shall  at  the  same  time  deliver  an  account  in 
writing,  signed  by  himself,  of  the  crime  with  which  the  said  prisoner  is  charged. 

Art.  43.  No  officer  commanding  a  guard,  or  provost  marshal,  shall  presume  to 
release  any  prisoner  committed  to  his  charge,  without  proper  authority  for  so  doing  i 
nor  shall  he  suffer  any  prisoner  to  escape,  on  the  penalty  of  being  punished  for  it, 
by  the  sentence  of  a  general  court  martial. 

Art.  44.  Every  officer,  or  provost  marshal,  to  whose  charge  prisoners  shall  be 
committed,  is  hereby  required,  within  twenty-four  hours  after  such  commitment,  or 
as  soon  as  he  shall  be  relieved  from  his  guard,  to  give  in  writing  to  the  colonel  of 
the  regiment  to  Avhom  the  prisoner  belongs  (where  the  prisoner  is  confined  upon  the 
guard  belonging  to  the  said  regiment,  and  that  his  offence  only  relates  to  the  neg- 
lect of  duty  in  his  own  corps),  or  to  the  commander  in  chief,  their  crimes,  and  the 
names  of  the  officers  who  committed  them,  on  the  penalty  of  being  punished  for  his 
disobedience  or  neglect,  at  the  discretion  of  a  general  court  martial. 

Art.  45.  And  if  any  officer  under  arrest,  shall  leave  his  confinement  before  he 
is  set  at  liberty  by  the  officer  who  confined  him,  or  by  a  superior  power,  he  shall  be 
cashiered  for  it. 

Art.  46.  Whatsoever  commissioned  officer  shall  be  convicted,  before  a  general 
court  martial,  of  behaving  in  a  scandalous,  infamous  manner,  such  as  is  unbecom- 
ing the  character  of  an  officer  and  a  gentleman,  shall  be  discharged  from  the 
service. 

Art.  47.  All  officers,  conductors,  gunners,  matrosses,  drivers,  or  any  other  per- 
sons, whatsoever,  receiving  pay  or  hire,  in  the  service  of  the  Rhode  Island  artillery, 
shall  be  governed  by  the  aforesaid  rules  and  articles ;  and  shall  be  subject  to  be 
tried  by  courts  martial,  In  like  manner  with  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  Rhode 
Island  troops. 

Art.  48.  For  differences  arising  amongst  themselves,  or  in  matters  relating 
solely  to  their  own  corps,  the  courts  martial  may  be  composed  of  their  own  officers ; 

VOL.  VII.         44 


S46  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1775. 

but  'whei'e  a  number  sufficient  of  such  officers  cannot  be  assembled,  or  in  matters 
wherein  other  corps  are  interested,  the  officers  of  artillery  shall  sit  in  courts  martlalj 
with  the  officers  of  the  other  corps. 

Art.  49.  All  crimes  not  capital,  and  all  disorders  and  neglects  which  officers  and 
soldiers  may  be  guilty  of,  to  the  prejudice  of  good  order  and  military  discipline, 
though  not  mentioned  in  the  articles  of  war,  are  to  be  taken  cognizance  of,  by  a 
general  or  regimental  court  martial,  according  to  the  nature  and  degree  of  the  of- 
fence, and  be  punished  at  their  discretion. 

Art.  50.  Xo  coui-ts  martial  shall  order  any  otTender  to  be  whipped,  or  receive 
more  than  thirty-nine  stripes  for  any  one  offence. 

Art.  .")1.  The  field  officers  of  each  and  every  regiment,  are  to  appoint  some 
suitable  person,  belonging  to  such  regiment,  to  receive  all  such  fines  as  may  arise 
within  the  same,  for  any  breach  of  any  of  the  foregoing  articles ;  and  shall  direct 
the  same  to  be  carefully  and  properly  applied  to  the  relief  of  such  sick,  wounded,  or 
necessitous  soldiers  as  belong  to  such  regiment ;  and  such  person  shall  account  with 
such  officer  for  all  fines  received,  and  the  application  thereof 

Art.  52.  All  members  sitting  in  coui*ts  martial,  shall  be  sworn  by  the  president 
of  said  courts ;  which  president,  shall  himself  be  sworn  by  the  officer  in  said  court, 
next  in  rank.  The  oath  to  be  administered,  previous  to  their  proceeding  to  the 
trial  of  any  offender,  in  form  following,  to  wit : 

"  You,  A.  B.,  swear  that  you  ivill  well  and  truly  try,  and  impartially  determine,  the 
cause  of  Ihe  prisoner  now  to  be  tried,  according  to  the  rules  for  reyulating  the  Rhode 
Island  army.     So  help  you  God." 

Art.  53.  All  persons  called  to  give  evidence  in  any  case,  before  a  court  martial 
who  shall  refuse  to  give  evidence,  shall  be  punished  for  such  refusal,  at  the  discre- 
tion of  such  court  martial ;  the  oath  to  be  administered  in  the  form  following,  to 
wit: 

'■  You  swear  the  evidence  you  shall  glee,  in  the  case  now  in  hearing,  shall  be  the 
truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth.     So  help  you  God."' 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  safety  be, 
and  they  are  hereby,  directed  to  charter  two  suitable  vessels, 
for  the  use  of  the  colony,  and  fit  out  the  same  in  the  best  man- 
ner, to  protect  the  trade  of  this  colony. 

That  the  said  vessels  be  at  the  risk  of  the  colony,  and  be 
appraised,  before  they  are  chartered,  by  Messrs.  Joseph  An- 
thony, Rufus  Hopkins  and  Cromell  Child,  or  any  two  of  them  ; 
who  are  also  to  agree  for  the  hire  of  the  said  vessels. 

That  the  largest  of  the  said  vessels  be  manned  with  eighty 
men,  exclusive  of  officers  ;  and  be  equipped  with  ten  guns, 
four-pounders  ;  fourteen  swivel  guns,  a  sufficient  number  of 
small  arms,  and  all  necessary  warlike  stores. 


1775.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  o47 

That  the  small  vessel  be  manned  with  a  number  not  exceed- 
ing thirty  men. 

That  the  whole  be  included  in  the  number  of  fifteen  hundred 
men,  ordered  to  be  raised  in  this  colony,  and  be  kept  in  pay 
until  the  1st  day  of  December  next,  unless  discharged  before, 
by  order  of  the  General  Assembly. 

That  they  receive  the  same  bounty  and  pay  as  the  land 
forces,  excepting  that  the  first  and  second  lieutenants,  and 
master,  receive  the  same  pay  as  the  first  lieutenant  of  the  land 
forces  ;  and  the  under  or  petty  officers  the  same  as  the  ser- 
geants of  the  army. 

And  that  the  lieutenant  general,  brigadier  general  and  com- 
mittee of  safety,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  have  the  power  of 
directing  and  ordering  said  vessels  ;  and,  in  case  it  shall  ap- 
pear to  them  that  the  officers  and  men  of  the  said  vessels  can 
be  more  serviceable  on  shore,  than  at  sea,  to  order  them  on 
shore,  to  defend  the  sea-ports  in  this  colony. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  following  offi- 
cers be,  and  are  hereby^  appointed  to  command  the  said  ves- 
sels, to  wit :  of  the  largest  vessel, — 

Abraham  Y/hipple,  commander,  with  the  rank  and  power  of 
commodore  of  both  vessels. 

John  Grimes,  first  lieutenant. 

Benjamin  Seabury,  second  lieutenant. 

William  Bradford,  of  Providence,  master. 

Ebenezer  Flagg,  quartermaster,  at  the  wages  of  £4,  lawful 
money,  per  month. 

Of  the  smallest  vessel,  Christopher  Whipple,  commander. 

William  Rhodes,  lieutenant. 

Whereas,  William  Potter,  Esq.,  presented  unto  this  Assem- 
bly, the  following  memorial,  to  wit : 

Memorial  of  William  Potter,  to  the    General  Assembly,  relative 
to  his  Protest,  S^x. 

To  the  Honorable  General  Assembly,  of  tlie  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  at  the  session 
to  be  holden  in  East  Greenwich,  on  the  second  ]\Ionday  in  June,  A.  D.  1775. 
I,  William  Potter,  of  South  Kingstown,  in   the  county  of  King's  county,  in  the 

«olony  aforesaid,  humblv  show  : 


S48  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE  ISLAND         [1775. 

That  a  session  of  the  General  Assembly,  lield  at  Providence,  on  the  22d  day  of 
April  last,  an  act  was  passed  for  the  raising,  with  all  expedition  and  dispatch,  fifteen 
hundred  men,  as  an  army  of  observation,  to  repel  any  insult  or  violence  that  might 
be  offered  to  the  inhabitants. 

And  also,  if  necessary  for  the  safety  and  preservation  of  the  colonies,  to  march  out 
of  this  colony,  ajid  join  and  co-operate  Avith  the  forces  of  the  neigliboring  colonies  5 
ao-ainst  which  act,  I,  as  one  of  the  upper  house  of  Assembly,  together  with  Joseph 
AVanton,  Esq.,  the  then  Governor ;  Darius  Sessions,  Esq.,  the  then  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor ;  and  Tliomas  Wickes,  Esq.,  then  also  one  of  the  same  upper  house,  did  enter 
my  jjrotest ;  which  hath  given  much  uneasiness  to  the  good  people  of  this  colony.  To 
remove  which,  so  far  as  respects  myself,  and  as  far  as  in  me  lieth,  I  beg  leave  to 
observe : 

That  a  rough  draught  was  drawn  up,  and  delivei-ed  to  a  person  to  be  corrected  ■ 
which  protest,  as  the  same  now  stands,  appears  to  me  to  be  of  a  different  import 
from  my  meaning  at  that  time  ;  and  which,  through  the  hurry  attending  the  business 
before  the  House,  was  not  so  properly  attended  to,  as  it  might  have  been,  and  in 
that  haste  was  signed. 

It  is  true,  I  was  against  the  passing  of  the  said  act  at  that  time,  as  I  conceived  the 
trade,  and  particularly  the  town  of  Newport,  would  be  gi'eatly  distressed,  which  a 
little  longer  time  might  prevent ;  and  because  it  was  known  that  the  very  respecta- 
ble Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Connecticut  would  soon  sit,  of  Avhose  wise  deliberations 
we  might  greatly  avail  ourselves.  These  were  the  true  reasons  of  my  conduct, 
however  the  contrary  may  appear  from  the  protest  signed. 

No  man  hath  ever  been  more  deeply  impressed  with  the  calamities  to  which 
America  is  reduced,  by  a  most  corrupt  administration,  than  mjself  No  man  hath 
more  exerted  himself  in  private  and  public  life,  to  reheve  ourselves  from  our  oppres- 
sions ;  and  no  man  hath  held  himself  more  ready  to  sacrifice  his  hfe  and  fortune 
in  the  arduous  struggles  now  making  throughout  America,  for  the  preservation 
of  our  just  rights  and  liberties ;  and  in  these  sentiments,  I  am  determined  to  live 
and  die. 

Sorry  I  am,  if  any  of  the  good  people  of  this  colony  should  have  conceived  other- 
wise of  me;  and  I  greatly  lament,  that  the  unguarded  expressions  in  that  protest, 
should  give  cause  therefor.  Should  I  from  thence,  lose  the  confidence,  just  hopes 
and  expectations  of  my  countrymen,  of  my  future  conduct  in  the  arduous  American 
struggles,  it  might  create  an  uneasiness  of  mind,  for  which  nothing  can  ever  com- 
pensate. 

But  sliould  this  public  declaration  case  the  minds  of  friends,  and  the  friends  of 
liberty,  and  convince  them  of  my  readiness  to  embark,  to  conflict  with  them  in  every 
difliculty,  and  against  every  opposition,  until  our  glorious  cause  shall  be  estabhshed 
upon  the  most  firm  and  permanent  basis,  it  will  be  a  consideration  that  will  afford 
me  the  highest  satisfaction  that  human  nature  is  capable  of  enjoying.* 

I  am  Your  Honors'  most  humble  servant, 

WILLIAM  POTTER. 

And  the  said  memorial  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be  accepted  ;  that  it 


See  page  311. 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  349 

is  satisfactory ;   and  that  the   said  William  Potter  be,  and  he 
is  hereby,  reinstated  in  the  favor  of  this  General  Assembly. 

An  Act  dividing  the  regiment  of  militia  in  the  county  of  Kings 
county  into  two  regiments. 

An  Act  dividing  the  regiment  of  militia  in  the  county  of  Kent 
into  two  regiments. 

Officers  to  command  the  several  Trained  Bands,  or  Companies  of 
Militia,  in  the  Colony. 

Portsmouth  :  first  company — Burrington  Anthony,  captain  ; 
David  Gifford,  lieutenant ;   Stephen  Borden,  ensign. 

Warwick :  first  company — Abraham  Lockwood,  captain  j 
Sylvester  Wickes,  lieutenant ;   Job  Randall,  ensign. 

Second  company — Reuben  Wightman,  captain  ;  Squire 
Mil  ward,  lieutenant ;  James  Jarauld,  ensign. 

Third  company — Thomas  Rice,  sou  of  Thomas,  captain  5 
Anthony  Holden,  son  of  Charles,  lieutenant ;  Stukely  Staf- 
ford, Jr.,  ensign. 

Westerly  :  first  company — Thomas  Thompson,  captain  ;  Jo- 
seph Pendleton,  lieutenant  ;   Joshua  Pendleton,  ensign. 

Second  company — John  Gavet,  captain  ;  Stephen  Saunders, 
Jr.,  lieutenant ;  William  Bliven,  ensign. 

New  Shoreham  company — John  Sands,  captain  ;  Samuel 
Rathbun,  Jr.,  lieutenant  ;   William  Littlefield,  ensign. 

North  Kingstown  :  first  company — Thomas  Clarke,  captain  ; 
John  Manchester,  lieutenant ;   William  Reynolds,  ensign. 

Second  company — Thomas  Cole,  captain  ;  Charles  Dyre, 
lieutenant ;   William  Taylor,  ensign. 

Third  company — Thomas  Bissell,  Jr.,  captain  ;  Timothy 
Deane,  lieutenant  ;   Robert  Potter,  ensign. 

South  Kingstown  :  first  company-^-^Samuel  Sengar,  captain  j 
Gideon  Babcock,  lieutenant ;  Daniel  Williams,  ensign. 


350  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

Second  company — Abial  Brown,  captain  ;  James  Parker, 
lieutenant ;   Barber  Peckbam,  ensign. 

East  Greenwicb  :  first  company — Natbaniel  Gardner,  cap- 
tain ;   Ebenezer  Spencer,  lieutenant ;   William  Hall,  ensign. 

Second  company — Allen  Jobnston,  captain  ;  Michael  Spen- 
cer, lieutenant  ;    Stephen  Greene,  ensign. 

Scituate  :  first  company — Peleg  Fisk,  captain  ;  Nathan 
Relph,  lieutenant ;   Nathan  Bates,  ensign. 

Third  company — Stephen  Kimball,  captain  ;  Joseph  Davis, 
lieutenant  ;  James  Williams,  ensign. 

Fourth  company — Jeremiah  Davis,  captain  ;  Isaac  Hop- 
kins, lieutenant ;   Oziel  Smith,  ensign. 

Fifth  company — Samuel  Wilbur,  captain  ;  Thomas  Field, 
lieutenant ;   William  Potter,  ensign. 

Glocester  :  first  company — Benajah  Whipple,  captain  ;  Si- 
mon Smith,  lieutenant ;   John  Eddy,  ensign. 

Second  company — Samuel  Mayes,  captain  ;  Ezekiel  Phet- 
tiplace,  lieutenant ;   Daniel  Mathewson,  ensign. 

Third  company — Abraham  Winsor,  captain  ;  Stephen  Pain, 
lieutenant  ;   Ptichard  Lewis,  ensign. 

Fourth  company — Stephen  Winsor,  captain  ;  Aaron  Arnold, 
lieutenant ;   Isaac  Ross,  ensign. 

Charlestown  company — Thomas  Sheffield,  captain  ;  Jona- 
than Macomber,  lieutenant  ;   Caleb  Crandal,  ensign. 

West  Greenwich  :  first  company — Eleazar  Carr,  captain ; 
Abel  Greene,  lieutenant ;  Abel  Mathewson,  2d,  ensign. 

Second  company — Jeremiah  Austin,  captain ;  Benjamin 
Gorton,  lieutenant  ;  Joseph  Weaver,  ensign. 

Third  company — John  Mathewson,  Jr.,  captain ;  Josiah 
Mathewson,  lieutenant  ;    Samuel  Reynolds,  ensign. 

Exeter  :  first  company — Christopher  Champlin,  captain  ; 
Abel  Fowler,  lieutenant  ;   Isaiah  Wilcox,  ensign. 

Second  company — John  Hoxsie,  captain  ;  George  Sweet, 
lieutenant  ;   Eber  Shearman,  ensign. 


1775.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  351 

Bristol  company — Jeremiah  Ingraham,  captain  ;  Stephen 
Smith,  lieutenant  ;   Ilezekiah  Munro,  ensign. 

Tiverton :  first  company-^Christopher  Manchester,  cap- 
tain ;   Isaac  Cooke,  lieutenant ;   Philip  Manchester,  ensign. 

Second  company — Benjamin  Durfee,  captain  ;  Ebenezer 
Slocum,  lieutenant ;   Jonathan  Deval,  ensign. 

Little  Compton  company — George  Simmons,  captain  ;  Sam- 
uel Gray,  lieutenant  ;   David  Cooke,  ensign. 

Warren  company — Amos  Haile,  captain  ;  John  Ornisbee, 
lieutenant  ;   Smith  Bo  wen,  ensign. 

Cumberland  :  first  company — Enoch  Weatherhead,  captain  ; 
Elisha  Waterman,  lieutenant  ;   Benjamin  Wilkinson,  ensign. 

Second  company — Levi  Tower,  captain  ;  Elias  Philbrook, 
lieutenant  ;   Levi  Ballou,  ensign. 

Cranston  :  first  company — John  King,  Jr.,  captain  ;  Antho- 
ny Potter,  lieutenant  ;   Josiah  Potter,  ensfgn. 

Second  company — Frederick  Williams,  captain  ;  Nathaniel 
Carpenter,  lieutenant ;  John  Harris,  ensign. 

Third  company — Edward  Knight,  captain  ;  William  Field, 
2d,  lieutenant;  Joseph  Potter,  ensign. 

Hopkinton  :  first  company— Barker  Wells,  captain  ;  Oliver 
Babcock,  Jr.,  lieutenant ;  Elnathan  Wells,  ensign. 

Second  company — George  Thurston,  Jr.,  captain  ;  Matthew 
Randall,  lieutenant ;   Randall  Wells,  ensign. 

Johnston  :  first  company — Richard  Thornton,  captain  ; 
Richard  Fenner,  Jr.,  lieutenant ;   Daniel  Sprague,  Jr.,  ensign. 

Second  company — Emmor  Olney,  captain  ;  Daniel  Angell, 
lieutenant ;  Laban  Waterman,  ensign, 

North  Providence  company — Job  Olney,  captain  ;  Charles 
Olney,  Jr.,  lieutenant  ;   Eleazar  Jenckes,  ensign. 

Barrington  company — Thomas  Allen,  captain  ;  Samuel  Bos- 
worth,  lieutenant ;   Vial  Allen,  ensign. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  this  General  Assembly  will 


352  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLOISY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  1775. 

join  with  the  other  colonies  in  establishing  post  offices  and  post 
riders,  in  order  to  preserve  an  intercourse  between  the  different 
colonies,  which  will  prove  so  beneficial  to  the  public,  as  well  as 
to  individuals  ;  and  that  this  colony  will,  for  the  present,  de- 
fray the  expense  of  post  riders  throughout  tliis  colony,  upon 
the  usual  post  road. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  post  offices  be,  and 
hereby  are,  established  at  the  following  places,  to  wit :  at 
Newport,  Providence,  Bristol,  Warren,  Tower  Hill,  in  South 
Kingstown  and  Westerly  ;  and  that  the  following  persons  be,- 
and  hereby  are,  appointed  post  masters,  to  wit : 

For  Newport,  Mr.  Nathaniel  Otis  ;  Providence,  Mr.  John 
Carter  ;  Bristol,  Mr.  Jonathan  Russell ;  Warren,  Mr.  Shubael 
Burr  ;  Tower  Hill,  Mr.  Ray  Sands  ;  Westerly,  Mr.  Joshua 
Babcock. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  rates  and  du'ties  for 
postage  of  letters,  be  as  follows,  to  wit  : 

Rates  of  Postage  in  the  Colony  of  Rhode  Island. 


For  any  distance  not  exceeding  sixty  miles 
"  sixty  miles,  and  not  exceeding  one  hundred  miles 
"  one  hundred  miles,  and  not  exceeding  two  hundred  miles 
"  two  hundred  miles,  and  not  exceeding  three  hundred  miles 
"  three  hundred  miles,  and  not  exceeding  four  hundred  miles     - 
"  four  hundred  miles,  and  not  exceeding  five  hundred  miles 
"  five  hundred  miles,  and  not  exceeding  six  hundred  miles 
"  six  hundred  miles,  and  not  exceeding  seven  hundred  miles 
"  seven  hundred  miles,  and  not  exceeding  eight  hundred  miles  - 
"  eight  hundred  miles,  and  not  exceeding  nine  hundred  miles 
"  nine  hundred  miles,  and  not  exceeding  one  thousand  miles 

The  above  rates  to  be  paid  in  lawful  money,  of  this  colony,  and  are  for  the  post- 
age of  a  single  letter.  They  are  to  be  doubled  for  all  double  letters,  trebled  for  all 
treble  letters ;  and  for  every  ounce  weight,  four  times  so  much  is  to  be  charged  as 
for  a  single  letter. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Peter  Mumford  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  appointed  the  post  rider  from  Newport  to 
Providence  ;  and  Mr.  Benjamin  Mumford  the  post  rider  from 
Newport  to  New  London ;   and  that  they  neither  receive  nor 


£  s. 

d. 

0  0 

51-4 

0  0 

8 

0  0 

101-4 

0  1 

1 

0  1 

4 

0   1 

6  1-4 

0  1 

9 

0  2 

0 

0  2 

2  1-2 

0  2 

5 

0  2 

8 

1775.]  AND  PROVIDENCE  pla:ntations.     "  '353 

deliver  any  letters  from  any  post  office  heretofore  establislied 
in  this  colony. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Joshua  Bab- 
cock,  John  Jenckes,  William  Bradford  and  Joseph  Anthony, 
be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  agree  with 
the  post  masters  and  post  riders,  for  their  service  ;  and  to 
give  directions  for  the  setting  off  and  returns  of  the  post  rid- 
ers ;  and  that  the  post  masters  account  to  the  said  committee 
for  what  they  shall  receive. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  letters  which  the 
post  rider  for  the  time  being,  may  receive,  directed  for  the 
town  of  Boston,  shall  be  first  post  paid,  and  submitted  to  the 
examination  of  the  commander  in  chief  of  the  American  forces, 
at  Cambridge,  or  of  a  committee  that  may  be  appointed  by  the 
provincial  congress  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  before  they  are 
permitted  to  go  into  Boston  ;  and  that  all  letters  coming  out  of 
Boston,  be  submitted  to  the  like  examination. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  this  act  shall  con- 
tinue in  force  until  this  Assembly  shall  make  some  further  order 
relative  to  the  same. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  letter  written  by  His 
Honor  the  Deputy  Governor,  to  James  Wallace,  Esq.,  com- 
mander of  His  Majesty's  ship  Rose,  and  Capt.  Wallace's  an- 
swer, be  published  in  the  next  Newport  Mercury,  and  Provi- 
dence Gazette. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  £10,000,  in  lawful  money 
bills  of  credit,  be  struck  off,  for  the  use  of  the  colony  ;  that  the 
same  proportion  of  the  different  bills  be  printed  ;  that  they  be 
signed  by  the  same  persons  who  signed  the  former  emission,  and 
in  the  same  manner  ;  that  they  be  completed  and  lodged  in 
the  general  treasury,  as  soon  as  may  be  ;  and  that  the  comr 
mittee  for  signing  the  bills,  procure  the  paper. 

An  Act  to  prevent  desertion  from  the  army  of  observation. 

An  Act  dividing  the  First  Trained  Band,  or   Company  of  Mi- 
litia, in  the  town  of  Coventry,  into  two  companies. 

VOL.  VII.  4^ 


354  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

An  Act  dividing  the   Second   Trained   Band,  or  Company  of 
Militia,  in  the  town  of  Coventry,  into  two  companies. 

Whereas,  Thursday,  the  20th  day  of  July  next,  is  recom- 
mende  d  by  the  Honorable  the  Continental  Congress  to  be  ob- 
served as  a  day  of  public  fasting  and  prayer  throughout  the 
colonies, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the 
Deputy  Governor  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  issue  a 
proclamation,  to  be  published  in  the  Newport  Mercury,  and 
Providence  Gazette,  earnestly  recommending  the  same  to  be 
religiously  observed  by  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor be,  and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  write  an  fuiswer  to  the 
letter  from  the  delegates  of  this  colony  at  the  Continental 
Congress  ;  and  to  transmit  to  them  a  copy  of  the  proceedings 
of  this  Assembly. 

God  save  the  Kinsr. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations^  at  Providence, 
on  Wednesday,  the  2Sth  day  of  June,  1775. 

The  lion.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Deputy  Governor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  six  companies,  consisting  of 
sixty  men  each,  including  officers,  be  immediately  raised  in 
this  colony,  in  addition  to  those  already  ordered  to  be  raised  ; 
that  they  be  equipped  with  arms,  ammunition  and  all  other 
necessaries  ;  that  two  companies  be  added  to  each  regiment 
now  in  the  service  of  this  colony,  and  encamped  near  Boston  , 
that  as  soon  as  twenty  men  in  a  company  shall  be  raised,  they 
be  sent  forward,  under  the  care  of  one  commissioned  officer, 
and  the  whole  as  soon  as  possible. 


1775.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  355 

That  the  same  bounty  and  wages  be  allowed  to  them,  as  to 
those  already  raised  ;  and  that,  to  defray  the  expense  thereof, 
£10,000,  in  lawful  money  bills,  be  emitted  and  signed  in  the 
same  manner  and  proportion  as  the  first  emission  ;  excepting 
that  the  bills  now  ordered  to  be  emitted,  be  signed  in  the  fol- 
lowing manner,  to  wit :  all  the  bills  of  five  shillings,  and  up- 
wards, by  three  signers  ;   and  all  under,  by  two  signers. 

An  Act  to  repeal  an  act,  entitled  "  An  act  for  regulating  ap- 
peals to  His  Majesty  in  Council,  in  Great  Britain." 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  act  entitled  "  An  act  for 
regulating  appeals  to  His  Majesty  in  Council,  in  Great  Brit- 
ain," be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  repealed. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  act  to  prevent  the  Hon- 
orable Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  from  acting  as  Governor  of  this 
colony,  until  the  oath  of  office  shall  be  administered  to  him  in 
open  General  Assembly,  with  the  consent  of  the  Assembly,  &C.5 
which  was  passed  at  the  session  held  on  the  first  Wednesday  in 
May  last,  and  continued  by  an  act  passed  at  the  session  held  on 
the  second  Monday  in  June  instant,  be  continued,  and  remain 
in  force,  until  the  rising  of  this  Assembly,  at  the  next  session ; 
and  that  a  copy  of  this  act  be  inserted  in  the  Newport  Mer- 
cury, and  Providence  Gazette. 

Whereas,  it  is  absolutely  necessary,  for  the  well  governing 
and  exerting  the  force  of  an  army,  that  the  same  should  be 
under  the  direction  of  a  commander  in  chief, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  army  of  observa- 
tion raised  by  this  colony,  during  the  operations  of  the  present 
campaign,  be  under  the  command  and  direction  of  the  com- 
mander in  chief  of  the  combined  American  army,  stationed  in 
the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay  ;  and  that  the  secretary 
transmit  a  copy  of  this  act  to  the  commander  in  chief  of  the 
combined  American  army  ;  and  to  the  brigadier  general  of  the 
Rhode  Island  troops. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Gov- 


356     '  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

ernor  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  \vnte  an  answer  to  the 
letter  from  the  Governor  of  Connecticut  ;  and  to  the  speech  of 
the  Oneida  tribe  of  Indians  to  the  four  New  England  colonies. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Jabez  Champlin, 
James  Angell,  Metcalfe  Bowler,  John  Waterman,  James 
Rhodes,  John  Sands,  Sylvester  Gardner,  John  Hawkins,  Allen 
Johnson,  Benjamin  Underwood,  Elisha  Mo  wry,  Jr.,  Rufus 
Hopkins,  Asa  Kimball,  Joseph  Stanton,  Jr.,  Thomas  Gorton, 
Stephen  Potter,  George  Pierce,  John  Barker,  Benjamin  Bos- 
worth,  John  Cooke,  Thomas  Brownell,  Cromell  Child,  John 
Dexter,  George  \Vebb,  Richard  Searle,  Abel  Tanner,  Emmor 
Olney,  Thomas  Olney  and  Thomas  Allen,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby,  appointed  and  directed  to  take  an  account,  as  soon  as 
may  be,  of  the  powder,  arms  and  ammunition,  in  the  several 
towns  in  this  colony,  in  which  they  respectively  dwell,  includ- 
ing private  as  well  as  public  stock. 

That  they  be,  and  hereby  are,  directed  and  empowered  to  go 
to  the  house  of  each  person  in  their  respective  towns,  to  take 
an  account  of  the  powder,  arms  and  ammunition. 

That  they  make  report  to  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor, 
that  he  may  transmit  an  account  thereof,  to  the  Continental 
Congress  ;  and  also  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  at  the  next 
session. 

And  that  in  case  any  of  the  persons  hereby  appointed,  shall 
refuse  to  serve,  the  members  of  the  General  Assembly,  of  the 
town  in  which  the  person  so  refusing  dwells,  appoint  another 
in  his  stead,  who  will  undertake. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committees  of  inspection  in 
the  several  towns  in  this  colony,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  ap- 
pointed to  collect  all  the  saltpetre  and  brimstone  in  the  respec- 
tive towns  wherein  they  dwell,  at  the  charge  of  the  colony,  and 
send  the  same  with  all  possible  dispatch,  to  the  committee  of 
inspection  for  the  town  of  Providence,  by  them  to  be  immedi- 
ately forwarded  to  the  Provincial  Congress,  at  New  York. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Charles  Bowler  be,  and  he 
is  hereby,  appointed  baker  to  the  army  of  observation  raised  by 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  357 

this  colony,  and  stationed  near  Boston  ;  and  that  he  be  paid 
five  shilhngs,  lawful  money,  for  every  hundred  weight  of  flour 
he  shall  bake  ;   he  findin";  the  fuel  for  baking  the  bread. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Capt.  Joseph  Stanton,  Jr.,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  appointed  one  of  the  committee  of  safety,  for 
the  county  of  Kings  county,  in  respect  to  the  soldiers  now  or- 
dered to  be  raised  by  this  Assembly. 

That  he  be  empowered  to  pay  off  the  soldiers  heretofore 
raised  in  the  towns  of  Westerly,  Charlestown  and  Hopkinton, 
all  such  wages  as  they  have  not  yet  received,  and  be  allowed 
therefor,  half  per  cent. 

That  John  Northup,  Esq.,  be  allowed  one  per  cent,  for  the 
same. 

And  that  the  said  Joseph  Stanton,  Jr.,  receive  of  the  said 
John  Northup,  the  accounts  he  hath  against  the  soldiers  now 
in  the  service  of  the  colony,  who  were  raised  in  the  said  three 
towns,  in  order  to  settle  with  the  soldiers,  and  to  stop  what 
shall  appear  to  be  due  from  them  to  the  said  John  Northup. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  gunner,  and  all  the  sol- 
diers at  Fort  George,  be  immediately  discharged. 

That  Mr.  Thomas  Freebody  have  the  care  of  the  buildings  on 
Goat  Island,  and  let  them  out ;  that  he  haul  up  the  fort-boat, 
take  particular  care  of  her,  and  preserve  her  for  the  use  of  the 
colony  ;  that  he  procure  the  cannon  to  be  brought  over  from 
the  fort  to  Newport ;  and  that  he  advertise  the  guns  Avhich 
were  stolen  from  the  fort. 

Both  Houses  being  joined  in  a  grand  committee,  chose  the 
following  ofiQcers,  to  wit : 

Officers  to  Command  the  Six  Additional  Companies  to  the  Arimj 
of  Observation. 

Ebenezer  Flagg,  captain  ;  Joseph  Perry,  lieutenant  ;  and 
Noel  Allen,  ensign,  of  the  eighth  company,  to  be  raised  in  the 
counties  of  Newport  and  Bristol. 

Thomas  Grey,  captain ;  Lemuel  Bailey,  lieutenant ;   William 


358  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         1775.] 

Southwortli,  ensign,  of  the  ninth  company,  to  be  raised  in  the 
counties  of  Newport  and  Bristol. 

Levi  Tower,  captain  ;  Silas  Talbot,  lieutenant ;  Reuben 
Sprague,  ensign,  of  the  ninth  company,  to  be  raised  in  the 
county  of  Providence. 

Israel  Gorton,  captain  ;  James  Williams,  lieutenant ;  Jo- 
seph Harris,  ensign,  of  the  tenth  company,  to  be  raised  in  the 
county  of  Providence. 

Ethan  Clarke,  captain  ;  Thomas  Cole,  lieutenant  ;  John 
Woodmansie,  ensign,  of  the  ninth  company,  to  be  raised  in  the 
counties  of  Kings  county  and  Kent. 

Christopher  Smith,  captain  ;  Thomas  Sweet,  lieutenant ; 
Oliver  Tefft,  ensign,  of  the  tenth  company,  to  be  raised  in  the 
counties  of  Kings  county  and  Kent. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Job  Watson  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  appointed  a  post  at  Tower  Hill,  to  give  intelligence  to 
the  northern  counties,  in  case  any  squadron  of  ships  should  be 
seen  off;  that  in  case  of  an  alarm,  the  northern  counties  be, 
and  they  are  hereby,  ordered  to  march  to  the  town  of 
Providence. 

That  a  proclamation  be  immediately  issued  by  His  Honor 
the  Deputy  Governor,  commanding  every  man  in  the  colony, 
able  to  bear  arms,  to  equip  himself  completely  with  arms  and 
ammunition,  according  to  law. 

And  that  the  town  of  Pi  evidence  fix  a  beacon  on  the  hill  to 
the  eastward  of  the  said  town,  to  alarm  the  country,  in  case  of 
an  invasion. 

An  Act  for  enlisting  one-fourth  part  of  the  militia  of  the  colony, 
as  minute  men. 
Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  one-quarter  part  of  the  mili- 
tia of  this  colony  be  enlisted  as  minute  men,  to  meet  together, 
and  exercise  themselves  in  military  discipline,  half-a-day,  once 
in  every  fortnight. 


1775.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  359 

And  that  the  following  persons  be,  and  hereby  are,  appointed 
in  the  several  towns  to  enlist  them,  to  wit : 

Names  of  Persons  appointed  by  the   Gcnerat  Assemhlij  as  En-^ 
listing  Officers^  in  the  Colony. 

Newport — The  captains  of  the  several  companies  of  militia. 

Providence — Messrs.  John  Demont  and  Nathaniel  Froth- 
in  gh  am. 

Portsmouth — Mr.  Burrington  Anthony. 

Warwick — Messrs.  Malachi  Hammet,  Reuben  Wiglitman 
and  Thomas  Rice,  son  of  Thomas. 

Westerly — Messrs.  George  Sheffield,  Benjamin  Hull  and  Jo- 
seph Stillman. 

New  Shoreham — The  captain  of  the  company  of  militia. 

North  Kingstown — Messrs.  Charles  Tillinghast,  Jonathan 
Vaughan  and  Ezekiel  Gardner,  Jr. 

South  Kingstown — Messrs.  Peleg  Babcock  and  John  Wait. 

East  Greenwich — Messrs.  Allen  Johnston  and  Wm.  Arnold, 

Jamestown — The  captain  of  the  company  of  militia. 

Smithfield — Messrs.  Andrew  Waterman,  Lnke  Arnold  and 
Peleg  Arnold. 

Glocester — Messrs.  John  Wells,  Gideon  Burgess,  Aaron 
Winsor  and  Samuel  Mayes. 

Charlestown — Messrs.  Augustus  Stanton  and  Beriah  Lewis. 

West  Greenwich — Messrs.  Eleazar  Carr,  Jeremiah  Austin 
and  John  Mathewson,  Jr. 

Coventry — Messrs.  Archibald  Kasson,  Yelverton  Wait, 
Stutely  Hudson  and  Benjamin  Greene. 

Exeter — Mr.  George  Pierce. 

Middietown — The  captain  of  the  company  of  militia. 

Bristol — Mr.  Benjamin  Bosworth. 

Tiverton — Messrs.  Joseph  Almy  and  Pardon  Cooke. 

Little  Compton — Mr.  Peres  Richmond. 

Warren — Mr.  William  Barton. 

Cumberland — Messrs.  Elisha  Waterman  and  Elias  Philbrook. 

Richmond — Mr.  Simeon  Clarke,  Jr. 


360  RECORDS    OP    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

Cranston — Messrs.  Andrew  Harris,  William  Potter  and  the 
capiain  of  the  third  company. 

Hopkinton — Messrs.  Thomas  Wells,  3d,  and  Oliver  Davis. 
Johnston — Messrs.  William  Hawkins  and  Joseph  Waterman. 
North  Providence — Mr.  Job  Olney. 
Barrington — Mr.  Luther  Martin. 

And  be  it  farther  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
in  case  any  of  the  persons  hereby  appointed,  shall  refuse  to 
serve,  the  deputies  of  the  several  towns  to  which  they  belong, 
be,  and  they  hereby  are,  empowered  to  appoint  others  in  their 
stead. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  following  be  the  form  of  the  enlistment  for  the  said  minute 
men,  to  wit : 

Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  8fc. 
We,  the  subscribers,  voluntarily  enlist  ourselves   to  serve  as 
minute  men,  in  the  service  of  this  colo?iy,  to  be  under  the  imme- 
diate command  of  our  superior  officers,  and  subject  to  the  law  of 
this  colony,  for  regulating  the  minute  men. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  persons  who  are  hereby  appointed  to  enlist  the  said  minute 
men,  return  the  names  of  the  persons  they  shall  so  enlist,  unto 
the  deputies  who  live  within  their  respective  regiments. 

That  the  said  deputies,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  be,  and 
hereby  are,  empowered  to  form  them  into  companies,  each  to 
consist  of  as  many  men  as  they  shall  think  proper  and  direct ; 
and  also  to  appoint  officers  over  them  ;  and  that  they  return 
the  names  of  the  officers  they  shall  appoint,  to  His  Honor  the 
Deputy  Governor,  to  be  commissioned  by  the  secretary,  in  the 
same  manner  that  the  other  officers  have  been  commissioned. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  said  minute  men  march  for  the  defence  of  the  colony,  when 
and  as  often  as  they  shall  be  called  upon  by  the  colonel  of  the 
re.£jiment  to  which  they  respectively  belong. 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  361 

And  that  the  lieutenant  general  and  major  general  of  the 
colony  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  authorized  and  empowered  to 
march  them  out  of  the  colony,  whenever  they,  or  either  of 
them,  shall  think  it  necessary. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  following  wages  bo  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general 
treasury,  to  the  said  officers  and  men,  to  wit : 

For  every  time  they  shall  meet  and  exercise,  each  captain 
shall  receive  two  shillings  and  sixpence,  lawful  money. 

Each  lieutenant  and  ensign,  two  shillings,  lawful  money  ; 
and  each  other  person  one  shilling,  lawful  money. 

And  when  they  march  for  the  defence  of  the  colony,  or  out 
of  the  colony,  each  captain  shall  receive  six  shillings,  lawful 
money,  per  day. 

Each  lieutenant,  five  shillings,  lawful  money,  per  day  ;  each 
ensign,  four  shillings,  lawful  money,  per  day  ;  and  each  other 
person,  three  shillings,  lawful  money,  per  day  ;  and  shall  also 
be  billeted  at  the  charge  of  the  colony. 

And  that  the  commanding  officer  make  his  return  once  a 
month  to  the  committee  of  safety,  and  draw  the  money. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  several  independent  companies  in  this  colony,  or  such  of 
them  as  shall  think  proper,  form  themselves  into  companies  of 
minute  men,  under  the  same  regulation  and  command  as  above 
mentioned,  and  exercise  and  do  duty  in  the  same  manner  ;  and 
that  they  receive  the  same  pay  and  allowance. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  secretary,  as  soon  as  may  be,  transmit  copies  of  this  act  to 
the  several  sheriffs  in  the  colony,  who  are  hereby  directed  to 
forward  them  by  the  first  safe  hands,  to  the  persons  appointed 
to  enlist  the  said  minute  men  in  their  respective  counties. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Capt.  John  Grimes  be,  and  he 
is  hereby,  appointed  commander  of  the  small  sloop,  chartered 
by  the  colony,  in  the  room  of  Capt.  Christopher  Whipple,  who 
refused. 

That  all  other  vacancies,  in  either  of  the  sloops,  chartered 
by  the  colony,  be  filled   up  by  the   committee  of  safety  ;   and 

VOL.  VII.         46 


362  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RflODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

that  the  officers  be  commissioned  by  the  secretary  of  this 
colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  when  the  places  of  any  com- 
missioned officers  in  the  army  of  observation,  raised  by  this 
colony,  shall  happen  to  be  vacant,  the  brigadier  general  of  the 
said  army,  with  the  advice  of  the  field  officers,  thereof,  fill  up 
all  such  vacancies  with  officers  ;  who  shall  have  fall  power  to 
act  by  virtue  of  such  appointment,  until  His  Honor  the 
Deputy  Governor  shall  send  them  commissions,  signed  by  the 
secretary. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembhj,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  on 
the  third  Monday  in  August,  1775. 

The  Hon.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Deputy  Governor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  neat  cattle  and  sheep 
upon  New  Shoreham,  excepting  a  sufficiency  for  the  inhabit- 
ants, be  brought  off  as  soon  as  possible,  and  landed  upon  the 
continent  ;  that  two  hundred  and  fifty  men  be  sent  upon  that 
island,  to  secure  the  stock  until  it  can  be  taken  off. 

That  the  remainder  of  the  two  companies  raised  in  the  coun- 
ties of  Kings  county  and  Kent,  which  have  not  yet  marched  to 
join  the  army  of  observation,  be  employed  in  the  said  service  ; 
that  to  complete  the  number,  one  hundred  and  ninety  men  be 
immediatelv  enlisted,  who  shall  be  allowed  wages  at  the  rate  of 
three  shillings  a  day,  and  be  billeted. 

That  Mr.  James  Rhodes  be  the  chief  commander  of  the  said 
men,  and  Gideon  Hoxsie,  Esq.,  the  second  in  command. 

That  the  said  James  Rhodes  and  Gideon  Hoxsie,  and  George 
Sheffield,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  empowered,  at  the  expense 
of  the  colony,  to  take  the  most  prudent  and  effectual  measures 
for  removing  the  said  stock  to  some  place  upon  the  continent ; 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  363 

that  the  committee  of  safety  supply  the  said  men  with  the  ne- 
cessary arms,  ammunition  and  provisions. 

That  the  following  persons  be  appointed  to  enlist  men  for 
the  said  service, — 

Thomas  Wells,  2d  ;  Thomas  Tefft,  and  in  case  of  his  refusal^ 
Richard  Bailey,  Jr.  ;  Stephen  Sheldon,  Ebenezer  Sprague, 
Elisha  Waterman,  Andrew  Waterman,  James  Albro,  Abial 
Brown,  Jonathan  Haszard,  Joseph  Pendleton  and  George 
Peirce  ;  who  shall  be  allowed  wages,  at  the  rate  of  six  shiU 
lings  a  day,  and  shall  have  the  command  of  the  men  by  them 
respectively  raised,  subordinate  to  their  superior  officers  above 
named  ;  that  no  one  of  the  above  named  persons  raise  more 
than  twenty  men. 

That  each  person  appointed  to  enlist  men,  set  out  for  the 
places  of  rendezvous,  with  the  men  he  shall  enlist,  on  Satur- 
day next,  at  eight  of  the  clock  in  the  morning,  which  are  as 
follows  : 

Those  raised  in  the  towns  of  Richmond  and  Charlestown,  to 
rendezvous  at  Jesse  Champlin's,  in  Charlestown. 

Those  raised  in  North  Kingstown,  South  Kingstown,  John- 
ston, Cumberland,  Exeter  and  Smithfield,  at  John  Potter's, 
Esq. 

Those  raised  in  the  other  towns,  at  Elias  Thompson's,  in 
Y/esterly. 

That  the  said  James  Rhodes,  Gideon  Hoxsie  and  George 
Sheffield,  or  any  two  of  them,  be  appointed  to  appraise  the 
said  stock,  which  is  to  be  transported  at  the  expense  and  risk 
of  the  colony. 

That  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor  be  requested  to  issue 
orders  to  the  said  two  companies,  belonging  to  Col.  Varnum's 
regiment,  to  proceed  to  New  Shoreham,  and  obey  the  orders  of 
the  said  James  Rhodes  and  Gideon  Hoxsie  during  the  said 
service. 

That  the  said  James  Rhodes  and  Gideon  Hoxsie  be  commis- 
sioned, mutatis  mutandis,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  officers  of 
the  army  of  observation  are  ;   and  that  Mr.  James  Rhodes  draw 


364  EECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775 

out  of  the  general  treasury  £200,  lawful  money,  for  the  pur^ 
poses,  aforesaid. 

In  Council,  was  read  the  return  of  officers'  names,  chosen 
to  command  the  Independent  Company  of  Cadets,  in  Provi- 
dence, viz.  : 

Joseph  Nightingale,  captain  ;  William  Ptussell,  first  lieu- 
tenant ;  Nathaniel  Greene,  second  lieutenant  ;  Ebenezer 
Thompson,  ensign. 

Which  being  considered  in  Council,— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  officers  be,  and  they 
are  hereby,  approved. 

An  Act  to  punish  persons,  who  shall  pilot  any  armed  vessels  in 
or  out  of  any  of  the  harbors,  rivers   or  bays,  in  this  colony, 
excepting  vessels  belonging  to  some  one  of  the  British  colo- 
nies in  America,  or  the  inhabitants  thereof. 
Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,' and  by  the  au-* 
thority  thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  any  person,  being  an  inhab- 
itant of  any  of  the  British  colonies  in  America,  who  shall  act 
as  a  pilot  on  board  any  armed  ship  or  vessel,  and  pilot  them  in 
or  out  of  any  of  the  harbors,  rivers  or  bays,  in  this  colony,  ex- 
cepting vessels  in  the  service  of  some  one  of  the  said  colonies,  or 
of  the  inhabitants  thereof,  shall,  upon  conviction  thereof,  by  bill, 
plaint  or  inlormation,  before  the  superior  court  of  judicature, 
court  of  assize  and  general  jail  delivery  of  this  colony,  be  pun- 
ished at  the  discretion  of  the  said  court,  by  fine  and  imprison- 
ment not  exceeding  a  fine  of  ^500,  lawful  money,  nor  more 
than  twelve  months  imprisonment. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  William  Potter,  Esq.,  be  al- 
lowed to  draw  out  of  the  general  treasury  the  sum  of  £270 
85.  7  3-4c?.,  for  carrying  on  the  building  a  new  court  house  in 
Kings  county. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  this  colony  will  purchase  all 
the  gunpowder  that  shall  be  imported  here  from  parts  beyond 
sea,  before  the  1st  day  of  April  next,  at  the  rate  of  three  shil-' 
lings,  lawful  money,  a  pound. 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  365 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  twenty-nine  minute  men, 
raised  by  Mr.  Andrew  Waterman,  proceed  with  him  immedi- 
ately to  New  Shoreham  ;  and  that  they  all  be  paid  according 
to  the  act  for  raising  men  for  the  same  purpose. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, the  members  of  the  upper  house,  who  live  in  the  county 
of  Providence  ;  the  deputies  of  the  town  of  Providence,  Met- 
calfe Bowler,  William  Bradford,  John  Dexter,  Joseph  Antho- 
ny, Daniel  Mowry,  Jr.  and  Joshua  Babcock,  Esqs.,  or  the 
major  part  of  them,  together  with  such  other  members  of  the 
General  Assembly,  as  may  be  present,  be,  and  they  are  hereby, 
appointed  a  committee,  during  the  recess  of  the  General  As- 
sembly, to  act  upon  any  sudden  important  emergency  ;  with 
full  power  of  taking  all  prudent  and  necessary  measures  for  the 
safety  of  this  colony,  and  the  colonies  in  general. 

That  they  be  particularly  empowered  to  employ  the  two 
armed  vessels  in  the  service  of  this  colony,  or  either  of  them, 
in  such  manner,  arid  upon  such  voyage,  as  they  shall  think 
conducive  to  the  public  interest  ;  and  that  this  act  continue 
in  force  until  the  next  session  of  Assembly. 

Whereas,  the  ensigns  in  the  respective  companies  of  the 
Rhode  Island  forces,  encamped  on  Prospect  Hill,  represented 
unto  this  Assembly,  that  by  a  resolve  of  the  Provincial  Con- 
gress of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  the  ensigns  of  the  several  bat- 
talions of  that  colony  were  advanced,  and  made  second  lieu- 
tenants, and  their  wages  enhanced  ten  shillings  a  month  ;  and 
prayed  that  this  Assembly  would,  in  conformity  to  that  resolve, 
make  the  same  regulation  respecting  the  ensigns  in  the  Rhode 
Island  forces  ;   on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the  said  petition 
be  granted  ;  that  the  said  ensigns  be  advanced  to  equal  rank 
and  station  with  their  brethren  in  the  Massachusetts  forces  ; 
and  that  their  wages  be  increased  ten  shillings  a  month. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  gentlemen  mentioned  in 
the  following  list,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  chosen  to  serve  in 
the  offices,  to  their  names  respectively  ascribed,  to  wit : 


366  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

Nani.es  of  Persons  chosen  to  the  respective  Militarij  Offices,  in  the 
Colony,  herein  mentioned. 

Joseph  Belcher,  Esq.,  colonel;  John  Cooke,  Esq.,  lienten- 
ant  colonel ;  and  William  Channing,  Esq.,  major,  of  the  regi- 
ment of  militia,  in  the  county  of  Newport. 

Charles  Dyer,  Esq.,  major j  of  the  regiment  of  militia,  in 
Kings  county. 

William  Barton,  Esq.,  adjutant,  of  the  first  regiment  of  mi- 
litia, in  the  county  of  Providence. 

Samuel  Pearce,  Jr.,  captain  ;  William  Allen,  son  of  William^ 
lieutenant ;  and  George  Allen,  ensign,  of  the  second  company 
of  militia,  in  Portsmouth. 

William  Taylor,  captain  ;  John  Cole,  lieutenant ;  and 
James  Albro,  ensign,  of  the  second  company  of  militia,  in 
North  Kingstown. 

William  Arnold,  Esq.,  major  of  the  regiment  of  militia,  in 
the  county  of  Kent. 

Benjamin  Underwood,  captain ;  John  Carr,  lieutenant ; 
and  Benjamin  Carr,  Jr.,  ensign,  of  the  company  of  militia,  in 
Jamestown. 

Samuel  Hill,  captain ;  Thomas  Jenckes,  lieutenant  ;  and 
Samuel  Day,  ensign,  of  the  first  company  of  militia,  in 
Smithfield. 

James  Smith,  lieutenant,  of  the  third  companj/  of  militia,  in 
Smithfield. 

Joseph  Whipple,  captain  ;  Joseph  Kinyon,  lieutenant ;  and 
Asaph  Bennett,  ensign,  of  the  fourth  company  of  militia,  in 
Coventry. 

Thomas  Peckham,  captain ;  Samuel  Bailey,  lieutenant ; 
and  Elisha  Barker,  ensign,  of  the  company  of  militia,  in  Mid- 
dle town. 

Ezra  Ormsbee,  captain,  of  the  company  of  militia,  in 
Warren. 

Vial  Allen,  lieutenant ;  and  Daniel  Kinnicutt,  ensign,  of 
the  company  of  militia,  in  Barrington. 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  367 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  two  row-gallies  be  forthwith 
built  and  equipped  at  the  expense  of  this  colony,  for  its  protec- 
tion and  defence  ;  that  they  be  of  a  suitable  bigness  to  carry 
sixty  men,  each  ;  to  row  with  fifteen  oars  on  a  side,  and  to 
mount  one  eighteen-pounder  in  the  bow,  and  a  number  of 
swivel  guns  ;  and  that  they  be  built  in  such  further  and  par- 
ticular form,  model  and  construction,  as  shall  be  judged  most 
suitable  and  fitting,  by  the  committee  hereafter  named,  for  an- 
swering the  design  and  purpose  of  their  building. 

And  that  Ambrose  Page,  Esq.,  be  the  person  for  the  above 
purpose,  and  that  he  be  empowered  to  draw  out  of  the  general 
treasury,  a  sum  not  exceeding  £300,  to  enable  him  to  prose- 
cute the  building. 

Whereas,  the  post  rider  hath  been  stopped  by  the  ships  of 
war  in  the  harbor  of  Newport,  and  the  mail  hath  been  actually 
taken  from  him,  by  violence,  which  renders  it  necessary  that 
the  route  be  altered, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  John  Lasell  be 
employed  as  a  post  rider,  to  go  the  old  post  road,  from  Provi- 
dence to  New  London  ;  that  he  set  out  from  Providence  for 
New  London  on  every  Tuesday,  immediately  upon  the  arrival 
of  the  post  from  Cambridge,  and  return  as  soon  as  possible  ; 
that  he  be  allowed  from  this  colony  at  the  rate  of  $185,  a 
year,  and  in  that  proportion  for  any  lesser  time,  he  finding 
good  horses,  and  paying  his  own  expenses. 

That  Mr.  Benjamin  Mumford  be  employed  as  a  post  rider 
from  Newport  to  Cambridge  ;  that  he  set  out  from  Newport  on 
Monday  afternoon  at  3  o'clock,  to  carry  the  Newport  mail  for 
the  westward  to  Providence,  and  proceed  immediately  to  Cam- 
bridge, with  the  mails  for  that  post  office,  and  set  off  from 
thence  on  Thursday,  in  the  afternoon,  for  Providence  ;  and 
there  take  the  mail  from  the  westward,  and  proceed  immedi- 
ately to  Newport ;  that  he  be  allowed  for  his  services  at  the 
same  rate  as  hath  heretofore  been  allowed  to  the  post  rider  be- 
tween Newport  and  Boston  ;  and  that  the  post  rider  pay  the 
port  of  every  letter  to  such  office  nearest  to  which  he  shall  re-* 


368  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1775. 

ceive  it,  and  be  under  oath  for  the  faithful  performance  of  his 
trust. 

That  this  act  continue  in  force  until  further  orders  from  this 
Assembly. 

That  Ilis  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor  be  requested  to  write 
to  and  transmit  a  copy  of  this  act  to  the  Governor  of  Connec- 
ticut, and  speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  the  Mas- 
sachusetts Bay,  requesting  them  to  pay  their  proportions  of 
the  expense  of  the  post  riders,  as  usually  practised. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Nathaniel  Mumford, 
Thomas  Greene,  Carder  Hazard,  Nathan  Miller  and  Gideon 
Mumford,  be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  hereby 
appointed  a  committee  to  audit  the  accounts  of  the  committee 
of  safety,  who  are  hereb}^  directed  to  pay  off  the  troops  to  the 
last  day  of  this  month,  and  to  close  their  accounts  on  the  8tli 
day  of  September  next. 

That  the  committee  hereby  appointed,  meet  at  Providence, 
on  the  15th  day  of  September,  to  proceed  upon  the  said  busi- 
ness, and  make  report  to  this  General  Assembly,  at  the  then 
next  succeeding  session. 

And  thiit  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor,  transmit  the  said 
accounts,  as  soon  as  may  be,  after  they  shall  be  audited,  to  the 
Honorable  the  Continental  Congress. 

"Whereas,  notwithstanding  the  humble  and  dutiful  petition  of 
the  last  Congress  to  the  King,  and  other  wise  pacific  measures 
taken  for  obtaining  a  happy  reconciliation  between  Great 
Britain  and  the  colonies  ;  the  ministry,  lost  to  every  sentiment 
of  justice,  liberty  and  humanity,  continue  to  send  troops  and 
ships  of  war  into  America,  which  destroy  our  trade,  plunder 
and  burn  our  towns,  and  murder  the  good  people  of  these  col- 
onies,— 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  this  colony  most  ar- 
dently wish  to  see  the  former  friendship,  harmony  and  inter- 
course, between  Britain  and  these  colonies  restored,  and  a 
happy  and  lasting  connection  established  between  both  coun- 
tries, upon  terms  of  just  and  equal  liberty  ;   and  will  concur 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  369 

with  the  other  colonies   in   all   proper  measures  for  obtaining 
those  desirable  blessings. 

And  as  every  principle,  divine  and  human,  require  us  to 
obey  that  great  and  fundamental  law  of  nature,  self-preserva- 
tion, until  peace  shall  be  restored  upon  constitutional  princi- 
ples ;  this  colony  will  most  heartily  exert  the  whole  power  of 
government,  in  conjunction  with  the  other  colonies,  for  carrying 
on  this  just  and  necessary  war,  and  bringing  the  same  to  a 
happy  issue. 

And  omongst  other  measures  for  obtaining  this  most  desira- 
ble purpose,  this  Assembly  is  persuaded,  that  the  building  and 
equipping  an  American  fleet,  as  soon  as  possible,  would  greatly 
and  essentially  conduce  to  the  preservation  of  the  lives,  lib- 
erty and  property,  of  the  good  people  of  these  colonies  ;  and 
therefore  instruct  their  delegates,  to  use  their  whole  influence, 
at  the  ensuing  Congress,  for  building,  at  the  Continental  ex- 
pense, a  fleet  of  sufficient  force,  for  the  protection  of  these  col- 
onies, and  for  employing  them  in  such  manner  and  places  as 
will  most  effectually  annoy  our  enemies,  and  contribute  to  the 
common  defence  of  these  colonies. 

And  they  are  also  instructed  to  use  ail  their  influence  for 
carrying  on  the  war  in  the  most  vigorous  manner,  until  peace, 
liberty  and  safety,  be  restored  and  secured  to  these  colonies 
upon  an  equitable  and  permanent  basis. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  delegates  for  this  colony, 
to  the  Congress,  to  be  holden  by  adjournment,  at  Philadelphia, 
on  the  5th  day  of  September  next,  bo,  and  they  are  hereby, 
fully  authorized  and  empowered  to  receive  of  the  Continental 
treasurer,  the  money  due  from  the  United  Colonies,  to  this 
colony,  for  the  several  sums  of  money  advanced,  for  raising  of 
forces,  purchasing  arms,  tents,  provisions,  clothing  and  warlike 
stores,  for  the  defence  of  the  said  United  Colonies  ;  and  trans- 
mit the  same  to  the  general  treasurer  of  this  colony,  by  such 
faithful  person  or  persons,  as  they  can  trust,  and  under  such 
guard  as  they  shall  judge  expedient  and  necessary. 

Whereas,  the  Honorable  Samuel  Ward,  Esq.,  one  of  the  del- 
egates from  this  colony,  to  the  Congress,  held  at  Philadelphia, 

VOL.  VII.         47 


370  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

on  the  10th  day  of  May  last,  hath  made  a  report  unto  this  As- 
sembly, of  many  of  the  proceedings  and  resolves  of  the  said 
Congress,  consisting  of  measures  by  them  taken  for  defending 
the  United  Colonies  against  the  attacks  of  our  cruel  and  un- 
natural enemies,  measures  for  the  security  of  the  frontiers,  the 
preservation  of  peace  and  friendship  with  the  people  of  Canada 
and  the  Indian  nations,  the  emission  of  a  Continental  currency 
for  defraying  the  expenses  of  the  war,  a  petition  to  the  King, 
an  address  to  the  people  of  England,  an  address  to  the  people  of 
Ireland,  a  letter  to  the  lord  mayor  of  London,  a  letter  to  the 
Assembly  of  Jamaica,  the  establishment  of  a  general  post  office, 
and  some  occasional  resolutions 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be, 
and  the  same  is  hereby,  accepted  and  approved,  and  that  the 
thanks  of  this  Assembly  be  given  to  the  delegates  of  the  Con- 
tinental Congress,  in  general,  and  to  the  delegates  of  this  col- 
ony, in  particular,  for  their  Avise,  spirited,  and  faithful  dis- 
charge of  the  important  trust  reposed  in  them. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  thai  the  delegates  from  this  colony, 
to  the  Congress,  to  be  holden  at  Philadelphia,  by  adjournment, 
on  the  5th  day  of  September  next,  be,  and  they  are,  empow- 
ered to  apply  to  their  own  respective  uses  $200,  each,  of  the 
money  which  they  may  receive  of  the  Continental  treasurer  in 
behalf  of  this  colony,  on  account  of  their  expenses  and  services 
at  the  Congress  ;  and  that  they  be  severally  accountable  to  the 
colony  therefor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Continental  currency  emit- 
ted by  the  Congress,  at  their  last  session  in  Philadelphia,  on 
the  10th  day  of  May  last,  be,  and  it  is  hereby,  made  a  lawful 
tender,  at  the  rate  of  six  shillings,  lawful  money  on  a  dollar,  and 
in  the  same  proportion  as  to  gold  and  silver,  in  all  payments, 
whatsoever,  whether  of  a  public  or  private  nature  ;  and  whether 
due  in  lawful  money,  dollars,  gold  or  silver  coin,  sterling  money, 
bills  of  exchange,  or  any  other  currency,  whatsoever. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  whosoever  shall  coun- 
terfeit the  said  Continental  currency  or  bills,  or  pass  the  same  in 
this  colony,  knowing  the  same  to  be  counterfeit,  such  person  or 


1775.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  •    371 

persons,  upon  legal  conviction  thereof,  shall  be  liable  to,  and 
suffer  the  same  pains,  penalties  and  punishments,  as  by  law 
persons  counterfeiting  the  lawful  money  bills  of  this  colony  are 
liable  to. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  eight  field  pieces  be  provided 
and  prepared  for  the  use  of  the  colony  ;  and  that  Mr.  Nicholas 
Power  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  appointed  to  provide  and  prepare 
six  of  said  field  pieces,  and  Mr.  Jacob  Greene,  the  other  two  ; 
and  that  the  said  Nicholas  Power  put  in  order  the  carriages  of 
the  colony  guns,  placed  in  the  Providence  battery. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  a  bounty  of  three  shillings  a 
pound,  be  allowed,  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  on 
every  pound  of  saltpeter  that  may  be  made  in  this  colony,  by 
the  26th  day  of  August,  A.  D.  1776,  suitable  to  be  manufac- 
tured into  gunpowder  ;  and  three  shillings  a  pound  for  every 
pound  of  such  saltpeter,  exclusive  of  said  bounty. 

And  that  Mr.  Joseph  Brown,  Jabez  Bowen,  Esq.  and  the 
secretary  of  this  colony,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  in- 
.spectors  and  provers  of  the  quality  thereof ;  and  that  no  person 
be  entitled  to  said  bounty  and  value,  until  he  shall  have  first 
made  oath  before  the  secretary,  that  the  saltpeter  offered  for 
inspection  was  actually  made  in  this  colony  ;  and  that  in  order 
to  its  being  so  proved,  that  the  manufacturers  thereon  convey 
the  same  to  the  town  of  Providence  ;  and  that  the  same  be  de- 
livered to,  and  deposited  with  the  general  treasurer. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, be  requested  to  write  a  letter  to  His  Excellency  General 
Washington,  informing  him  of  the  steps  this  colony  have  taken 
to  secure  the  stock  upon  the  islands  lying  within  this  jurisdic- 
tion ;  and  to  request  His  Excellency  to  use  his  authority,  that 
such  of  said  stock  as  may  be  fit  for  market,  be  received  by  the 
commissary  general,  for  the  use  of  the  army. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  monthly  wages  of  Abraham 
Whipple,  captain  of  the  colony  sloop,  be  raised  from  £7  IO5., 
to  £9,  from  the  time  he  entered  on  board  said  sloop. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  James  Rhodes,  Gideon 
Hoxsie,  George  Shefiield,  Joshua  Babcock,  Abel  Tanner,  Jo- 


372      .  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  1775. 

seph  Hoxsie  and  William  Potter,  be,  and  they,  or  any  three  of 
them,  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee  to  take  possession  of 
the  stock  that  may  be  brought  off  from  New  Shoreham,  by  order 
of  this  Assembly ;  and  such  of  said  stock  as  may  be  fit  for  a  mar- 
ket, immediately  to  send  to  the  army  ;  that  such  of  said  stock  as 
may  not  be  fit  for  a  market,  they  immediately  sell  and  dispose 
of  to  the  best  advantage,  either  at  public  or  private  sale,  unless 
the  owners  of  said  stock  shall  choose  to  take  their  own  stock 
into  possession  at  their  own  risk  ;  and  that  they  make  report 
thereof,  to  the  next  General  Assembly. 

An  Act  dividing  the  Second  Company,  or  Trained  Band,  in  the 
town  of  Scituate,  into  two  companies,  appointing  officers,  &c. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  act  to  prevent  the  Hon. 
Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  from  acting  as  Governor  of  this  colony, 
until  the  oath  of  office  shall  be  administered  to  him  in  open 
General  Assembly,  with  the  consent  of  the  Assembly,  &c., 
which  was  passed  at  the  session  held  on  the  first  Wednesday  in 
May  last,  and  continued  by  an  act  passed  at  the  session  held  on 
the  second  Monday  in  June  last,  and  further  continued  by  an 
act  passed  at  the  session  held  on  Wednesday,  the  28th  day  of 
the  same  June,  be  still  continued,  and  remain  in  force,  until 
the  rising  of  this  Assembly,  at  the  next  session. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Honorable  Stephen  Hop- 
kins, Esq.,  one  of  the  delegates  of  this  colony,  at  the  Conti- 
nental Congress,  be  empowered  to  receive  £80,  lawful  money, 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  on  account  of  his  expenses  and 
services  at  said  Congress,  from  the  time  he  last  set  out  for 
Philadelphia,  to  the  time  of  the  last  adjournment  of  said  Con- 
gress ;   and  that  he  be  accountable  to  the  colony. 

Whereas,  the  Honorable  Samuel  Ward,  Esq.,  one  of  the 
delegates  for  this  colony,  at  the  Continental  Congress,  exhib- 
ited unto  this  Assembly  an  account,  by  him  charged  against  the 
colony,  for  his  services  at  said  Congress  ;  and  sundry  expenses 
in  going  to,  during  his  residence  at,  and  returning  from,  Phil- 
adelphia ;  and  the  said  account  being  duly  examined, — 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  373 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is,  al- 
lowed ;  and  that  the  balance  thereof,  being  =£83  19s.  od.,  law- 
ful money,  be  paid  the  said  Samuel  Ward,  out  of  the  general 
treasury. 

It  is  A^oted  and  resolved,  that  the  late  proceedings  of  the 
members  of  the  committee  of  inspection  of  South  Kingstown, 
and  several  other  towns,  respecting  the  stopping  and  regulating 
the  passing  of  a  number  of  neat  cattle  over  the  ferries  to  New- 
port from  South  Kingstown,  belonging  to  George  Irish,  be  ap- 
proved of;  and  that  it  is  expected  and  requested,  that  the 
committees  of  inspection  for  the  towns,  do,  at  all  times,  use 
their  utmost  endeavors  that  stock  be  not  suffered  to  pass  over 
any  of  the  ferries  to  Newport,  in  larger  numbers  than  two  at  a 
time,  except  sheep,  and  of  those  but  five  at  a  time,  while  any 
danger  may  remain  of  their  being  taken  by  our  enemies  ;  and 
that  the  proprietors  of  the  ferries  and  their  ferrymen,  govern 
themselves  accordingly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  Samuel  Aborn,  Col.  John 
Low,  Richard  Smith,  Esq.,  Mr.  Benjam"n  Bosworth,  Sylvester 
Gardner,  Esq.  and  Mr.  Benjamin  Gardner,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  cause  all  the  cattle  and 
sheep,  that  are  fit  to  be  killed,  to  be  forthwith  removed  and 
carried  off  all  the  islands  in  this  colony,  Rhode  Island  except- 
ed ;  and  Block  Island,  for  which  provision  hath  already  been 
made. 

To  this  end,  the  committee  are  to  request  the  owners  to  re- 
move them,  and  to  give  them  assistance  ;  and  if  the  owners 
refuse,  then  this  committee  are  to  cause  them  to  be  appraised 
by  proper  persons  of  their  appointment,  and  to  transport  them 
to  the  main  land,  to  be  sent  to  the  camp  and  sold,  for  which 
the  owners  shall  be  indemnified. 

That  the  stock  on  Prudence  and  Hog  Islands  be  removed  to' 
Bristol,  by  the  said  Richard  Smith  and  Benjamin  Bosworth. 

And  the  stock  on  Jamestown  be  removed  to  South  Kings- 
town, by  the  said  Sylvester  Gardner  and  Benjamin  Gardner. 

That  said  committee  be  empowered   to  take  such  assistance, 


874  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

vessels  and  boats,  as  they  shall  think  necessary,  and  all  at  the 
expense  of  the  colony. 

And  the  said  committee  are  also  empowered  to  order  the 
two  armed  vessels  belonging  to  the  colony,  to  assist  in  remov- 
ing said  cattle  and  sheep  ;  that  William  Bradford,  Esq.,  send 
those  cattle  and  sheep  to  the  camp,  that  may  be  brought  to 
Bristol  ;  and  that  John  Northup,  Esq.,  send  those  cattle  and 
sheep  to  the  camp,  that  may  be  brought  to  South  Kingstown 
or  North  Kingstown. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, with  the  advice  of  the  committee  appointed  to  transact 
public  matters  during  the  recess  of  the  Assembly,  be  requested 
to  write  an  answer  to  the  letter  from  the  Council  of  the  colony 
of  Massachusetts  Bay,  dated  August  18,  1775,  to  the  Deputy 
Governor,  and  to  take  such  orders  respecting  the  prisoners 
therein  referred  to,  as  they  shall  think  proper. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  if  any  person  or  persons  shall 
refuse  to  take  the  paper  money  emitted  by  this  colony,  the  pa- 
per money  emitted  by  the  Continental  Congress,  or  by  any  of 
the  American  colonies,  in  payment  for  any  debt,  duty  or  de- 
mand of  a  pecuniary  nature,  he  shall  incur  the  displeasure  of 
this  General  Assembly ;  and  ought  to  be  held  and  esteemed  as 
an  enemy  to  its  credit,  reputation  and  happiness  ;  and  totally 
destitute  of  that  regard  and  obligation  he  is  under  to  his 
country  and  the  cause  of  liberty,  which  they  are  deeply  en- 
gaged to  support  and  defend  ;  and  that  the  good  people  of  this 
colony  and  America  ought  to  withdraw  all  communication  from 
such  person  or  persons. 

God  save  the  King. 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  375 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly.,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantation?,,  at  Providence,  on 
Tuesday,  the  olst  day  of  October,  1775. 

The  Hon.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  Edward  Cole,  Esq.,  presented  unto  this  Assembly 
the  following  petition  and  declaration,  to  wit  : 

Petition  of  Edward  Cole,  to  the  General  Assembly. 

To  the  Honorable  General  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,  now  sitting 
at  Providence,  hnmbly  showeth  Edward  Cole,  of  Newport,— 

That  he  is  called  by  business  of  great  importance  to  himself,  to  Carlisle,  in  the 
province  of  Pennsylvania. 

That  having,  some  time  past,  in  common  conversation,  spoken  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  induce  many  people  to  think  he  was  inimical  to  this,  his  native  country  (al- 
though he  never,  in  any  way,  whatever,  either  by  giving  information  or  intelligence, 
or  otherwise,  did  any  thing  to  the  prejudice  of  America),  he  thought  proper  to  ap- 
ply to  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor,  to  give  him  a  pass  to  proceed  through  the 
country,  lest  from  the  prejudice,  aforesaid,  he  might  meet  with  some  interruption  in 
his  intended  journey ;  who  did  not  choose  to  comply  with  his  request,  unless  by  the 
advice  of  the  comnn'ttee. 

That  the  committee  being  empowered  to  act  only  during  the  recess  of  the  General 
Assembly,  he  is  under  the  necessity  of  applying  to  Your  Honors.  He  begs  leave  to 
represent,  that  he  hath  no  other  intention  in  pursuing  his  said  journey,  than  trans- 
acting his  own  private  business  ;  and  to  assure  Your  Honors,  that  during  the  course 
of  it,  he  Avill,  in  every  resjject,  conduct  himself  as  a  real  well  wisher  and  a  hearty 
friend  to  his  country,  as  he  in  truth,  is,  and  will  abide  by,  and  be  governed  by,  the 
resolutions  of  the  Continental  Congress. 

He  therefore  humbly  prays  Your  Honors  to  request  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, to  grant  him  a  pass  or  certificate,  that  he  may  pursue  his  said  journey,  Avith' 
out  danger  of  interruption  from  misapprehension  of  his  principles  or  intentions. 

And,  as  in  duty  bound,  will  ever  pray,  &c.  EDWARD  COLE, 

Declaration  of  Edward  Cole,  to  the  General  Assembly. 

I,  the  subscriber,  dreading  censure  from  my  countrymen,  on  the  score  of  what 
mistakenly  may  have  been  apprehended  to  be  my  political  principles,  now  seriously 
declare  and  avow  my  principles  to  be  the  foUovying,  to  wit : 


:376  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

That  I  solemnly  declare,  that  I  justify  and  voluntarily  adopt  the  resolutions  of  this 
General  Assembly,  in  using  force  against  force,  at  or  near  to  Boston,  in  opposing 
the  ministerial  troops  ;  and  that  we,  of  this  colony,  have  good  cause  toAvithstand,  and 
to  our  utmost,  oppose  the  mandatory  edicts  of  the  British  Parliament,  to  enslave  the 
inhabitants  of  this  country,  and  compel  them  by  force  to  submit  to  vassalage  ;  and, 
in  consequence  of  which,  an  army  has  been  sent  into  Boston,  and  is  now  there  ;  and 
from  henceforward  I  (If  needed,)  will  co-operate  with  my  countrymen  in  their  op- 
position, &c.  EDWARD  COLE. 

And  the  said  petition  and  declaration  being  duly  con- 
sidered,— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  declaration  be  accept- 
ed by  this  Assembly  ;  and  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, be  requested  to  grant  the  petitioner  a  pass,  agreeably  to 
the  prayer  of  his  petition. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  five  hundred  good  and  effective 
men,  be  immediately  raised,  as  soldiers  for  the  defence  of  the 
colony,  for  one  year,  unless  dismissed  before  ;  that  proper  offi- 
cers be  appointed  to  command  them  ;  and  that  John  Sayles^ 
Jr.,  Eseck  Hopkins  and  Henry  Marchant,  Esqs.,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  commitiee  to  prepare  an  act  ac- 
cordingly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  John  Dexter,  William  Greene^ 
Paul  Mumford  and  Thomas  Church,  Esqs.,  be  a  committee,  to 
examine  the  prisoners  taken  into  custody  by  General  Hopkins, 
and  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  as  soon  as  may  be  ;  and 
that  General  Hopkins  be  requested  to  attend  said  committee. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  soldiers  on  Jamestown,  be 
reinforced  with  a  suGficient  number  of  men,  to  be  immedi- 
ately raised  by  John  Northup,  Esq.,  if  necessary,  with  the  as- 
sistance of  Col.  Brown. 

And  that  Col.  Brown  send  such  officer  or  officers  to  com-, 
mand  such  men,  as  he  shall  think  proper;  and  that  said 
troops  be  under  the  commanding  officer  no\v  on  Jamestown. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  conduct  of  General  Hop- 
kins, in  respect  to  taking  into  his  possession,  in  behalf  of  the 
colony,  the  estates  of  George  Rome,  Benjamin  Brenton,  the 
heirs  of  Andrew  Oliver,  Esq.,  deceased;  Jahleel  Brenton  and 
Thomas  Hutchinson,  as  persons  inimical  to  the  true  interest  of 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  377 

the  colony,  be  approved  of ;  and  that  the  said  estates  bo  kept 
ill  the  possession  of  those  persons  appointed  by  the  general,  in 
behalf  of  the  colony  ;  and  that  they  j^ccount  to  the  colony  for 
the  back  and  future  rents,  and  profits  thereof. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of 
Kings  county,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  directed  to  take  posses- 
sion, in  behalf  of  the  colony,  of  a  certain  farm  on  Point  Judith  j 
in  the  county  of  Kings  county,  in  the  possession  of  Silas  Niles, 
and  of  the  stock  of  every  kind  thereon,  belonging  to  Samuel 
Sewall,  now  in  Boston  ;  and  that  the  said  farm  and  stock  be 
let  out ;  that  the  said  Silas  Niles  account  for  all  back  rents  due 
to  the  said  sheriff,  in  behalf  of  the  colony. 

That  the  said  sheriff  be,  and  lie  is  hereby,  ordered  to  take 
into  possession  a  certain  farm  in  Exeter,  in  said  county,  be- 
longing to  the  said  Samuel  Sev^all,  with  all  the  stock  thereon, 
belonging  to  the  said  Sewall,  and  to  let  out  the  same  in  behalf 
of  the  colony,  and  account  therefor,  on  demand  ;  that  David 
Austin,  the  present  tenant  account  with  Ihe  said  sheriff,  in  be- 
half of  the  colony,  for  all  back  rents  due. 

That  the  said  farms  be  rented  to  the  present  tenants,  they 
giving  bond  to  the  general  treasurer,  for  the  payment  to  the 
said  general  treasurer,  of  the  rents  back,  and  the  rents  hereaf- 
ter arising. 

And  that  in  like  manner  the  said  sheriff  take  into  his  pos- 
session the  estate  of  Dr.  Thomas  Moffatt,  situate  in  North 
Kingstown,  in  said  county,  now  in  possession  of  Charles  Dyer  ; 
and  that  he  act  and  do  therewith,  as  above  ordered,  respecting 
the  estate  of  the  said  Samuel  Sewall. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  real  estate  lately  belonging 
to  John  Borland,  late  of  Cambrid.Eje,  in  the  Province  of  the 
Massachusetts  Bay,  deceased,  lying  in  the  county  of  Bristol, 
in  this  colony,  with  the  stock  thereon,  be  forthwith  taken  into 
possession  by  the  sheriff  of  said  county  of  Bristol,  in  behalf  of 
this  colony  ;  and  that  he  rent  the  same  to  the  present  tenant, 
provided  he  will  give  as  high  rent  for  the  same,  as  any  other 
person  ;  and  that  he  give  bond  to  the  general  treasurer  for  the 
payment  of  all  back  rents,  and  for  all  rents  hereafter  arising. 

VOL.  VII.         48 


378  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

That  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Kings  county,  take  into  his 
possession  all  such  real  estate  in  that  county,  lately  belonging 
to  the  said  John  Borland,  with  such  stocks  as  may  belong  to 
the  heirs  of  the  said  John  Borland  ;  and  that  he  rent  the  same 
to  the  present  tenants,  provided  they  will  give  as  much  there- 
for, as  any  other  person,  and  give  bond  to  the  general  treasurer 
for  the  payment  of  all  back  rents  due,  and  for  such  rents  as 
shall  hereafter  arise. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  this  Asseuibly,  having  a  due 
sense  of  the  spirited  conduct  of  Col.  Robert  Brown,  of  South 
Kingstown,  in  his  late  exertions  for  the  relief  of  the  town 
of  Jamestown,  do  hereby  present  him  the  thanks  of  this 
Assembly. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  he  be  requested  to 
give  his  attendance  before  this  Assembly  for  their  further  in- 
formation. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved ^  that  a  messenger  be  immediately 
dispatched  to  Lieut.  Col.  Pierce,  and  to  Capt.  Simeon  Clarke, 
Jr.,  of  Richmond,  requiring  their  immediate  attendance  on  this 
Assembly. 

An  Act  dividing  the  First  Trained  Band,  or  Company  of 
Militia,  in  the  town  of  South  Kingstown,  into  two  com- 
panies. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  further  consideration  of 
the  bill  for  freeing  negro  slaves,  now  pending  before  this  As- 
sembly, be  referred  to  the  next  session. 

That  in  the  mean  time,  a  copy  thereof,  be  published  in  the 
Newport  and  Providence  newspapers. 

And  that  the  deputies  of  each  town  in  the  colony,  lay  the 
same  before  their  constituents,  in  town  meeting,  and  obtain 
their  opinions  thereon,  and  present  the  same  to  this  General 
Assembly,  at  their  next  session. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  James  Rhodes  and  Gideon  Hoxsie,  who 
were  appointed  a  committee  to  remove  all  the  stock  from  Block 


1775.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


379 


Island,  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly  an  account  of  the  stock 
taken  from  said  island,  belonging  to  sundry  persons,  together 
with  the  valuation,  thereof,  as  follows,  to  wit : 

Account  of  Sheep  and  Lambs  taken  by  the  Colony^  from  Block 
Island,  September  2,  1775. 


Giles  Pierce,  two  hundred  and  forty-one  f;it  sheep  and  lambs,  at  £G  IO5., 
per  score  ---.-.-. 

John  Paine,  seventy-eight  sheep,  at  £G  lC\s-.,  per  score 

Walter  Rathbun,  seventeen  "       u         u  u  .  „  . 

Abel  Franklin,  thirty-two     "       "         "  "       _ 

John  Littlefield,  sixty-two     "       »         a  (t  ... 

Capt.  John  Sands,  one  hundred  and  five  sheep,  at  £6  10s.,  pe: 

Edward  Sands,  Jr.,  twenty  -  "  " 

Joshua  Sands,  Esq.,  five  -  -       "  '• 

Henry  Willis,  Jr.  fifteen    -  -  "  " 

Samuel  Rathbun,  four  -  -       "  '' 

John  Barber,  ninety-six     -  -  "  " 

Thomas  Dickens,  eleven  -  -       "  " 

John  Mott,  two  lambs        -  -  -  -     " 

Hezeklali  Dodge,  three  lambs-  -  -  " 

Benjamin  Sheffield,  six     "  -  -  -     " 

Henry  Littlefield,  two      "       -  -  -  '' 

John  ^litchell,  fivo  "  -  -  -     " 

Thomas  Mitchell,  nine      "      -  -  -  " 

Jeremiah  Mitchell,  one     "  -  -  -     " 

John  Littlefield,  forty  three  lambs       -  -  " 

Capt.  John  Sands,  one  hundred  and  sixty-nine  store  sheep  and  lambs,  at 
£5,  per  score  --.._. 

John  Littlefield,  one  hundred  and  forty-eight  sheep,  at  £5,  per  score, 

John  Barber,  one  hundred  and  seventy-five       ''  "  " 

Thomas  Mitchell,  twenty-seven  -  "  "  " 

John  Mitchell,  ten  -  -  u  n  « 

Jonathan  Mitchell,  ten  -  .  "  (^  u        , 

Joseph  Mitchell,  three  -  -  .      "  "  "  . 

George  Franklin,  eight      -  -  a-  n  u 

Henry  Littlefield,  five  -  .  f  u  u        . 

Nathaniel  Littlefield,  twelve  -  "  "  " 

Edward  Sands,  Jr.,  twenty-nine  -  "  "  " 

Joshua  Sands,  four  -  -  u  u  u 

Ezekiel  Sheffield,  fourteen        -  .  u  u  u        . 

Henry  Willis,  two  -  -  u  u  u 

John  Mott,  one  -  -  -"«'». 

Giles  Pierce,  four  hundred  and  forty-one  "  "  " 

Abel  Franklin,  twenty-eight  -  "  "  " 

John  Paine,  t^enty-thi-ee         -  .  "  u  u 


78 

OG 

6 

■25 

03 

0 

5 

10 

6 

10 

18 

0 

20 

03 

0 

34 

02 

6 

G 

10 

0 

1 

12 

6 

5 

07 

6 

1 

06 

0 

31 

04 

0 

3 

11 

6 

0 

13 

0 

0 

17 

6 

1 

19 

0 

0 

13 

0 

1 

12 

6 

2 

18 

6 

0 

06 

6 

13 

19 

G 

42 

05 

0 

37 

00 

0 

43 

15 

0 

G 

15 

0 

2 

10 

0 

2 

10 

0 

0 

15 

0 

2 

00 

0 

1 

05 

0 

3 

00 

0 

7 

95 

0 

1 

00 

0 

3 

10 

0 

0 

10 

0 

0 

05 

0 

110 

05 

0 

7 

00 

0 

5 

15 

0 

£ 

s. 

cL 

2 

05 

0 

1 

10 

0 

2 

10 

0 

1 

10 

0 

1 

00 

0 

0 

15 

0 

1 

00 

0 

iioSi 

09 

G 

180  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 


Walter  Rathbun,  nine  slieep,  at  £5,  per  score 
Nathaniel  Littlefield,  Jr.,  six  sheep,  at  £5,  per  score 
Henry  Willis,  Jr.,  ten  "  "         " 

Tonnut  Rose,  six         -  "  "         «'        . 

Daniel  Mott,  four  -         "  "         " 

Jeremiah  ^Mitchell,  three  "  "         "        . 

Ezekiel  Rose,  four  -         "  "         " 

Total  sheep  and  lamljs,  one  thousand  nine  h.undred  and  eight. 


And  the  said  account  being  duly  examined, — 
It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  the  amount  thereof,  being  £534  ds.  6d, 
lawful  money,  be  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury  to  the  per- 
sons to  whom  the  same  is  respectiv^ely  due,  as  mentioned  in 
said  account. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Sylvester  Gardner  and  Benjamin  Gardner, 
who  were  appointed  a  committee,  to  remove  the  stock  from 
Jamestown,  and  to  appoint  a  committee  to  appraise  the  same, 
presented  unto  this  Assembly  the  following  account  of  the 
stock  removed  from  the  said  island,  and  appraisement  there- 
of, to  wit : 

Account  of  Stock  taken  by  the  Colony ^  from  Jamestown, 
August  30,  1775. 

£        5.    d 

Samuel  Carr,  one  ox,  one  cow  and  twelve  shee])       -  -                 -     20  10  0 

£     s.  <L 

Isaac  Ilowland,  six  oxen,  two  heifers                 -                 -  64  04  0 

"             '•     thirty-four  sheep  and  one  lamb,  at  9s.  5  l-2(/.,  l(i   10  t)     80  14  9 

Pain  Hammond,  four  oxen  and  two  bulls  -                 -  -                 -     45  00  0 

Joseph  and  Benjamin  Underwood,  two  oxen  and  one  cow  -  21  00  0 

"                     "                 "     seventeen  sheep,  at  8s.  M.  -       7  00  3     28  00  3 

Daniel  Weeden,  Jr.,  one  heifer  and  one  steer     -                 -  8  08  0 

"             "     twenty-five  sheep  -                 -                 -  -  12  16  3     21  04  3 

Edward  Carr,  two  oxen  and  one  cow                  -                 -  ^             28  04  0 

Nicholas  Carr,  two  oxen              -                 -                 -  -                 -21100 

Benjamin  Carr,  two  oxen  -                 -                 -                 -  15  18  0 

'■            "     twenty-one  sheep,  at  9s.     -                  -  -     9   09  0     25  07  0 

George  Tew,  one  ox           -                 -                 -                 -  -             11  08  0 

John  Eldred,  one  cow                   -                  -                  -  -     7   1 7  G 

"     twenty-four  sheep,  at  9s.  -                  -                  -  101G018136 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  381 


£ 

.>>•. 

(L 

£ 

s.  d. 

Isaac  Pierce,  four  oxen,  one  cow,  four  heifers  and  one  steer, 

OS 

IS 

0 

"         "     one  cow             .                 .                 -                 - 

c 

00 

0 

"         "     one  hundred  and  twenty-five  slieep,  at  9,s\ 

-  56 

05 

0 

131 

03  0 

Gei-shom  Remington,  two  oxen           .                 _                 . 

21 

00  0 

Hazard  Knowles,  three  oxen  and  two  heifers 

-  ;i.i 

17 

0 

"             "     three  heifers,  two  steers  and  one  bull 

1!) 

10 

0 

"             "     twenty-nine  sheep,  at  8s.  3(7. 

-  11 

19 

3 

CO 

12  9 

Daniel  Carpenter,  five  heifers 

24 

OO 

0 

"             "     two  oxen 

-  1!) 

Ot.) 

0 

"             "     one  hundred  sheep,  at  9s. 

45 

00 

0 

88 

00  0 

James  Carr,  Jr.,  two  oxen         .                 .                 - 

-   IS 

00 

0 

"             "     three  heifers 

9 

12 

0 

27 

12  0 

Josiah  Arnold,  Esq.,  one  cow,  four  heifers  and  two  bulls 

35 

09   0 

John  Howland,  two  oxen  -                 ,-                 -                 - 

19 

10 

0 

'•             "     twenty-six  sheep  -                 -                 - 

-  11 

14 

0 

31 

11   0 

William  Battey.  two  oxen  -                 -                 -                 - 

- 

21 

00   0 

Thomas  Fowler,  two  heifers  and  one  steer 

-  12 

IS 

(t 

"             "     one  cow         .                 -                 -                 - 

5 

05 

0 

"             "     twenty  sheep,  at  9s. 

9 

0<» 

0 

27 

03  0 

James  Carr,  two  oxen          .                 .                 .                 . 

14 

17 

0 

"             "     ten  sheep              -                 -                 - 

-     4 

1(1 

0 

19 

0  7  0 

Daniel  Weeden,  two  oxen   -                 -                 -                 - 

24 

00 

0 

"             "     one  cow                -                 -                 - 

-     5 

10 

0 

"             "     one  heifer     -                 -                 -                 - 

5 

00 

0 

34 

10   0 

Abraham  Chace,  two  oxen         .                 -                 - 

-  19 

04 

0 

"                  "     one  heifi'r 

3 

OO 

0 

22 

10  0 

John  Martin,  two  oxen 

23 

12   0 

?850 

09   0 

And  the  said  account  being  duly  considered, — 
It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  the  amount  thereof,  being  £850  9s.,  lawful 
money,  be  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  the  several  per- 
sons to  whom  the  same  is  respectively  due,  as  mentioned  in 
siiid  account. 

Whereas,  the  town  council  of  the  town  of  Newport,  pre- 
sented a  memorial  to  this  Assembly,  setting  forth  the  distressed 
situation  of  the  town,  occasioned  by  the  withholding  from  the 
ministerial  fleet,  stationed  in  the  harbor  of  Newport,  their 
usual  supplies  of  fresh  beef,  beer,  &c.  ;  in  consequence  of 
which,  the  ferry  boats,  market  boats,  fish  boats  and  wood  ves- 
sels, are  prevented  from  coming  to  the  town  with  their  usual 
supplies  of  provisions  and  fuel,  for  the  use  of  the  inhabitants ; 


382  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE    ISLAND  [1775. 

by  means,  whereof,  together  with  a  stagnation  of  trade,  they 
are  now  exposed  to  all  those  dreadful  consequences  which 
must  inevitably  arise  through  the  want  of  the  common  neces- 
saries of  life. 

And  thereupon  prayed  this  Assembly  to  take  into  their  most 
serious  consideration,  the  truly  affecting  state  of  that  once 
happy  town,  and  to  grant  them  such  relief  in  the  premises,  as 
shall  be  thought  proper,  consistently  with  the  common  inter- 
est ;  and  this  Assembly  taking  the  subject  matter  of  the  said 
memorial  into  their  most  serious  consideration, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  town  of  Newport  may,  for 
the  safety  thereof,  as  far  as  may  consist  with  the  general 
safety,  negotiate  with  Capt.  Wallace,  for  the  supplying  the 
ships  there  with  beef,  beer,  &c.,  as  heretofore,  upon  his  stipu- 
lating that  the  ferry  boats,  wood  boats,  with  their  passengers, 
&c.,  pass  and  repass  unmolested,  with  the  common  supplies  for 
the  town,  of  the  common  and  usual  necessaries  of  life. 

That  the  commander  in  chief  upon  the  said  island,  be  in- 
structed to  permit  said  negotiation,  and  regulate  the  supplies 
for  said  ships. 

And  that  he,  from  time  to  time,  remove  the  troops  under  his 
command,  from  place  to  place,  as  he  shall  think  may  best  tend 
to  the  general  safety,  and  the  peace  and  happiness  of  the  town 
of  Newport  ;  paying  the  greatest  attention  to,  and  having 
the  tenderest  concern  for,  the  true  and  lasting  peace,  support 
and  relief,  thereof ;  still  having  an  eye  and  just  preference  to 
the  general  safety,  and  the  common  cause  of  America. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  declaration  made  by  Col. 
Edward  Cole,  and  by  him  signed  before  this  Assembly,  be 
printed  in  the  Providence  newspaper. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  £200,  lawful  money,  be  al- 
lowed for  the  relief  of  the  poor  of  the  town  of  Newport,  and 
paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  the  overseers  of  the  poor  of 
said  town  of  Newport. 

That  the  moneys  be  first  applied  towards  the  immediate  re- 
moval of  such  of  the  poor  as  are  not  now  chargeable,  and  are 
not  able,  but  are  willing,  to  remove  from  the  town  ;   and  that 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  383 

the  remainder  be  appropriated  for  the  support  of  such  poor  per- 
sons as  may  choose  to  remain  there. 

That  William  Vernon  and  John  Read,  be  added  to  the  over- 
seers, to  assist  about  the  removal  of  such  poor. 

That  those  poor  persons  who  shall  be  immediately  removed, 
carry  a  certificate  with  them  ;  and  if  they  become  chargeable 
in  such  towns,  that  they  be  maintained  by  the  colony. 

An  Act  establishing  an  independent  company  in  the  county  of 

Kings  county,  by  the  name  of  the  Kingstown  Reds. 

[See  printed  Schedule,  for  this  act.] 

An  Act  establishing  an  independent  troop  of  horse  in  the 
county  of  Providence,  by  the  name  of  the  Captain  General's 
Cavaliers,  for  the  county  of  Providence. 

[See  printed  Schedule,  for  this  act.] 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Honorable  Nicholas  Cooke, 
Esq.,  Ambrose  Page,  Esq.,  James  Arnold,  Jr.,  Esq.,  Jonathan 
Randall,  Esq.,  John  Sayles,  Jr.,  Esq.  and  Henry  Ward,  Esq.  ; 
Metcalfe  Bowler,  Joseph  Anthony,  William  Bradford,  Joshua 
Babcock,  John  Jenckes,  John  Smith,  John  Mathewson,  John 
Dexter,  Job  Olney,  Stephen  Whipple,  William  Greene,  Paul 
Mumford  and  John  Potter,  Esqs.,  or  any  seven  of  them,  to- 
gether also  with  all  such  members  of  the  General  Assembly,  as 
shall  be  present,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  commit- 
tee to  act  during  the  recess  of  the  General  Assembly,  upon 
any  sudden  important  emergency,  with  full  power  to  take  all 
prudent  and  necessary  measures  for  the  safety  of  the  United 
Colonies  in  general,  and  this  colony,  in  particular. 

That  they  be  empowered  to  employ  the  two  armed  vessels, 
and  the  whole  force  of  the  colony,  in  such  manner  as  they  shall 
think  the  public  interest  and  safety  shall  require  ;  and  that  this 
act  continue  in  force  until  the  next  session  of  the  Assembly. 

Complaint  being  made  to  this  Assembly,  that  divers  people, 
taking  an  undue  advantage  of  the  consternation  and  distresses 
of  the  town  of  Newport,  have  exacted  most  exorbitant  prices 


384  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1775. 

for' the  removal  and  wharfage  of  the  goods  of  the  inhabitants  of 
said  town  ;  — 

It  is  therefore  resolved,  that  William  Richmond,  John  Cooke, 
Samuel  Dyer,  John  Barker  and  John  Jepson,  Esqs.,  or  the 
majer  part  of  them,  be,  and  hereby  are,  appointed  a  committee 
to  state  the  price  for  every  cart  load  of  goods  from  the  said 
town  to  the  different  parts  of  the  island  ;  and  also  of  the 
wharfage  and  transportation,  thereof,  over  any  of  the  ferries 
from  Rhode  Island. 

That  any  one  of  the  said  committee  be,  and  hereby  are,  em- 
powered to  press  carts  and  teams  for  the  removal  of  the  goods 
of  the  said  inhabitants. 

And  that  in  case  any  person  shall  demand  a  greater  price 
than  shall  be  so  fixed,  for  the  removal  of  goods,  he  or  they,  so 
offending,  shall  forfeit  and  pay,  as  a  fine  (one  half  to  the  in- 
former, and  the  other  half  to  and  for  the  use  of  the  town  where 
the  offence  shall  be  committed),  the  sum  of  £3,  law^ful  money, 
to  be  recovered  by  the  town  treasurer,  before  any  justice  of  the 
peace  in  the  county  of  New^port. 

An  Act  for  embodying,  supplying  and  paying  a  regiment, 
consisting  of  five  hundred  men,  for  the  defence  of  the 
United  Colonies  in  general,  and  of  this  colony,  in  par- 
ticular. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  five  hundred  men,  field  and 
commissioned  officers  included,  be  enlisted,  raised  and  em- 
bodied, with  all  expedition  and  dispatch,  and  be  formed  into 
one  regiment,  under  the  command  of  one  colonel,  one  lieuten- 
ant colonel  and  one  major ;  that  there  be  one  adjutant  and  one 
(partermaster. 

That  each  field  ofiicer's  company  be  commanded,  under  such 
field  officer,  by  one  captain -lieutenant,  one  lieutenant  and  one 
ensign  ;  and  each  of  the  other  companies,  by  one  captain,  one 
lieutenant  and  one  ensign  ;  and  that  said  regiment  consist  of 
eight  companies. 

And  be  it   further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 


f 

s. 

-     15 

00 

12 

GO 

-     10 

00 

6 

00 

^       4 

00 

3 

10 

-       5 

10 

3 

00 

2 

08 

2 

04 

and  that  bis 

1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  385 

each  able  bodied  man,  who  shall  enlist  into  the  service,  and 
find  himself  a  small  arm,  bayonet  and  other  accoutrements, 
shall  be  allowed  and  paid  sixteen  shillings,  therefor. 

And  be  it  farther  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
each  officer  and  soldier  shall  receive  the  following  monthly 
wages,  Avhile  in  the  service,  to  wit  : 

The  colonel  _  -  „  _ 

"     lieutenant  colonel 

"     major  .  _  _  _ 

*'     captain-lieutenants  and  each  captain 

"     lieutenant       ^  _  .  _ 

*'     ensign    -  »  -  - 

"     adjutant  .  _  _  „ 

"     quartermaster       -  -  - 

^'     sergeant  -  _  .  » 

"     corporal,  drummer  and  fifer 
Each   private   man,  forty  shillings  per  month 
first  month's  wages  be  advanced  at  the  time  of  his  enlistment. 

And  be  it  farther  enacted,  that  each  soldier  shall  have  a 
blanket  and  knapsack  given  him  by  the  colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
each  soldier  be  enlisted  by  signing  the  following  enlistment, 
to  wit : 

For?n  of  Enlistmejit. 

I,  the  subscriber,  hereby  solemnly  engage  and  enlist  myself  as 
a  soldier,  in  the  pay  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  for  the  pre- 
servation of  the  liberties  of  America,  and  the  defence  of  the  United 
Colonies  in  general,  and  of  this  colony  in  particidar,  from  the 
day  of  my  enlistment  for  one  year,  unless  the  service  admit  of  a 
discharge  sooner,  ivhich  shall  be  at  the  discretion  of  the  General 
Assembly  ;  and  1  hereby  promise  to  submit  myself  to  all  the  or- 
ders and  regulations  of  the  army,  and  faithfully  to  observe  and 
obey  all  such  orders  as  1  shall  receive  from  timc^  to  time,  from  m,y 
officers. 

VOL.  VII.         49 


386  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

And  be  it  farther  enacted,  that  no  officer  or  soldier  be  ar- 
rested, prosecuted  or  detained  in  jail,  for  any  debt,  whatsoever, 
less  than  £15,  lawful  money,  due  to  one  creditor. 

And  that  every  apprentice  who  shall  enlist  into  the  said 
regiment,  shall  be  entitled  to  three-quarters  of  his  wages,  he 
finding  his  own  clothes  ;  and  his  master  the  other  quarter  ; 
provided,  he  deliver  to  such  enlisted  apprentice  all  the  wearing 
apparel  he  shall  then  be  possessed  of ;  but  in  case  he  shall  not 
do  so,  that  then  the  said  apprentice  shall  take  the  whole  of  his 
wages. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  Eseck  Hopkins,  Esq.,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  appointed  commander  in  chief  of  said  regi- 
ment, and  the  regiments  of  militia  in  the  county  of  Newport, 
with  the  title  and  rank  of  brigadier  general. 

That  he  be  empowered  to  fdl  up  all  vacancies  of  commis- 
sioned officers,  till  further  order  of  the  General  Assembly  ;  and 
that  he  be  allowed  the  sum  of  £20  per  month. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  said  regiment  be  embodied 
for  tw^elve  months,  from  the  rising  of  the  General  Assembly, 
unless  sooner  disbanded. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  John  Jenckes  and 
John  Potter  be  a  committee  to  purchase  of  Mr.  John  Brown, 
for  the  use  of  the  colony,  all  the  powder  he  has  to  sell. 

It  is  voted  aud  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of 
Providence,  forthwith  take  into  possession  the  shop  and  house, 
situate,  lying  and  being  in  the  town  of  Providence  ;  being  the 
estate  of  Gilbert  Deblois,  of  Boston,  in  the  county  of  Suffolk, 
in  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  merchant  ;  together 
with  all  other  interest  and  estate  of  the  said  Gilbert  Deblois,  in 
the  county  of  Providence. 

That  he  lease  the  same  to  the  present  tenant,  he  paying  as 
much  therefor,  as  any  other  person,  and  giving  security  to  the 
general  treasurer  for  the  payment  of  all  rents  now  due,  and 
that  may  hereafter  arise. 

That  the  said  sheriff  take  into  his  possession  all  the  goods  in 
said  shop,  together  with  the  books  of  accounts  of  James  Hill  ; 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  387 

notifying  him   to  attend  this  House,  forthwith,  that  he  may  be 
examined  touching  the  property  of  the  said  Gilbert  Deblois. 

And  that  the  said  sheriff  take  into  his  possession  the  shop  of 
John  and  Jonathan  Simpson,  of  said  Boston,  situate  in  said 
Providence,  and  lease  the  same  to  the  present  tenants,  they 
giving  as  much  therefor,  as  any  other  person  ;  and  giving 
security  to  the  general  treasurer  for  the  payment  of  all  rents 
already  due,  and  for  such  as  shall  become  due,  to  the  said  gen- 
eral treasurer. 

An  Act  dividing  the  Company  of  Militia  in  the  town  of  Rich- 
mond, into  two  companies. 
[See  printed  Schedule,  for  this  act.]' 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of 
Newport,  take  into  his  possession  the  house  and  estate  of  Ralph 
Inman,  situate  in  Newport,  now  in  possession  of  the  widow 
Partridge  ;  and  that  he  lease  the  same  to  the  present  tenant, 
she  paying  therefor  as  much  as  any  other  person,  and  giving 
security  to  the  general  treasurer  for  the  payment  of  all  rents 
due,  and  that  may  hereafter  arise. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  Joseph  Dennison,  2d,  and  Company, 
exhibited  unto  this  Assembly,  an  account  by  them  charged 
against  the  colony,  for  the  amount  of  the  schooner  Polly,  taken 
by  the  enemy  while  in  the  colony's  service,  removing  stock 
from  Block  Island  ;  and  also  for  the  amount  of  the  charter  of 
the  sloop  Hector,  employed  in  the  abovementioned  service,  and 
charges  of  provision,  v^^ages,  &c.  ;  and  also  for  sundries  sup- 
plied the  soldiers,  who  went  on  Block  Island  in  said  service  ; 
and  the  said  account  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed ;  and  that  the  amount  thereof,  being  £374  Is.  10c?., 
lawful  money,  be  paid  to  the  said  Joseph  Dennison,  2d,  and 
Company,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Benjamin  Bosworth,  who  was  appointed  to  re- 
move the  stock  from  the  island  of  Prudence,  belonging  to  sun- 


388  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

dry  persons,  and  to  cause  the  same  to  lie  valueii,  presented  unto 
this  Assembly  an  account  and  valuation  thereof,  as  follows, 
to  wit  : 

[The  total  i'.ppraisement,  in  lawful  money,  amounted  to 
£530  65.  lOd.] 

An  Act  for  the  punishment  of  persons  who  shall  be  iound  guilty 
of  holding  a  traitorous  correspondence  with  the  ministry  of 
Great  Britain,  or  any  of  their  officers  or  agents  ;  or  of  sup- 
plying the  ministerial  army  or  navy,  that  now  is,  or  may  be, 
employed  in  America,  against  the  United  Colonies,  with 
provisions,  cannon,  arms,  ammunition,  warlike  or  naval 
stores,  or  of  acting  as  pilots  on  board  any  of  their  ships  and 
vessels. 

Whereas,  the  ministry  of  Great  Britain,  have,  for  several 
years  last  past,  steadily  pursued  a  plan  for  subjecting  the  in- 
habitants of  the  British  colonies,  in  America,  to  an  absolute, 
unconditioned  state  of  slavery  ;  and  have  proceeded  at  length 
to  the  burning  of  our  towns,  and  spreading  desolation  and 
slaughter,  as  far  as  it  hath  been  in  their  power,  through  the 
country,  in  a  manner  totally  inconsistent  with  the  practice  of 
civilized  nations,  and  unworthy  of  the  reputation  formerly  sus- 
tained by  British  troops. 

And  whereas,  the  aforesaid  colonies  have  been  reduced  to 
the  fatal  necessity  of  taking  up  arms,  in  defence  of  those  ines- 
timable rights  and  liberties,  which  they  derive  from  the  un- 
erring laws  of  nature,  and  the  fundamental  principles  of  the 
British  constitution  ;  and  which  they  cannot  resign,  but  with 
their  lives. 

And  whereas,  several  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  said  colonies, 
lost  to  every  generous  sentiment  of  liberty,  of  love  to  their 
country,  and  posterity,  have  kept  up  a  traitorous  correspond- 
ence with,  and  supplied  the  ministerial  troops  and  navy  ;  and 
some  of  them  have  acted  as  pilots  on  board  their  ships  and 
vessels,  whereby  the  safety  and  liberties  of  the  said  colonies 
may  be  greatly  endangered. 

Be  it  therefore    enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIO:vS.  389' 

the  authority  thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  if  any  of  the  inhabit- 
ants of  the  said  colonies,  within  this  colony,  or  any  of  the  in- 
habitants of  this  colony,  Avithin  any  other  colony,  shall  be  found 
guilty  of  holding  a  traitorous  correspondence  with  the  ministry 
of  Oreat  Britain,  or  any  of  their  officers  or  agents  ;  or  of  sup- 
plying- the  ministerial  army  or  navy,  that  now  is,  or  may  be,, 
employed  in  America,  against  the  United  Colonies,  with  provi- 
sions, cannon,  arms,  ammunition,  warlike  or  naval  stores  ;  or  of 
acting  as  pilots  on  board  any  of  their  ships  or  vessels,  he  or  they,  so 
offending,  shall  suffer  the  pains  of  death,  as  in  cases  of  felony  ; 
and  shall  forfeit  his  lands,  goods  and  chattels,  to  the  colony,  to- 
be  disposed  of  by  the  General  Assembly,  as  they  shall  think 
fit  ;  all  necessary  charges  of  prosecution,  condemnation  and 
execution,  being  first  deducted. 

And  that  all  offences  against  this  act,  shall  be  cognizable  be- 
fore the  superior  court  of  judicature,  court  of  assize  and  gen- 
eral jiiil  delivery  of  this  colony. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  Ihat  the  negotiation  and  treaty  of  the 
town  council  with  Gapt.  Wallace,  respecting  the  supplying  the 
ships  of  war  stationed  in  the  harbor  of  Newport,  and  the  regu- 
lations thereof,  by  the  commanding  officer,  .allowed  of  by  this 
General  Assembly,  at  this  present  session,  be,  and  the  same  is 
hereby,  excepted  out  of  this  act. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  that 
this  act  be  in  force  in  ten  days  after  the  rising  of  this  Assem- 
bly ;  and  that  a  copy,  thereof,  be  published  in  the  Newport 
Mercury  and  Providence  Gazette. 

it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  .^20,000,  lawful  money  bills, 
be  immediately  printed,  to  supply  the  treasury,  for  paying  oflf 
and  discharging  all  the  colony's  debts,  whether  on  security  or 
otherwise  ;  and  that  the  bills  be  signed  by  Metcalfe  Bowler, 
Henry  Y/ard,  Joseph  Clarke,  John  Cole,  Thomas  Greene,  John 
G.  Wanton  and  John  Dexter,  Esqs. 

That  all  bills  under  five  shillings,  be  signed  by  two  of  the 
committee,  and  all  the  other  bills  by  three  of  the  committee. 

That  the  same  shall  be  a  lawful  tender  in   discharge  of  all 


390  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775^ 

contracts,  debts,  dues   and    demands,  whether  of  a   public    or 
private  nature  ;    tliat  said  bills  carry  no  interest. 

That  the  whole  of  said  bills  be  redeemed  in  five  years  from 
the  time  of  emission,  by  a  general  tax,  to  be  levied  on  the  in- 
habitants of  this  colony  ;  and  that  said  bills  shall  be  of  the  fol- 
lowing value,  to  wit  : 

1,500,  of  forty  shillings,  each,  is 

3,000,  "  thirty        "  ''                .              . 
4,000,  "  twenty     " 

5,000,  "  ten            c.  ,.               _              . 

6,000,  "  five           "  "         - 

8,000,  "  three         "  ''                .              . 

12,000,  "  two            cc  ..        _ 

20,000,  "  one            •*  ^^               .              . 

16,000,  "  nine  pence  "        - 

20,000,  "  six       "  "               -             - 

Total     -  -  -  -  £20,000 

Which  bills,  shall  be  of  the  following  form  : 

The  possessor  of  this  bill  shall  be  paid,  bi/  the  general  treasurer 

of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island, • ,  laicful  money,  within 

Jive  years  from  the  date  hereof.     By  order  of  the  General  As- 
sembly.    Providence,  the  Qth  day  of  November,  A.  D.  1775. 

And  on  the  said  bills,  there  shall  be  the  same  impression  aAd 
motto,  as  on  the  lawful  money  bills,  heretofore  emitted  ;  and 
that  said  bills  shall  be  redeemed  at  the  rate  of  one  silver  Spanish 
milled  dollar  for  every  six  shillings,  or  other  silver  and  gold 
equiv.'dent,  agreeably  to  the  law  of  this  colony,  declaring  what 
shall  be  lawful  money. 

And  that  said  bills  be  signed  in  the  council  chamber,  in 
Providence,  and  not  elsewhere. 

"Whereas,  the  Viper   sloop  of  war,  took  the  sloop  Polly, 


£3,000 

4,500 

4,000 

2,^00 

1,500 

1,200 

1,200 

1,000 

60O 

500 

1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  391 

Samuel  Barnes,  master,  belonging  to  New  York,  bound  from 
Antigua  to  New  York,  and  put  a  midshipman  as  prize  master, 
with  several  hands,  on  board,  with  orders  to  proceed  with  the 
said  vessel  and  cargo  to  Boston  ;  and  also  put  on  board  Isaac 
Eslick,  of  Bristol,  in  this  colony,  as  pilot  of  said  sloop  ;  prom- 
ising the  said  Eslick,  that  in  case  he  piloted  the  said  sloop 
fjiithfully  into  the  harbor  of  Boston,  they  would  deliver  up  ta 
him  a  boat  taken  from  him,  with  the  goods  on  board  her,  then 
in  the  possession  of  one  of  the  enemy's  ships. 

But  the- said  Eslick,  with  two  of  the  men  belonging  to  said 
sloop,  who  were  left  on  board,  having  with  great  address 
brought  the  said  sloop  into  Seaconnet  River,  so  that  she,  with 
her  cargo,  were  recovered  out  of  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  and 
taken  into  the  possession  and  care  of  General  Eseck  Hopkins, 
and  thereby  the  said  Isaac  Eslick  hath  lost  all  hopes  of  recov- 
ering his  said  boat  and  goods  ;  and,  as  in  justice  and  equity, 
satisfaction  and  encouragement,  in  such  cases,  ought  to  be 
made  and  given, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  $250,  be  paid  to 
the  said  Isaac  Eslick,  and  $50,  to  each  of  the  other  persons, 
instrumental  in  saving  the  said  sloop  and  cargo  out  of  the 
enemy's  hands,  out  of  the  value  of  the  said  sloop  and  cargo,  in 
proportion  to  the  properties  of  the  several  owners. 

And  that,  upon  the  payment  of  the  said  sum,  together  with 
all  the  costs  and  charges  that  have  arisen  upon  the  said  sloop 
and  cargo,  since  her  being  in  the  possession  of  the  said  Eseck 
Hopkins,  and  upon  proof  of  their  respective  properties,  the  said 
Eseck  Hopkins  deliver  the  said  sloop  and  cargo  to  the  owners 
of  the  same,  respectively;  David  Currie,  one  of  the  principal 
freighters  of  the  goods  on  board  the  said  sloop,  having  appeared 
before  this  House,  and  declared  himself  satisfied  with  the  above 
order. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  inhabitants  of  Nantucket, 
upon  producing  certificates  from  the  committee  of  correspond- 
ence, of  Falmouth,  specifying  any  particular  articles  of  provi- 
sions and  necessaries,  with  the  quantities,  may  purchase  and 
ship  from  any  town  in  this  colony,  such  articles,  first  applying 


392  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    EHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

to  the  committee  of  correspondence  ;  and  having  inserted  in 
the  certificate,  the  quantity  of  each  article,  and  giving  his  or 
their  security,  in  double  the  value  of  the  goods,  to  transmit  to 
the  said  committee  of  Falmouth,  within  four  months  from  re- 
ceiving the  same,  an  account,  thereof,  with  a  certificate  from 
the  selectmen  of  Nantucket,  that  the  same  "^^as  landed  there^ 
and  was  necessaiy  for  the  internal  consumption  of  the  in- 
habitants. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Ambrose  Page,  Esq.,  be  re- 
quested to  procure  the  two  row  gallies,  belonging  to  the  colony^ 
to  be  immediately  completed  fit  for  service  ;  and  that  he  draw 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  the  sum  of  .-£400,  lawful  inoneyy 
for  the  purpose,  aforesaid. 

Whereas,  a  number  of  accounts  were  laid  before  this  Assem- 
bly, by  sundry  persons,  charged  against  the  colony,  for  their 
respective  services,  and  sundries  by  them  supplied,  for  the  use 
of  the  troops  who  went  to  Bristol,  on  the  alarm  of  the  7th  inst.  ; 
and  the  said  accounts  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  are  hereby, 
allowed  ;  and  that  the  several  sums  by  them  charged,  be  paid 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  the  persons  to  whom  the  same 
are  due  respectively. 

Whereas,  a  number  of  persons,  considering  the  distressed 
situation  of  their  debtors,  occasioned  by  the  restrictions  of 
trade,  have  not  commenced  suits  against  them,  for  the  re- 
covery of  their  just  debts ;  and  thereby,  if  the  statute  of  limi- 
tations in  personal  actions,  should  continue  in  force,  may  lose 
the  same  ;  — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  statute  of  limita- 
tations  in  personal  actions,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  re- 
pealed. 

An  Act  declaring  the  office  of  Governor  of  this  colony,  vacant. 

Whereas,  this    General  Assembly,  at   the    session   held  at 

Providence,  on  the  first  Wednesday  in  May  last,  made  and 

passed  an  act  (for  divers  weighty  reasons  therein   mentioned,) 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  393 

to  prevent  the  Honorable  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  who  was 
ehosen  Governor  of  this  colony,  at  the  general  election  held  on 
the  said  first  Wednesday  in  May,  from  acting  in  the  said  office  ; 
which  act  hath  been  continued  from  session  to  session,  until 
now,  without  proceeding  to  declare  the  said  office  vacant,  from 
a  tender  regard  to  the  said  Joseph  Wanton  ;  and  in  order  to 
give  him  an  opportunity  of  making  due  satisfaction  for  his 
former  conduct,  and  of  convincing  this  General  Assembly  of  his 
friendly  disposition  to  the  United  Colonies,  in  general,  and  to 
this  colony,  in  particular. 

And  whereas,  the  said  Joseph  Wanton,  by  the  whole  course 
of  his  behaviour,  since  the  passing  of  the  said  act,  hath  con- 
tinued to  demonstrate  that  he  is  inimical  to  the  rights  and  lib- 
erties of  America,  and  is  thereby  rendered  totally  unfit  to  sus- 
tain the  said  office. 

And  whereas,  the  calamities  of  the  present  times,  make  it 
necessary  for  this  General  Assembly  to  avail  themselves  of  the 
advantages  given  them  by  charter,  and  the  fundamental  prin- 
ciples of  the  constitution  ; — 

This  General  Assembly  do  therefore  resolve  and  declare,  and 
by  the  authority  thereof,  it  is  resolved  and  declared,  that  the 
said  Joseph  Wanton  hath  justly  forfeited  the  office  of  Governor 
of  this  colony  ;  and  that  thereby  the  said  office  is  become 
vacant. 

Whereas,  sundry  persons  laid  before  this  Assembly,  ac- 
counts by  them  charged  against  the  colony,  for  billeting  a 
number  of  persons  who  went  to  the  assistance  of  the  town  of 
East  Greenwich,  to  disperse  the  rioters  assembled  with  Ste- 
phen Arnold,  Esq.,  in  September  last ;  and  the  said  accounts 
being  duly  considered  by  this  Assembly, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  upon  the  said  Stephen  Ar- 
nold's paying  £15,  lawful  money,  of  said  expense,  the  follow- 
ing sums  be  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  wit : 

£  s.  d. 
To  William  Arnold  -  -  -  -     10  00  03 

Preserved  Pearce      -  -  -  -  5  05  07 

Oliver  Arnold    -  -  ^  -  -       4  01  00 

VOL.  VII.  50 


894  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  1775. 

£    s.  d. 
Richard  Mathewson         -  -  -  -     11  07  10 

Caleb  Arnold  -  -  -  -  1  05  05 

Whereas,  Henry  Ward,  Esq.,  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly, 
an  account  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  his  attend- 
ance upon  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor,  at  Cambridge,  to 
assist  the  committee  appointed  by  the  Continental  Congress, 
to  confer  with  General  Washington,  upon  the  best  methods  for 
forming,  establishing  and  regulating  a  Continental  army  ;  and 
the  said  account  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  the  amount  thereof,  being  =£7  45.,  lawful 
money,  be  paid  the  said  Henry  Ward,  out  of  the  general 
treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  any  and  all  deeds  or  convey- 
ances of  any  of  the  real  estates  of  George  Rome,  Jahleel 
Brenton  and  Benjamin  Brenton,  all  of  Newport  ;  of  Ralph  In- 
man,  Gilbert  Deblois  and  Samuel  Sewall,  all  of  Boston  ;  of 
Thomas  Hutchinson,  late  of  Boston  ;  of  Thomas  Moffatt,  now 
or  late  of  New  London  ;  of  the  heirs  of  Andrew  Oliver  and 
John  Borland,  both  late  of  Boston,  deceased,  lying  and  being 
within  this  colony,  made  and  executed  by  any  of  them  since 
the  5th  day  of  October  last  past,  and  not  placed  to  record  at  or 
before  that  time  ;  or  that  hereafter  may  be  made,  be,  and  the 
same  are  hereby,  declared  void,  to  all  intents  and  purposes, 
whatever. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  rules  and  orders  for  regu- 
lating the  army  of  observation,  raised  by  this  colony,  made  and 
passed  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  the  session  held  at  East 
Greenwich,  on  the  second  Monday  in  June  last,  be,  and  the 
same  are  hereby,  extended  to  the  regiment  now  ordered  to  be 
raised  and  embodied  for  the  defence  of  this  colony  ;  and  that 
said  regiment  be  governed  thereby. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  mortgage  deeds,  bonds 
and  other  securities,  belonging  to  the  grand  committee's  office, 
be  immediately  removed  from  the  town  of  Newport,  to  the 
town  of  Providence,  by  the  keeper  of  the  said  office  ;   and  in 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  395 

€ase  that  he  shall  decline  removing  the  same,  it  be  clone  by 
the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Newport  ;  and  that  they  be  lodged 
in  the  secretary's  office,  until  further  orders  from  the  General 
Assembly. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Benjamin  Crane,  presented  unto  this  Assembly 
the  following  confession  and  declaration,  to  wit : 

Confession  and  Declaration  of  Benjamin  Crane^  to  the  General 
Assembly. 

To  the  Honorable  General  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  iiow  sitting  in 
Providence : 

Some  time  about  the  12th  instant,  I  was  on  board  a  sloop,  near  Hope  Island,  that 
formerly  belonged  to  Mr.  John  Brown,  of  Providence,  and  then  in  the  care  ot 
Thomas  Gilbert. 

The  reason  I  went  on  board  said  sloop  was,  that  I  heard  said  Gilbert  was  on  board, 
and  thonght  he  might  be  serviceable  to  me,  in  getting  some  money  Avhich  I  have  due 
in  Boston ;  and  when  I  was  about  to  return  home,  I  was  persuaded  by  said  Gilbert 
to  take  a  number  of  letters  to  his  friends  in  the  country ;  and  I  acknowledge  I  am 
heartily  sorry  I  have  been  guilty  of  so  imprudent  a  conduct,  as  it  since  appears  to 
me  to  be ;  and  I  heartily  beg  foi'giveness  of  Your  Honors,  and  promise  that  my 
future  conduct  shall  be  agreeable  to  my  confession,  as  I  am  fully  determined  to  risk 
my  life  and  fortune  in  the  cause  of  American  liberty. 

These  are  the  free  and  voluntary  sentiments  of  Your  Ilonors's  most  humble 
gei-vant,—  BENJAMIN  CRANE. 

And  the  said  confession  and  declaration  being  duly  con- 
sidered,— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be  satisfactory  to  this 
General  Assembly,  and  therefore  the  said  Benjamin  Crane  is 
discharged  from  his  confinement ;  and  that  his  boat  be  delivered 
to  him,  he  paying  all  the  charges  of  his  being  apprehended,  and 
of  his  confinement. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Ambrose  Cleveland  presented  unto  this  As- 
sembly, the  following  confession  and  declaration,  to  wit : 

Confession  and  Declaration   of  Ambrose  Cleveland,  to  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly. 

To  the  Honorable  General  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  now  sitting  at 
Providence : 

AVhereas,  the  memorial  of  Ambrose  Cleveland,  acknowledges  he  is  -wi'ong  in  sign- 
ing Brigadier  Ruggles's  Association,  under  Colonel  Gilbert,  and  training  under  said 


396  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

Gilbert  for  two  days,  and  going  to  Boston,  and  Avorking  at  the  King's  works ;  and  like- 
wise of  my  saying  I  could  pilot  the  fleet  as  far  as  Bowers's  ;  all  which,  I  am  heartily 
sorry  for,  and  for  the  future  1  am  determined  to  stand  for  the  rights  and  liberties  of 
my  country,  as  far  as  lies  in  my  power. 

I  therefore  beg  the  Honorable  House  will  forgive  me,  and  pray  that  I  may  be  re- 
ceived as  a  friend  to  my  country. 

I  am,  with  regard,  Your  Honors'  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

AMBROSE  CLEVELAND. 


And  the  said  memorial  being  duly  considered  by  this 
Assembly, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  Ambrose  Cleveland 
be  discharged  from  his  confinement,  upon  condition  that  he  im- 
mediately proceed  to  Freetown,  of  which  he  is  an  inhabitant ; 
and  that  he  does  not,  on  any  pretence,  remove  out  of  said 
town  for  one  year  from  the  date  hereof,  and  paying  all  the 
charges  of  his  being  apprehended,  and  his  confinement. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Joseph  Brown  and 
Eseck  Hopkins,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  commit- 
tee, to  go  through  this  colony,  and  determine  in  what  places  it 
may  be  necessary  to  erect  batteries  or  entrenchments  for  the 
defence  of  this  colony  ;  and  in  what  towns  to  provide  field 
pieces,  specifying  the  number,  the  bore  and  the  weight  of 
metal ;  and  also  whether  any  fire  ships  are  necessary,  and 
what  number,  and  in  what  places  it  will  be  proper  to  sink 
hulks,  &c. 

That  the  said  committee  make  report  to  the  grand  committee 
of  safety,  appointed  to  act  during  the  recess  of  the  General 
Assembly. 

That  the  commander  in  chief  of  this  colony  call  the  said 
grand  committee  together,  to  consider  of  the  said  report,  by 
advertising  them,  and  all  the  members  of  the  General  Assem- 
bly, of  the  time  and  place  of  meeting,  by  an  advertisement  to 
be  inserted  in  the  Newport  Mercury  (if  continued  to  be  pub- 
lished,) and  Providence  Gazette,  one  week  before  the  time  of 
meeting. 

That  the  said  grand  committee  take  the  same  into  considera- 
tion ;  and  in  case  they  shall  approve  the  said  report,  or  any 
part  thereof,  the  said  Joseph  Brown  and    Eseck  Hopkins  be 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  397 

empowered  to  carry  the  same  into  execution  ;  and,  under  the 
direction  of  the  said  grand  committee,  to  draw  such  sums  of 
money  out  of  the  general  treasury,  as  shall,  from  time  to  time 
be  necessary  for  the  said  purposes  ;  and  that  the  troops  ordered 
at  this  session  to  be  raised,  be  employed  in  the  aforesaid  ser- 
vice, as  much  as  may  be. 

Whereas,  Mr.  George  Wightman,  Jr.,  presented  unto  this 
Assembly,  the  following  petition  and  declaration,  to  wit : 

Petition  and  DeclaroMon  of  George  Wightman,  to  the  General 
Assemhlij. 

To  the  Honorable  the  General  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &e.,  now 
sitting  at  Providence  : 

Whereas,  Your  Honors  have  been  pleased  to  admit  of  my  presence,  wherein  I  en- 
deavored to  relate  the  plain  truths  respecting  my  being  accused  of  supplying  the 
enemy,  and  now  have  no  just  reason  to  imagine  that  I  have  deviated  from  it,  except 
that  I  am  too  apt  to  speak  with  an  unbecoming  warmth,  in  justification  of  my  own 
conduct. 

Therefore,  I  pray  Your  Honors  may  forgive  and  consider  my  weakness  fiild  ina_ 
bility  to  address  such  a  number  of  worthy  members,  who  are  constituted  to  represent 
this  our  unhappy  colony,  and  again  be  entreated  to  hear  patiently  your  humble  pe- 
titioner's present  unhappy  situation,  with  those  of  my  aged  and  honored  parents, 
wife  and  children. 

I  hereby  acknowledge  that  I  have  heretofore,  from  time  t5  time,  as  opportunity  in 
public  and  private  may  have  offered,  been  inimical  to  the  just  rights  and  privileges 
of  this,  my  native  country,  and  was  fully  persuaded  that  the  right  and  power  of  His 
present  Majesty,  and  all  the  laws  enacted  by  him  and  his  ministers,  were  and  ought 
ever  to  be  binding  in  all  cases  on  every  subject  in  Britain  and  America ;  but  Your 
Honors  may  be,  and  are  hereby,  assured  that  I  never  have  supplied  or  agreed  to 
supply,  any  ship  or  vessel  belonging  to  His  Majesty,  except  by  compulsion,  notwith- 
standing I  was  of  this  sentiment. 

And  seeing  the  present  destruction  and  calamities  of  my  country  in  general,  anil 
this  colony,  in  particular,  with  the  cruel  and  horrid  exertions  of  His  Majesty's  forces 
put  in  execution  against  us,  I  utterly  deny  and  abhor  these  their  proceedings  ;  and 
if  Your  Honors  may  be  entreated  to  suffer  me  again  to  be  admitted  to  your  flxvors, 
and  to  the  favor  of  all  my  distressed  countrymen,  I  hereby  heartily  engage,  from  a 
just  conviction  of  my  erroneous  sentiments,  that  I  willj  for  the  time  to  come,  lend  all 
my  reasonable  assistance  in  endeavoring  to  oppose  the  present  proceedings  of  His 
Majesty's  ministers  against  this  once  happy  country,  and  do  liereby  sincerely  implore 
the  forgiveness  of  this  Honorable  General  Assembly. 

And  that  I  may  be  restored  to  their  favors,  I  do  hereby  promise  that  my  future 
conduct  shall  be  subservient  to  the  rules  of  the  Honorable  the  Continental  Congress, 
and  the  orders  of  this  Honorable  Assembly.  GEORGE  WIGHTMim,  JR. 


398  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1775. 

And  the  said  memorial  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be  satisfactory  to  this 
General  Assembly  ;  and  that  the  petitioner  be  discharged,  upon 
condition  that  he  does  not  go  a  freighting  in  his  own  boat  or 
any  other,  for  the  term  of  six  months  from  the  date  hereof ; 
and  pay  all  charges  which  have  arisen  upon  his  being  appre- 
hended and  confined. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Nathaniel  Mumford,  Thos. 
Greene  and  Gideon  Mumford,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby, 
appointed  to  wait  on  the  Honorable  the  Continental  Congress 
as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be,  to  receive  of  the  said  Congress 
what  is  due  from  the  United  Colonies,  to  this  colony,  and  to 
give  discharges  ;  and  that  they  carry  all  the  accounts  and 
vouchers  with  them. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  delegates  of  this  colony  at 
the  Continental  Congress,  and  Mr.  Nathaniel  Mumford,  Thomas 
Greene  and  Gideon  Mumford,  Esqs.,  who  are  appointed  a  com- 
mittee to  receive  the  money  due  from  the  United  Colonies,  to 
this  colony,  or  any  three  of  them,  are  hereby  fully  empowered 
finally  to  adjust  the  accounts  carried  by  the  said  committee, 
and  to  make  such  deductions  therefrom,  as  shall  appear  to 
them  contrary  to  the  allowances  made  to  the  other  colonies,  and 
reasonable. 

Whereas,  the  Honorable  Darius  Sessions,  Esq.,  presented 
unto  this  Assembly,  the  following  memorial,  to  wit : 

Memorial  of  Darius  Sessio?is,  to  the  General  Assemblij. 

To  tlie  Honorable  General  Assserably  of  the  colony  of  Uliode   Island,  to  be  liolden 
at  Providence,  the  31st  day  of  October,  A.  D.  17  75  : 

The  memorial  of  Darius  Sessions,  of  said  Providence,  humbly  showeth  : 
That  at  a  session  of  the  General  Assembly,  in  April  last,  an  act  passed  for  raising 
and  embodying  fifteen  hundred  men,  for  the  defence  of  the  colony,  &c. ;  against 
which,  your  memorialist  entered  a  protest,*  expressed  in  terms  which  greatly  dis- 
pleased the  General  Assembly  and  the  good  people  of  the  colon}-,  for  which  he  is 
very  sorry,  and  now  craves  their  forgiveness  ;  and  as  he  is   in  principle  a  friend  to 

"  See  page  311. 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  899 

the  liberties  of  America,  it  is  his  determination  to  unite  and  co-operate  with  his 
countrymen  in  defending  all  our  invaluable  rights  and  pi'ivileges. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  your  humble  servant, 

DAEIUS  SESSIONS. 

And  the  said  memorial  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be  accepted  ;   that  it 

is  fully  satisfactory  to  this    General  Assembly  ;   and  that  the 

Honorable   Darius  Sessions,  Esq.,  be  received  into  their  favor 

and  friendship. 

The  return  of  the  choice  of  officers,  for  the  United  Artillery 

Company,  in  the  county  of  Providence,  was  read  in  Council, 

and  is  as  follows,  to  wit : 

Names  of.  the  Officers  of  the  Providence   United   Company  of 
Artillery, 

Levi  Hall,  was  chosen  lieutenant  colonel,  in  the  room  of 
Daniel  Hitchcock. 

Elihu  Robinson,  major,  in  the  room  of  John  Crane. 
Robert  Taylor,  captain,  in  the  room  of  Elihu  Robinson. 
Daniel  Stillweli,  lieutenant  fire-worker. 

Which  being  duly  considered  by  the  Council, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the   same  be,  and  hereby  are, 

approved. 

Whereas,  Mr.  John  Dennis  presented  unto   this  Assembly, 

the  following  memorial,  to  wit : 

Memorial  of  John  Dennis,  to  the  General  Assembly. 

To  the  Honorable  the  General  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,  now 
sitting  at  Providence : 

The  humble  representation  and  memorial  of  John  Dennis,  of  Prudence  Island,  in 
the  township  of  Portsmouth,  in  said  colony,  merchant,  humbly  showcth : 

That  your  memorialist  deems  it  his  greatest  happiness  to  have  been  born  and  edu- 
cated in  a  covmtry  where  the  love  of  liberty,  to  an  eminent  degree,  is  the  character- 
istic of  its  inhabitants ;  and  rejoices  that  he  is  allowed  the  favor  of  making  applica- 
tion to  this  Honorable  Assembly,  who  have  nobly  exerted  themselves,  in  a  most  just 
and  patriotic  opposition  to  that  system  of  tyranny  and  despotism  designed  for  en- 


400  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

slaving  the  American  colonies.  He  lias  ever  gloried  in  being  a  freeman  of  this 
colony,  and  a  warm  friend  and  well  wisher  to  the  liberties  of  America. 

He  has  always  justified  the  measures  of  the  Continental  Congress,  in  opposition  to 
the  British  ministry,  and  is  ready  to  contribute  his  full  proportion,  and  give  all  rea- 
sonable assistance,  towards  prosecuting  the  present  war,  justly  undertaken  in  defence 
of  the  United  American  colonies. 

That  these  have  been  his  general  sentiments,  he  appeals  to  those  who  have  been 
conversant  and  acquainted  with  him  ever  since  this  unhappy  dispute  subsisted  be- 
tween Great  Britain  and  the  colonies  ;  but,  humanam  est  errare ;  it  is  peculiar  to 
mankind  to  commit  errors,  and  the  best  may  slip  at  an  unguarded  hour. 

It  is  a  great  grief  to  your  memorialist,  that  he  has  by  any  means  given  cause  for  any 
to  suspect  him  -as  inimical  to  his  country ;  he  prays  liberty  to  represent  the  circum- 
stances which  have  occasioned  this  suspicion. 

It  is  true,  some  conversation  passed  between  him,  Mr.  Aaron  Chace  and  Mr. 
Thomas  Dennis,  as  contained  in  the  evidence  ;  he  never  thought  of  supplying  the 
least  article  to  our  enemies,  until  it  was  accidentally  mentioned  in  that  discourse ; 
but  the  prospect  of  a  very  great  profit  arising  therefrom,  and  not  properly  minding 
that  which  chiefly  ought  to  have  been  considered,  the  inestimable  value  of  the 
American  cause,  the  cause  of  our  country,  ourselves  and  posterity,  led  him  foolishly 
to  entertain  discourse  respecting  the  matter  so  far  as  he  did. 

But  upon  the  reception  of  Mr.  Chace's  advice,  and  when  he  came  seriously  to  re- 
flect upon  the  folly  and  wickedness  of  supplying  our  inveterate  enemies,  although  the 
gain  might  b;  ever  so  great,  he  was  immediately  sorry  that  he  had  expressed  any 
thing  that  might  have  a  tendency  that  way,  and  never  did  any  thing  in  consequence 
of  that  conversation. 

With  respect  to  the  eviden-;e  given  in  by  Mr.  Thomas  Dennis,  your  memorialist 
saith,  that  he  had  been  apphed  to  by  several  gentlemen  in  Newport,  to  procure 
them  potatoes,  for  the  use  of  their  respective  families ;  and  therefore  he  applied  to 
him  to  freight  them  to  Newport. 

In  regard  to  those  potatoes  which  he  has  now  by  him  at  Prudence,  he  solemnly 
declares  that  he  had  not  the  least  view  or  intention  of  selling  them  for  the  use  of  the 
British  army  or  navy,  or  any  of  our  enemies,  or  of  putting  them  in  such  a  situation 
that  they  Avould  probably  fall  in  their  way ;  but  that  he  purchased  them  with  a  sole 
view  of  sending  them  to  Carolina  ;  to  these  facts,  he  is  ready  to  make  solemn  oath. 

These  are  the  circumstances  which  have  caused  a  suspicion,  that  he  is  inimical  to 
the  American  colonies  ;  a  suspicion,  which  gives  him  the  greatest  anxiety,  because 
he  is  conscious  of  his  innocency,  and  is  very  loth  to  incur  the  displeasure  of  the 
public. 

He  can  have  no  ill  design  against  his  country  ;  it  would  be  contrary  to  his  interest 
and  principles ;  his  expressions  in  his  conversation,  have  never  favored  of  disaffec- 
tion or  malice  to  the  liberties  of  his  countrymen  ;  he  has  si^oken  two  orations  in  their 
favor,  at  public  commencements  in  this  town  ;  he  has  only  offended  in  the  afore- 
mentioned instance,  for  which  he  is  extremely  sorry ;  and  as  he  wishes  well  to  the 
American  cause,  and  is  heartily  willing  to  do  his  best  endeavors  to  assist  in  support- 
ing it,  he  hopes  that  Your  Honors  will  not  be  severe  against  him  for  that  offence ;  he 
is  extremely  sorry  that  his  Imprudence  has  given  Your  Honors  this  trouble. 

He  prays  for  your  clemency  and  compassion ;  and  that  if  Your  Honors  are  sat- 
isfied with  this,  his  declaration,  which  he  solemnly  afllrms  to  be  true,  that  you  Avould 
be  pleased  to  dismiss  him  from  his  present  arrest ;  and  as  in  duty  bound,  will  ever 
pray,  &c.  -TOHN  DENNIS. 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  401 

And  the  said  memorial  being  duly  considered  by  this  As- 
sembly,— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
accepted  ;  that  it  is  satisfactory,  and  that  therefore  the  peti- 
tioner be  discharged. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Arthur  Dennis  presented  unto  this  Assembly, 
the  following  petition,  &c.,  to  wit : 

Petition  of  Arthur  Dennis,  to  the  General  Assembly. 

To  the  Honorable  the   General  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,  now 
sitting  at  Providence : 

Arthur  Dennis,  of  Prudence  Island,  humbly  showeth  : 

That  some  time  in  the  month  of  July  last  past,  he  was  informed  that  Mr.  Samuel 
Pearce  had  said  that  he,  the  said  Arthur,  had  given  intelligence  to  Capt.  Wallace, 
respecting  the  packet  Avhich  was  taken  by  Capt.  Abraham  Whipple,  of  which  the 
said  Arthur  was  entirely  innocent. 

This  caused  him  to  enter  into  conversation  with  the  said  Pearce  about  the  matter,  as 
mentioned  in  his  evidence  now  before  Your  Honors  ;  when  he  told  him  that  he  possibly 
might  have  an  opportunity  of  conveying  intelligence,  and  making  much  thereby  ;  but 
that  he  scorned  doing  such  a  thing;  but  upon  being  threatened  to  be  confined  on 
board  Captain  Whipple's  privateer,  and  other  conversation  passing,  the  said  Arthur 
was  put  in  a  violent  passion,  which  caused  him  to  express  himself  in  a  very  indecent, 
unbecoming  manner,  as  mentioned  in  Mr.  Pearce's  evidence. 

Soon  after,  Mr.  William  Pearce  told  him  that  the  said  Samuel  Pearce  designed  to 
have  him  put  on  board  Capt.  Whipple's  sloop ;  which  made  the  said  Arthur  very 
imprudently  express  himself  in  the  manner  as  mentioned  in  said  William  Pearce's 
evidence,  respecting  giving  intelligence  to  said  Wallace,  in  order  that  he  might  take 
the  said  Samuel  Pearce. 

But  he,  the  said  Arthur,  never  did  give  any  such  intelligence ;  and  has  since,  al- 
though much  unwell,  appeared  under  arms  in  defence  of  the  colony,  when  the  town 
of  Bristol  was  inhumanly  attacked  and  fired  upon  by  the  ships  of  war. 

He,  the  said  Arthur,  also  did  imprudently  express  himself  to  Capt.  Angell  and 
Samuel  Olney,  as  in  their  several  evidences  before  Your  Honors,  owing  to  passion 
and  sudden  surpi-ise. 

But,  be  the  said  Arthur,  humbly  represents  to  Your  Honors,  that  although  the  said 
expressions  were  rash  and  unadvised,  yet  he  has  always  been  a  friend  and  well 
wisher  to  all  the  measures  undertaken  in  opposition  to  that  system  of  tyranny,  de- 
signed by  the  British  Parliament  to  the  American  colonies  ;  and  he  is  now  both  in 
principle  and  inclination,  determined  to  support  and  maintain  the  defence  of  Ameri- 
can liberty  by  all  means  in  his  power,  against  those  unjust  and  tyrannical  measures 
which  are  now  pursuing  by  the  British  ministry ;  and  is  determined  at  the  risk  of 
his  life  and  fortune,  to  stand  or  fall  with  the  Americans,  in  their  present  defence. 

He  is  very  sorry  for  this  trouble  which  he  has  given  Y^our  Honors,  and  the  loss  of 
his  reputation ;  but  he  promises  to  Your  Honors  that  his  future  conduct  shall  be  ac- 
cording to  the  resolutions  of  the  Continental  Congress,  and  this  House ;  and  there- 
VOL.  VII.  51 


402  RECORDS    OP    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

fore  prays  Your  Honors  tliat  he  may  be  restored  to  your  favorable  opinion  and 
protection. 

The  said  Arthur  being  now  very  much  unwell,  prays  Your  Honors  that  he  may 
be  dismissed ;  and,  as  in  duty  bound,  will  ever  pray.  ARTHUR  DENNIS. 

And  the  premises  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  acknowledgment  and 
declaration,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  accepted  ;  that  it  is 
satisfactory  to  this  Assembly,  and  that  therefore  the  petitioner 
be  discharged. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of 
King's  county  immediately  take  possession  of  those  lands  and 
estates,  lying  partly  in  North  Kingstown  and  partly  in  Exeter, 
in  said  county,  lately  claimed  by  Samuel  Sewall,  and  now  in 
possession  of  Nicholas  Gardner,  Esq.  ;  that  he  rent  the  same 
to  the  present  tenant  at  the  rent  he  now  gives  ;  provided,  he 
gives  bond  to  the  general  treasurer  for  the  rent,  as  well  for  the 
back  rent  as  the  future. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  James  Arnold,  Jr.,  be 
empowered  to  procure  plank  and  timber,  for  making  platforms 
for  the  guns  at  the  battery,  at  Pawtuxet. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Joseph  Brown,  Jabez 
Bo  wen  and  Joseph  Snow,  Jr.,  or  any  two  of  them,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  carry  on,  at  the  ex- 
pense and  risk  of  the  colony,  the  manufacture  of  saltpeter. 

That  they  collect  as  great  a  quantity  of  materials  as  they 
think  they  shall  be  able  to  use. 

That  they  draw  the  sum  of  £150,  out  of  the  general  treasu- 
ry, for  the  said  purpose  ;  and  that  this  Assembly  will  make 
them  a  suitable  allowance  for  their  services. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  General  Hopkins  have  power 
to  appoint  a  secretary  for  the  regiment  now  raising  for  the  de- 
fence of  the  colony  ;  and  that  he  have  the  same  wages  as  Gen- 
eral Greene's  secretary  has. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  there  be  a  commissary  and 
sutler  appointed  for  the  troops,  under  the  command  of  General 
Hopkins  ;   that  he  be  allowed  one  and  a  half  per  cent,  commis- 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  40S 

sions  ;  and  that  he  give  bond  to  the  general  treasurer,  with 
one  surety,  in  the  sum  of  £500. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  trained  band,  or  Company 
of  Mihtia,  in  the  town  of  Charlestown,  be  divided  into  two 
companies,  by  a  line  beginning  where  the  Meadow  Brook  emp- 
ties itself  into  the  Salt  Pond  ;  and  thence  running  northerly,  to 
Quacompaug  Pond  ;  from  thence,  to  the  Great  Cedar  Swamp  ; 
and  from  thence,  as  the  brook  runs  through  the  said  swamp, 
until  it  comes  to  the  Great  River  ;  and  that  the  east  part  of 
said  town,  be  the  Second  Company. 

Both  Houses  being  resolved  into  a  grand  committee,  chose 
the  following  officers,  to  wit : 

Officers  of  the  Regiment   Ordered  to  be  Raised  at  the  present 
Session. 

William  Richmond,  Esq.,  colonel  ;  Gideon  Hoxsie,  Esq., 
lieutenant  colonel ;   and  Benjamin  Tallman,  Esq.,  major. 

Caleb  Gardner,  captain ;  Benjamin  Fry,  lieutenant ;  and 
Jonathan  Wallen,  ensign,  of  the  first  company. 

Peter  Church,  captain  ;  Caleb  Carr,  lieutenant ;  and  Peleg 
Heath,  ensign,  of  the  second  company. 

Job  Pearce,  captain  ;  Malachi  Hammet,  lieutenant  ;  and 
Benjamin  Burlingham,  ensign,  of  the  third  company. 

Thomas  Wells,  2d,  captain  ;  Augustus  Stanton,  lieutenant ; 
and  Peleg  Berry,  ensign,  of  the  fourth  company. 

Christopher  Manchester,  captain  ;  Walter  Palmer,  lieuten- 
ant ;   and  Jonathan  Deval,  Jr.,  ensign,  of  the  fifth  company. 

William  Barton,  captain-lieutenant ;  and  Squire  Fiske,  en- 
sign, of  the  colonel's  company. 

Peter  Wanton,  captain-lieutenant,  James  Wallace,  lieuten- 
ant ;  and  John  Rogers,  ensign,  of  the  lieutenant-colonel's 
company. 

Charles  Dyer,  captain-lieutenant ;  Zerobabel  Westcoat,  lieu- 
tenant ;   and  Royzel  Smith,  ensign,  of  the  major's  company. 

Nathan  Miller,  commissary  and  sutler  to  the  troops  under 
the  command  of  General  Hopkins. 


404  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1775. 

Benjamiri  Page,  captain  of  the  first  row-galley,  that  shall  be 
equipped. 

Officers  for  the  Militia. 

Joseph  Pendleton,  captain  ;  Joshua  Pendleton,  lieutenant ; 
and  John  Pendleton,  ensign,  of  the  first  company,  in  Westerly. 

Joseph  Case,  Jr.,  captain  ;  John  Mowry,  lieutenant ;  and 
John  Brown,  Jr.,  ensign,  of  the  third  company,  in  North 
Kingstown. 

Amos  Greene,  Jr.,  captain  ;  Beriah  Lewis,  lieutenant  ;  and 
Peleg  Hoxsie,  ensign,  of  the  second  company,  in  Charlestown. 

Thomas  Tefft,  captain  ;  Jonathan  Maxson,  lieutenant  ;  and 
Newman  Herring,  ensign,  of  the  second  company,  in  Richmond. 

Smiting  Potter,  ensign,  of  the  first  company,  in  Richmond. 

William  Peckham,  ensign,  of  the  first  company,  in  South 
Kingstown. 

Ray  Sands,  captain  ;  and  Samuel  Potter,  Jr.,  lieutenant,  of 
the  third  company,  in  South  Kingstown. 

Joseph  Jenckes,  captain ;  Sylvanus  Bucklin,  lieutenant  ; 
and  WiUiam  Wilbur,  ensign,  of  the  company  of  minute  men, 
in  Smithfield. 

The  Honorable  Nicholas  Cooke,  Esq.,  Governor.     Engaged. 

The  Honorable  William  Bradford,  Esq.,  Deputy  Governor, 
Engaged. 

Joshua  Babcock,  Esq.,  major  general  of  the  colony's  forces. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be 
requested  to  write  to  His  Excellency  General  Washington,  re- 
minding him  of  the  forces  stationed  on  New  Shoreham,  in  the 
Continental  service,  that  the  time  of  their  enlistment  will  soon 
be  up  ;  of  their  want  of  pay,  clothing,  &c. ;  and  whether  he 
proposes  to  take  any  method  for  the  engaging  the  officers  in 
that  deparment,  and  enlisting  the  soldiers ;  and  to  advise  as  to 
their  future  station  on  said  island,  or  elsewhere  ;  and  also  to 
give  His  Excellency  a  statement  of  the  stock  there. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Paul  Allen  be  appointed 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  405 

to  adjust  all  the  accounts  for  the  supply  of  the  troops,  under 
tho,  command  of  General  Hopkins,  up  to  the  present  time  ;  and 
that,  upon  the  said  accounts  being  passed  bj  the  general,  the 
said  Paul  Allen  draw  a  sufficient  sum  of  money  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury  to  pay  the  same. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  several  cap- 
tains of  the  said  troops  make  out  the  muster  rolls  of  their  sev- 
eral companies  ;  which  being  certified  by  the  general,  and 
returned  to  the  respective  proper  members  of  the  committee  of 
safety,  shall  entitle  the  officers  and  men  to  their  wages. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Brigadier  General  Eseck  Hop- 
kins be  appointed  to  have  the  care,  charge  and  management  of 
the  several  estates  by  him  ordered  to  be  taken  into  the  sheriff 
of  Newport,  until  further  orders  from  this  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  regiment  now  to  be  raised 
under  the  command  of  General  Hopkins,  have  the  same  allow- 
ances, and  be  supplied  in  the  same  manner,  as  our  troops  under 
the  command  of  General  Washington. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  with  the  consent  of  Mr.  John 
Brown,  that  the  colony  will  purchase  the  sloop  Katy,  as  she 
now  is,  with  her  boats,  stores  and  appurtenances,  at  the  rate  of 
$1,250. 

That  the  said  John  Brown  be  allowed  the  hire  of  said  sloop, 
at  the  price  agreed  upon,  from  the  12th  day  of  June  last,  to 
this  day,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

And  that  in  case  the  said  sloop  be  taken  or  lost,  before  this 
day,  that  then  the  said  John  Brown  shall  receive  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury  the  said  $1,250,  with  interest  from  the  said  12th  day 
cf  June,  in  full  compensation,  without  any  allowance  for  hire. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  safety  supply 
and  pay  the  regiment  ordered  at  this  session  to  be  /aised. 

That  the  captains  and  subalterns  of  the  said  regiment  shall 
enlist  the  following  number  of  soldiers,  who  shall  pass  muster 
before  the  respective  members  of  the  committee  of  safety  in 
whose  district  the  officer  lives,  before  they  receive  their  com- 
missions, that  is  to  say  : 


406  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1775. 

Each  captain,  twenty  men  ;  and  each  lieutenant  and  ensign, 
fifteen  men. 

That  in  case  any  officer  shall  not,  within  twenty  days  after 
the  rising  of  this  Assembly,  return  into  the  secretary's  office,  a 
certificate  from  the  committee  of  safety,  of  his  having  enlisted 
the  number  of  men  required  of  him,  he  shall  forfeit  his  commis- 
sion, and  his  place  become  vacant ;  and  that  each  officer,  as 
som  as  he  has  enlisted  the  above  number,  proceed  with  them 
to  the  head  quarters  on  Rhode  Island. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Thursday,  the  23d  day  of  No- 
vember, 1775,  be  observed  as  a  day  of  thanksgiving,  through- 
out this  colony  ;  and  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be  requested 
to  issue  a  proclamation,  accordingly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  General  Hopkins  have  the 
liberty  of  carrying  from  Providence  to  Rhode  Island,  two 
eighteen-pound  cannon,  and  two  nine-pound  cannon,  with  the 
field  carriages,  for  the  defence  of  the  colony  ;  and  that  His 
Honor  the  Deputy  Governor,  General  Hopkins  and  Mr.  Jo- 
seph Brown,  put  two  more  eighteen-pounders  on  field  car- 
riages, immediately. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  be  instructed  to  per- 
mit James  Hill  to  make  sale  of  the  goods  he  has  now  for  sale 
on  commissions,  the  property  of  Gilbert  Deblois  ;  that  he  ac- 
count and  pay  monthly,  to  the  general  treasurer  of  this  colony, 
for  the  sale  of  said  goods,  at  the  same  rate  he  was  under  con- 
tract with,  with  the  said  Deblois  ;  that  he  render  an  account 
upon  oath,  of  what  money,  debts  and  effects  he  hath  in  his 
hands  of  the  said  Gilbert  Deblois  ;  and  that  an  inventory  be 
taken  thereof,  by  the  sheriff. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  there  be  the  same  number  of 
officers,  and.  of  the  same  kind,  appointed  for  the  row-gallies,  as 
are  appointed  for  the  sloop  Katy  ;  that  the  officers  and  men  of 
the  row-gallies  receive  the  same  wages  as  are  allowed  to  the 
officers  and  men  of  the  sloop  Washington. 

That  Ambrose  Page,  Esq.,  be  empowered  to  enlist  the  men 
for  the  said  row-gallies,  to   pay  them  one  month's  pay  in  ad- 


1775.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  407 

vance,  and  to  equip  and  fit  them  completely  for  the  service  ; 
and  that  the  officers  of  the  row-gallies,  not  chosen,  be  ap- 
pointed by  Brigadier  General  Hopkins,  and  be  commissioned, 
accordingly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Capt.  Joseph  Anthony,  Briga- 
dier General  Eseck  Hopkins  and  Mr.  PaulMumford,  be  a  com- 
mittee to  receive  of  the  late  Governor,  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq., 
the  charter  of  this  colony,  the  letters  and  other  things  in  his 
hands  belonging  to  the  colony,  and  deliver  the  same  to  His 
Honor  Nicholas  Cooke,  Esq.,  the  present  Governor  ;  and  that 
the  same  committee  receive  of  the  late  Deputy  Governor,  Da- 
rius Sessions,  Esq.,  the  duplicate  of  the  charter,  and  such  other 
things  in  his  hands  as  belong  to  the  colony,  and  deliver  the 
same  to  His  Honor  William  Bradford,  Esq.,  the  present  Deputy 
Governor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  Mr. 
John  Jenckes  and  Col.  William  West,  be,  and  they  are  hereby, 
appointed  a  committee  to  inquire  at  what  price  good  muskets, 
for  the  use  of  the  Continental  army,  can  be  made  in  this  colo- 
ny ;  and  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be  requested  to  write  to 
General  Washington,  informing  him  of  the  price,  and  desiring 
his  farther  advice  and  direction. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  Mr. 
John  Jenckes  and  Col.  William  West,  or  any  two  of  them,  be 
a  committee  to  inquire  at  the  neighboring  furnaces  at  what 
price  the  cannon  proposed  to  be  procured  for  the  use  of  the 
colony,  can  be  got ;  and  that  they  ma.ke  report  to  the  grand 
committee,  appointed  to  act  during  the  recess  of  the  General 
Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Paul  Mumford,  William 
Vernon  and  John  G.  Wanton,  for  the  county  of  Newport  ;  John 
Brown,  James  Angell  and  Henry  Ward,  for  the  county  of 
Providence  ;  Joshua  Babcock,  for  Kin^^s  county  ;  Simeon 
Potter  and  Cromel  Child,  for  the  county  of  Bistol ;  and  Jacob 
Greene,  for  the  county  of  Kent,  be  a  committee,  to  collect  a 
well  authenticated  account  of  the  hostilities  committed  by  the 
ministerial  troops  and  navy  within  this  colony,  since  March 


408  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

last,  witli  proper  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  facts  related,  the 
number  and  value  of  the  vessels  inward  and  outward  bound 
which  have  been  seized  by  them  since  that  period,  as  near  as 
the  number  and  value  can  be  ascertained  ;  and  also  the  stock 
taken  by  them  from  different  parts  of  the  colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  commander  in  chief  of  the 
forces  raised  in  this  colony,  and  the  officer  commanding  a  de- 
tachment or  out-post,  be,  and  hereby  are,  empowered  to  ad- 
minister an  oath,  and  swear  any  person  or  persons  to  the  truth 
of  any  information  or  intelligence,  or  any  other  matter  relating 
to  the  public  service. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  on 
the  second  Monday  in  January,  1770. 

The  Hon.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Bradford,  Deputy  Governor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  a  deputy  be  chosen  for  the 
town  of  Providence,  in  the  room  of  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq. ;  a 
deputy  for  the  town  of  Hopkinton,  in  the  room  of  Capt.  Thos. 
Wells  ;  and  a  deputy  for  the  town  of  North  Providence,  in  the 
room  of  Eseck  Hopkins,  Esq.  ;  and  that  the  speaker  of  the 
House  be  requested  to  issue  his  warrants,  accordingly. 

Whereas,  William  Greene  and  Joseph  Noyes,  Esqs.,  and 
Mr.  Ephraim  Westcoat,  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly,  the  fol- 
lowing account  and  report,  to  wit : 

Colony  of  Rhode  Island  to  the  following  persons,  inhabit- 
ants of  the  town  of  New  Shoreham,  Dr. 
For  a  quantity  of  beef,  hides  and  tallow,  delivered  for  the 
use  of  said  colony,  in  consequence  of  an  agreement  made  by 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  409 

said  inhabitants,  with  William  Greene,  Joseph  Noyes  and 
Ephraim  Westcoat,  the  committee  specially  appointed  by  the 
general  committee,  empowered  to  act  during  the  recess  of  the 
General  Assembly. 

[Here  follows  an  account  sales  of  the  beef,  hides  and  tallow 
belonging  to  the  inhabitants  of  New  Shoreham  ;  with  the 
amount  due  to  each.  Other  returns  of  the  sales  of  similar 
articles  belonging  to  the  inhabitants  of  other  towns,  were 
made.] 

Whereas,  the  Honorable  Nicholas  Cooke,  Esq.,  presented 
unto  this  Assembly  an  account,  by  him  charged  against  the 
colony,  for  the  time,  horse-hire  and  expenses  of  himself  and 
servant,  in  going  to  Cambridge,  to  assist  in  a  committee  of 
Congress,  for  establishing  the  army  ;  for  cash  paid  sundry  per- 
sons for  going  expresses  on  public  business,  and  for  sundry 
other  services  and  expenses  ;  and  the  said  account  being  duly 
examined, — ^ 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby 
is,  allowed;  and  that  £30  45.  Qd.,  lawful  money,  being  the 
amount  thereof,  be  paid  the  said  Nicholas  Cooke,  out  of  the 
general  treasury. 

Whereas,  Mr.  George  Peirce  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly, 
an  account,  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  lead  and 
flints,  by  him  provided  for  the  use  of  the  town  of  Exeter  ;  and 
the  said  account  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby 
is,  allowed  ;  and  that  the  amount  thereof,  being  £1  Is.  5d., 
lawful  money,  be  paid  the  said  George  Peirce,  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, the  secretary,  William  EUery,  Joseph  Brown,  Henry 
Marchant,  Sylvester  Child  and  Gideon  Mumford,  or  the  major 
part  of  them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee, 
to  take  into  consideration  the  state  of  this  colony,  and  the  mea- 
sures necessary  for  the  defence  thereof. 

That  they  prepare  a  suitable  address  to  the  Honorable  the 
Continental  Congress,  representing  the  inability  of  the  colony, 

VOL.  vn.         52 


410  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

from  its  situation,  smallness  and  poverty,  to  defend  itself;   and 
praying  that  we  receive  assistance. 

That  they  also  consider  in  what  places  it  will  be  best  to  sta,- 
tion  the  troops  now  in  the  service  of  the  colony  ;  and  that  they 
make  report  to  this  Assembly,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  two  nine-pound  cannon  at 
North  Kingstown,  be  put  on  field  carriages,  by  John  Northup, 
Esq.,  at  the  charge  of  the  colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  this  colony  purchase  of  Met- 
calfe Bowler,  Esq.,  nine  cannon,  with  the  shot  and  other  stores 
belonging  to  him,  now  in  the  government's  possession,  in  the 
fort  at  East  Greenwich  ;  and  that  the  said  Metcalfe  Bowler  re- 
ceive $450,  for  the  same,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  present  committee  for 
signing  the  last  emission  of  the  paper  currency,  be  permitted 
to  remove  to  the  dwelling  house  of  Mr.  John  Carter,  printer, 
for  signing  the  same  ;  any  act  to  the  contrary  thereof,  not- 
withstanding. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  commissary  of  the  army  on 
Rhode  Island,  be  allowed  one  and  an  half  per  cent,  for  pur- 
chasing and  delivering  out  the  provisions  for  the  said  soldiers, 
;and  no  more. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Gapt,  John  Grimes  be  com- 
mander of  the  row-galley,  to  be  fitted  out,  at  the  wages  of  c£9» 
lawful  money,  per  month,  to  commence  from  this  day  ;  and  to 
be  commodore  of  both  row-gallies. 

That  the  wages  of  Capt.  Benjamin  Page  be  raised  to  £9^ 
lawful  money,  per  month,  commencing  from  this  time. 

That  each  of  the  said  gallies  be  manned  with  fifty  men.  in- 
cluding oflicers  ;  and  that  Thomas  Arnold,  of  East  Greenwich, 
be  appointed  first  lieutenant ;  Samuel  Vial,  of  Rehoboth,  sec- 
ond lieutenant  ;  and  John  Kelton,  of  Providence,  master  of 
said  row-galley. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  regiment  voted  at  the  last 
session,  be  augmented  to  seven  hundred  and  fifty  men,  exclu- 
sive of  the  Artillery  Company  ;  and  that  the  same  consist  of 
twelve  companies. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  411 

Whereas,  Mr.  Nathaniel  Muraford,  Thomas  Greene  and 
Gideon  Mumford,  Esqs.,  presented  unto  this  Assembly  the 
following  report,  to  wit  : 

Report  of  fhe  Committee  appointed  by  the  General  Assemblij, 
relative  to  certain  Accounts  of  the  Colony,  with  the  Conti- 
nental Congress. 

In  pursuance  of  the  appointment  of  this  Honorable  Assembly,  to  wait  upon  the 
Honorable  Continental  Congress,  with  the  accounts  of  this  colony,  we  proceeded  im- 
mediately to  Philadelphia ;  and  on  our  arrival  there,  we  made  known  our  business 
to  the  delegates  of  this  colony,  who  made  ajiplication  to  the  Congress,  for  oi'ders  to 
the  committee  of  claims,  for  the  adjustment  of  the  accounts. 

Very  soon  after  opening  the  papers  before  that  committee,  objections  were 
made  to  the  charges  of  small  arms  and  bounties  ;  and  as  no  accounts  had  been  pre- 
sented by  the  other  New  England  colonies,  we  thought  it  most  advisable  to  wave 
the  settlement  of  the  accounts,  till  the  other  colony  accounts  should  be  brought  for- 
ward for  adjustment,  and  to  make  a  demand  of  a  sum  in  behalf  of  the  colony. 

We  consulted  our  delegates  upon  that  subject,  who  advised  the  measure,  and  we 
adopted  it;  and  obtained  an  order  of  Congress  for  $120,000,  which  we  received; 
and  have  paid  into  the  general  treasury  $119,200;  which,  with  $800,  the  delegates 
took  to  their  own  account,  make  the  sum  of  the  order. 

We  also  received  a  draught  drawn  by  General  Hopkins,  for  £150,  lawful  money» 
on  Messrs.  Hillegas  and  Clymer,  Continental  treasurers,  which  was  also  paid  to  us  » 
and  we  have  paid  that  sum  also  into  the  general  treasury ;  for  both  which  sums,  we 
have  the  treasurer's  receipts.  NATHANIEL  MUMFORD, 

THOMAS  GREENE, 

Providence,  January  8,  1776.  GIDEON  MUMFORD. 

And  the  said  report  being  duly  considered, — 
It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the   same   be,  and  hereby  is, 
accepted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  for  the  future,  all  persons  who 
entertain  any  of  the  marching  troops  in  this  colony,  if  they  sup- 
ply but  three  meals  of  victuals  before  the  troops  leave  the 
house,  they  shall  be  allowed  nine  pence  per  meal  ;  if  more 
than  three  meals,  that  they  be  allowed  for  the  whole  at  the  rate 
of  nine  shillings  per  week  ;  that  in  cold  weather,  two  pence, 
per  night,  shall  be  allowed  for  each  soldier's  lodging  ;  that  no 
liquor  be  found  them,  upon  the  colony's  account ;  and  that 
this  act  be  published  in  the  Newport  Mercury  and  Providence 
Gazette. 


412  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Samuel  Westcoat  be 
chosen  and  appointed  first  lieutenant  of  the  row-galley,  com- 
manded by  Capt.  John  Grimes,  in  the  room  of  Thomas  Ar- 
nold, who  refuses  ;  and  that  Mr.  Francis  Bradfield  be  ap- 
pointed master  of  said  row-galley,  in  the  room  of  John  Kelton, 
who  refuses. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  general  treasurer  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  directed  to  discharge  all  accounts  of  billeting  sol- 
diers on  Block  Island,  that  are  properly  authenticated  by  the 
commanding  officers. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  Samuel  and  William  Vernon  exhibited 
unto  this  Assembly,  an  account,  by  them  charged  against  Jacob 
Greene  and  Company,  for  six  new  double -fortified  four-pound 
cannon,  with  their  carriages  ;  together  with  one  hundred  and 
thirty  round  shot,  six  bags  of  grape  shot,  some  sliding  and  bar 
shot,  with  ladles,  rammers,  sponges,  worms,  &c.  ;  and  the  said 
account  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  the  amount  thereof,  being  £100,  sterling, 
be  paid  the  said  Samuel  and  William  Vernon,  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Ezekiel  Burr,  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly, 
an  account,  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  his  time, 
horse  hire  and  expenses,  in  going  express  to  His  Excellency 
General  Washington,  at  Cambridge,  by  order  of  His  Honor  the 
Governor  ;   and  the  said  account  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed;  and  that  the  amount  thereof,  being  £2  lis., 
lawful  money,  be  paid  the  said  Ezekiel  Burr,  out  of  the 
general  treasury. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Ebenezer  Coffin,  of  Nantucket,  preferred  a  peti- 
tion, and  represented  to  this  Assembly,  that  in  consequence  of 
a  permit  from  the  selectmen  of  Falmouth,  he  purchased  a 
quantity  of  apples  and  cider,  with  a  design  to  lade  the  same 
on  board  his  said  schooner,  now  in  this  colony,  for  Nantucket, 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  413 

and  applied  to  His  Honor  the  Governor,  for  a  permit  for  that 
purpose,  who  was  pleased  to  grant  the  same,  he  complying 
with  the  regulations  therein  mentioned. 

That  having  laded  the  same  on  board  said  schooner,  and  be- 
ing ready  to  sail,  the  sherift',  by  order  of  His  Honor  the  Gov- 
ernor, took  said  vessel  and  effects  into  his  cttstody  ;  where- 
upon, the  petitioner  again  applied  to  His  Honor  the  Governor, 
and  informed  him  of  all  and  singular  the  premises  ;  who  was 
pleased  to  entrust  to  his  care,  a  request  to  the  sheriff  to  permit 
said  vessel  to  sail  for  Nantucket ;  and  that  nothing  be  laded  on 
board,  except  apples  and  cider. 

Yet  notwithstanding,  two  days  afterwards,  and  before  the  pe- 
titioner could  sail,  the  same  sheriff  took  said  vessel  and  effects  into 
his  custody,  in  consequence  of  a  second  command  from  His 
Honor  the  Governor  ;  and  still  holds  and  detains  the  same,  al- 
though the  petitioner  hath  always  demeaned  himself  irreproach- 
ably, strictly  observing  and  obeying  as  well  the  commands  of 
His  Honor  the  Governor,  as  of  the  several  committees,  and 
others  his  superiors,  in  their  several  offices  and  departments,  in 
no  matter  whatever,  contravening  their  commands. 

And  that  his  s-^id  cargo  and  effects  are  perishable,  and  have 
in  all  probability,  suffered  in  the  late  severe  weather,  and  fur- 
ther detention  will  ensure  great  loss,  and  expose  the  said 
vessel  and  cargo  to  the  most  imminent  danger,  especially  at 
this  rigorous  season  of  the  year  ;  and  thereupon  prayed  this  As- 
sembly to  take  the  premises  into  consideration,  and  permit  him 
to  depart  in  peace  with  his  effects  ;  and  this  Assembly  having 
taken  the  premises  into  consideration, — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  the 
said  petition  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted  ;  upon  con- 
dition that  the  petitioner  give  bond,  with  good  sureties,  to  the 
general  treasurer,  to  deliver  the  goods  mentioned  in  said  peti- 
tion, at  Nantucket,  and  to  return  to  the  general  treasurer,  a 
certificate  for  the  same. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Benjamin  Brenton,  who  was  taken  into  cus- 
tody, by  order  of  General  Hopkins,  and  his  estate  and  interest 
taken  into  possession,  in  behalf  of  the   colony,  on  account  of 


414  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [177G, 

his  being  inimical  to  this,  his  native  country,  and  to  the  liber- 
ties of  America  ;  and  upon  a  suggestion  of  his  supplying  the 
ministerial  fleet,  stationed  in  the  harbor  of  Newport,  with  live 
stock,  &c.,  preferred  a  petition  to  this  Assembly,  asserting  his 
innocence,  declaring  his  regard  for  the  liberties  of  his  country^ 
and  promising  fliat  his  future  conduct  shall  be  agreeable  to  the 
rules  of  the  Honorable  the  Continental  Congress,  and  of  this 
General  Assembly  ;  and  thereupon,  prayed  that  he  might  be 
reinstated  in  the  friendship  and  esteem  of  his  countrymen ;' 
that  he  might  be  permitted  to  return  to  his  distressed  family  ; 
and  that  his  estate  and  interest  might  be  restored  to  him  ;  and 
the  premises  being  duly  considered  by  this  Assembly, — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  said 
petition  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  Thomas  Church  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  appointed  to  repair  to  the  camp,  near  Boston, 
and  collect  all  the  small  arms  there  belonging  to  the  colony, 
and  bring  them  up  to  this  colony. 

That  he  receive  the  money  due  for  those  arras  that  w^ere  ap- 
praised ;  that  he  inquire  after  the  locks  belonging  to  the  colony, 
and  bring  them  up  also  ;  and  that  he  deliver  the  guns  and 
locks  to  Mr.  John  Smith,  of  Providence,  to  be  by  him  delivered 
to  the  committee  of  safety  of  each  county,  in  proportion. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  there  be  an  artillery  conapany, 
to  consist  of  fourteen  men  ;  each  including  officers,  raised  in 
each  of  the  following  towns,  to  wit : 

Providence,  Warwick,  Cranston,  East  Greenwich,  North 
Kingstown,  South  Kingstown,  Jamestown,  Charlestown,  Wes- 
terly, Warren,  Bristol,  Barrington,  Portsmouth,  Little  Comp- 
ton,  Tiverton,  Newport  and  Middletown. 

That  each  of  said  towns  be  supplied,  at  the  charge  of  the 
colony,  with  two,  three  or  four-pound  field  pieces,  on  carriages, 
^Yith  other  appurtenances  excepting  the  towms  of  Providence, 
East  Greenwich,  North  Kingstown  and  Newport,  which  are 
already  supplied. 

That  the  said  companies  meet  half  a  day  in  every  week,  to 
exercise    the   cannon,   and  be    allowed    one    shilling,   lawful 


177G.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  415 

money,  for  their  time,  each  half  clay  ;  and  when  they  are 
called  upon  to  march  out  to  action,  to  be  allowed  the  same 
wages  as  the  other  artillery  companies  ;  that  the  officers  on  ex- 
ercising days  be  allowed  as  follows  : 

The  captain,  two  shillings  and  sixpence  ;  and  the  lieutenant, 
two  shillings,  lawful  money,  per  half-day  ;  which  officers  are 
to  be  chosen  by  the  respective  towns. 

That  the  several  towns  proceed  to  choose  the  officers,  and 
the  officers  enlist  the  men,  immediately. 

That  an  ammunition  cart  be  provided  for  each  town  ;  and 
that  the  committee  of  safety,  for  each  county,  be  directed  to 
see  that  each  of  the  towns  be  provided  with  cannon,  &c., 
agreeably  to  this  vote. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  James  Angell,  William 
Ellery  and  Henry  Marchant,  Esqs.,  be  a  committee,  to  prepare 
and  draw  an  act  for  raising  and  equipping  a  body  of  minute 
men,  to  be  held  in  readiness,  for  the  better  defence  of  this 
colony. 

And  also  an  act  for  the  encouraging  the  manufactures  of  salt-^ 
peter  and  gunpowder,  and  make  report,  thereof,  to  this  session 
of  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  another  regiment  of  seven 
hundred  and  fifty  men,  including  officers,  to  consist  of  twelve 
companies,  be  raised  for  the  defence  of  this  colony,  over  and 
above  what  has  been  already  ordered  to  be  raised. 

Whereas,  Ambrose  Page,  Esq.,  who  was  appointed  to  build 
two  row-gallies,  for  the  service  of  the  colony,  laid  before  this 
Assembly,  an  account,  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for 
materials  by  him  furnished,  and  for  his  time  in  attending  said 
business  ;  and  the  said  account  having  been  duly  examined  by 
Mr.  Nathaniel  Mumford,  Thomas  Greene  and  Gideon  Mum- 
ford,  Esqs.,  who  reported  a  balance  of  £380  125.  2d.,  lawful 
money,  due  to  the  said  Ambrose  Page  ;  which  being  consid^ 
ered  by  this  Assembly, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be,  and  the 
same  is  hereby,  accepted  ;  and  that  said  balance  be  paid  the 
said  Ambrose  Page,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 


416  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

Whereas,  Capt.  Abial  Brown  laid  before  this  Assembly,  an 
account,  charged  against  the  colony,  by  sundry  persons,  who 
served  under  him,  as  minute  men,  for  their  services  and  ex- 
penses in  the  action  on  Jamestown  ;  and  the  said  account  hav- 
ing been  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  the  amount,  thereof,  being  £43  125.,  law- 
ful money,  be  paid  to  the  said  Abial  Brown,  out  of  the  general 
treasury,  to  be  by  him,  paid  to  the  several  persons  named  in 
said  account. 

Whereas,  the  said  Abial  Brown  laid  before  this  Assem- 
bly, an  account,  charged  against  him  by  sundry  persons,  for 
damage  and  loss  sustained  in  their  furniture,  &c.,  in  the  late 
attack  on  Jamestown  ;  and  the  said  account  being  duly  exam- 
ined,— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  ^£12  10s.  Id.,  thereof,  and  no 
more,  be  allowed  ;  and  that  the  same  be  paid  to  the  said 
Abial  Brown,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Capt.  Abial  Brown  proceed, 
as  soon  as  possible,  with  his  minute  company,  upon  James- 
town, there  to  remain  till  further  orders  from  His  Honor  the 
Governor. 

That  His  Honor  the  Governor  be  requested  to  write  to  the 
commander  in  chief  at  head  quarters,  on  Rhode  Island,  re- 
questing him  immediately  to  put  as  many  soldiers  or  minute 
men  on  Jamestown,  as  can  be  spared,  compatibly  with  the  ser- 
vice there  ;  and  that  the  number  of  men  placed  on  said  island 
do  not  exceed  three  hundred. 

Whereas,  the  town  of  South  Kingstown,  has  not  been  fur- 
nished with  their  proportion  of  powder  ;  and  have,  at  sundry 
alarms,  sent  a  considerable  quantity  to  Jamestown, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  Mathewson  furnish  the 
town  of  South  Kingstown  with  two  quarter  casks  of  powder, 
to  be  delivered  to  Col.  Robert  Brown  ;  and  that  one  hundred 
weight  of  lead  be  also  delivered  to  the  said  Robert  Brown, 
for  the  use  of  said  town. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that    Colonel  Daniel   Tillinghast 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  417 

be  requested  immediately  to  send  one  field  piece,  properly- 
equipped,  to  Warwick,  to  be  used  in  the  defence  of  that 
place. 

Whereas,  the  committee,  who  were  appointed  to  inquire  the 
price  of  cannon,  laid  before  this  Assembly,  a  memorial  ad^ 
dressed  to  them,  from  the  owners  of  furnace  Hope,  which  is  as 
follows,  to  wit : 

Report  of  the  Committee^  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly^  to 
inquire  the  price  of  Cannon. 

Providence,  Januaiy  12,  1776. 
Gentlemen  : — In  consequence  of  your  application  to  us  for  heavy  cannon,  we  liavis 
taken  pains  to  inquire  for  suitable  persons  to  assist  in  making  them,  and  are  now 
putting  the  furnace  in  readiness,  by  building  the  necessary  additional  works  to  carry 
the  same  into  execution. 

And  have  also  made  inquiry  of  the  price  they  can  be  made  for  at  Philadelphia  ; 
and  in  consequence  thereof,  we  now  otier  to  make  what  heavy  cannon  we  can,  at 
£.35,  lawful  money,  per  ton,  warranted  good  ;  but  in  this  case,  we  expect  the  colony 
to  be  obliged  to  take  whatever  cannon  they  now  agree  for,  Avhether  the  war  should 
continue  or  not. 

Under  this  price,  we  cannot  undertake,  as  there  are  no  workmen  in  these  parts, 
that  can  be  procured,  that  ever  made  heavy  cannon  ;  we  must  must  get  them  from 
the  westward,  at  a  very  high  rate,  and  pay  their  expenses  and  wages  by  the  day, 
from  the  time  they  come  from  home,  and  until  they  return  back. 

The  government  are  to  be  at  the  expense  of  proving  the  cannon ;  for  which  pur- 
pose, they  must  apjjoint  a  person  to  see  it  done ;  but  in  case  anj'  fail  of  proof,  we  to 
be  at  the  expense  of  proving  such  only  as  fail. 

NICHOLAS  BROWN,  JABEZ  BOWEN. 

JOSEPH  BPtOWN,  JOHN  BROWN, 

RUFUS  HOPKINS, 

The  commjtte-e  appointed  to  inquire  the  price  of  cannon. 

And  the  premises  being  considered  by  this  Assembly, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  this  colony  agree  with  the  sub- 
scribers of  the  foregoing  memorial  to  take  of  them  thirty  can- 
non, eighteen-pounders,  and  thirty  twelve-pounders,  at  the 
price  therein  mentioned  ;  provided,  they  are  ready  for  use  by 
the  10th  day  of  May  next. 

And  that  Ambrose  Page,  Esq.  and  Coi.  John  Mathewson, 
be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  ascertain 
the  bore,  dimensions  and  weight  of  the  cannon. 

VOL.  VII.         53 


418  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  £40,000,  lawful  moneybills, 
emitted  by  this  colony,  carrying  interest,  be  brought  into  the 
general  treasiiy  within  one  month,  after  the  rising  of  this  As- 
sembly, to  be  exchanged  for  other  bills  carrying  no  interest ; 
that  no  interest  be  allowed  on  the  first  mentioned  bills,  after 
the  end  of  said  month. 

And  that  £40,000,  lawful  money  bills,  be  immediately 
struck  oiT,  carrying  no  interest ;  which,  together  with  the  bills 
of  credit  lately  received  from  the  Continental  treasury,  be  im^ 
proved  in  exchanging  the  first  mentioned  lawful  money  bills, 
and  all  other  debts  due  from  the  colony,  carrying  interest. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Joseph  Lawrence  be  em- 
ployed to  proceed  to  Groton  and  New  London,  and  purchase 
for  the  use  of  the  colony,  of  Messrs.  Thomas  Mumford  and  Na- 
thaniel Shaw,  Jr.,  all  the  powder  they  have  in  Providence  and 
Bedford  ;  and  that  he  be  empowered  to  draw  upon  the  general 
treasurer  for  the  amount  thereof. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  £?>  l^s.  lawful  money,  be  paid 
to  Jonathan  Pierce,  out  of  the  general  treasury,  for  five  gun 
locks  delivered  to  Caleb  Harris,  Esq.,  for  the  use  of  the  colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  head-quarters  at  Rhode  Is- 
land, be  immediately  supplied  with  five  hundred  weight  of 
gunpowder,  from  the  government's  magazine,  at  Providence. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  North  Kingstown  be  supplied 
with  one  quarter  cask  of  powder,  and  about  one  hundred 
weight  of  lead. 

That  East  Greenwich  be  supplied  with  one  quarter  cask  of 
powder  ;   that  the  same  be  done  immediately. 

And  that  Exeter  be  supplied  with  about  one  hundred  weight 
of  lead. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  James  Arnold  be  directed 
and  fully  empowered  to  place  the  two  eighteen-pound  cannon 
at  Pawtuxet,  on  field  carriages,  at  the  expense  of  the  colony. 

Whereas,  this  General  Assembly,  at  the  session  held  on  the 
first  Wednesday  in  May  last,  ordered  £20,000,  lawful  money, 
to  be  emitted  ;  and  at  the  session  held  on  the  second  Monday 
in  June  last,  ordered  £10,000,  lawful  money,  to  be  emitted  ; 


i?T6.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  419 

and  at  the  session  held  on  the  28th  day  of  June  last,  ordered 
d£lO,000,  lawful  moneys  to  be  emitted,  all  which  bills  carried 
an  interest  of  two  and  an  half  per  cent,  per  annum. 

And  whereas,  the  Honorable  the  Continental  Congress,  and 
the  several  provincial  Assemblies  and  conventions,  considering 
the  distressed  situation  of  the  colonies,  engaged  in  a  war  with 
a  powerful  nation,  for  the  defence  of  their  lives,  liberties,  pro- 
perties and  everything  dear  to  mankind  ;  and  relying  upon  the 
manly  spirit  and  zeal  of  the  colonists,  have  made  divers  emis- 
sions of  bills  of  credit,  without  allowing  any  interest  thereon. 

And  whereas,  the  burthens  and  hardships  of  this  colony  are 
so  great,  that  this  Assembly  have  passed  an  act  for  redeeming 
the  aforesaid  emissions  of  this  colony  by  the  Continental  bills 
of  credit  now  in  the  general  treasury,  and  by  an  emission  of 
^40,000,  lawful  money,  to  be  forthwith  made, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  sura  of 
£40,000,  be  immediately  struck  off,  in  bills  of  the  same  form 
and  tenor  with  those  ordered  to  be  emitted  at  the  last  session  ; 
that  they  be  signed  and  lodged  in  the  general  treasury  ;  that 
all  bills  of  five  shillings,  and  upw\ards,  be  signed  by  three  of 
the  committee  ;  and  all  bills  under  five  shillings,  by  two  of  the 
committee  ;  and  that  the  bills  be  of  the  following  denomi- 
nations : 

3,000,  of  sixty  shillings  each,  is   -  -  -  d£9,000 

4,000,  "  forty         *'  *c    .  .  .  S^qqq 

6,000,  "  thirty       *<  *«         .  „  .     g^QOO 

6,000,  "  twenty     "  "  .  -  .  6,000 

6,000,  *'  ten  **  «         .  .  .     s^qOO 

6,000,  "  five  "  **  >  .  .  1,500 

6,000,  "  four  *c  *c         „  .  .     1^200 

7,500,  "  three        "  ««  .  .  .  1,125 

5,000,  "  two  <c  ..         .  .  .        500 

6,000,  "  one  *«  ««  .  .  .  300 

6,000,  "  ninepence  "...        225 

6,000,  "  sixpence  "  -  -  -  150 

£40,000 


420  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  1776. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  said  lawful  money  bills 
be  a  lawful  tender  for  paying  and  discharging  all  debts  and  de- 
mands, whatsoever  ;  and  that  said  bills  be  redeemed  within 
five  years  from  the  date,  thereof. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  John  G.  Wanton,  John 
Dexter,  John  Cole,  Joseph  Clarke,  Welcome  Arnold,  Thomas 
Greene  and  James  Congdon,  3d,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  ap- 
pointed to  sign  all  the  lawful  money  bills  of  credit,  ordered  by 
this  Assembly  to  be  emitted  ;  that  they  be  allowed  and  paid 
out  of  the  general  treasury  one-quarter  per  cent,  for  their 
trouble. 

That  Mr.  John  Carter  be  employed  to  print  said  bills  at  one 
shilling  and  fourpence,  per  hundred  ;  and  that  the  committee 
appointed  to  sign  said  bills,  procure  paper  for  the  same,  at  the 
charge  of  the  colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be  re- 
quested to  write  to  the  delegates  of  this  colony ^  at  the  Conti- 
nental Congress,  and  to  request  them  to  inform  this  House 
what  information  they  have  hadj  respecting  any  letters  that 
have  been  written  by  any  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  to 
any  person  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  respecting  the  situation 
of  the  town  of  Newport,  and  the  supplying  of  Capt.  Wallace 
with  provisions  ;  and  of  any  reflections  that  have  been  by  such 
letters,  cast  upon  any  part  of  this  colony  ;  and  also  to  inform 
this  Assembly  of  the  names  of  such  letter-writers  ;  and  to  pro- 
cure and  transmit  to  this  Assembly  copies  of  such  letters,  if 
they  can  be  obtained. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  speaker  of  this  House  be 
requested  to  purchase  at  the  charge  of  the  colony,  all  the  three 
and  four-pound  shot  he  can  find  in  the  town  of  Newport. 

And  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor  be  requested  to 
purchase,  at  the  charge  of  the  colony,  all  the  three  and  four- 
pound  shot  he  can  find  in  the  county  of  Bristol 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  in  case  the  colony  shall  purchase 
any  quantity  of  powder,  of  Messrs.  Mumford  and  Shaw,  that 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  421 

five  hundred  weight,  thereof,  be  sent  to  the  head-quarters,  for 
the  defence  of  Rhode  Island,  over  and  above  what  is  already- 
ordered. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  minute  men  that  have  al- 
ready been  drawn,  continue  for  three  months  from  the  time  of 
drawing  ;  and  that  as  many  of  them  as  are  willing,  may  enlist 
as  soldiers  in  either  of  thl  companies. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Cromel  Child  be,  and  he 
is  hereby,  empowered  to  draw  out  of  the  general  treasury,  the 
sum  of  £30,  lawful  money,  towards  paying  for  removing  hay, 
&c.,  off  the  island  of  Prudence. 

And  that  Mr.  Sylvester  Gardner  draw  out  of  the  general 
treasury,  the  sum  of  £45,  lawful  money,  towards  paying  for 
removing  hay,  &c.,  off  the  island  of  Conanicut. 

Whereas,  Mr.  George  Gracie  preferred  a  petition,  and  rep- 
resented unto  this  Assembly,  that  soon  after  his  first  arrival  in 
America,  he  has  been  employed  by  Mr.  George  Rome  ;  that 
he  commenced  serving  him  on  the  1st  of  June,  1773,  and  con- 
tinued in  his  service  until  he  was  taken  into  custody,  by  order 
of  General  Hopkins,  in  the  absolute  execution  of  said  Rome's 
business. 

That  a  considerable  sum  of  money  still  remains  due  to  him 
from  said  Rome  ;  and  thereupon,  prayed  that  this  Assembly 
would  order  him  payment  out  of  said  Rome's  estate,  which  has 
taken  into  possession  in  behalf  of  the  colony. 

And  the  premises  being  duly  considered  by  this  As- 
sembly,— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  petitioner  be  directed  to 
draw  out  his  account  against  the  said  George  Rome,  and  send 
it  to  the  commanding  officer  at  head-quarters ;  who  is  re- 
quested to  send  the  same  to  said  Rome,  in  order  to  be 
adjusted. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Joseph  Farrish  preferred  a  petition  to  this  As- 
sembly, setting  forthj  that  on  the  27th  of  November  last,  he 
was  taken  up  by  order  of  Col.  Richmond,  upon  a  suspicion  of 
his  having  served  the  King's  ships,  stationed  at  Newport,  with 
beer,  and  of  being  unfriendly  to  the  the  American  cause  ;   and 


422  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1776.- 

nfter  bem<^  had  before   the  committee,  was  committed  to  jail, 
where  he  has  remained  ever  since. 

That,  as  to  the  charges  alleged  against  him,  if  he  has  erred 
in  any  matter,  it  was  rather  from  want  of  judgment,  than  any 
^vil  design  ;  and  that  he  can  say  with  the  strictest  truth,  that 
he  is  a  hearty  well-wisher  to  the  American  colonies  ;  and 
thereupon,  prayed  this  Assembly  to  tfft<e  the  premises  into  con- 
sideration, and  release  him  from  the  irksome  confinement  of  a 
prison,  that  he  may  seek  some  honest  employment  for  a  liveli- 
hood, in  the  way  of  his  business,  which  he  is  ready  to  accept 
with  cheerfulness,  and  perform  with  integrity,  if  it  is  thought 
fit,  in  the  service  of  the  colony  ;  and  the  premises  being  duly 
considered  by  this  Assembly, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  petition  be  granted  ; 
that  the  petitioner  have  the  liberty  of  sending  his  account  to 
the  commanding  officer,  at  head-quarters  ;  who  is  requested  to 
send  the  same  to  George  Rome,  in  order  to  be  adjusted. 

And  that  the  petitioner  be  forbid  going  upon  any  of  the 
islands  in  this  colony,  on  any  pretence  whatsoever. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  Thomas  Church  be  di- 
rected, and  fully  empowered,  to  pay  the  ensigns  in  the  service 
of  the  colony,  now  at  head-quarters,  at  Cambridge  ;  and  to 
those  who  are  returned  from  said  service,  ten  shillings,  lawful 
money,  each  per  month,  from  the  1st  day  of  September  to  the 
31st  day  of  December  last,  being  four  months  ;  and  that  he 
draw  a  sufficient  sum  out  of  the  general  treasury,  for  that 
purpose. 

it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  in  case  any  body  or  detach- 
ment of  the  Continental  troops  shall  march  into  this  colony,  the 
commanding  officer,  thereof,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  empowered 
to  impress  horses,  cattle,  €arts  and  wagons,  sufficient  for  the 
transportation  of  the  provisions,  baggage  and  ammunition  of 
such  body  or  detachment,  to  such  places  within  the  colony,  as 
the  service  shall  require. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  each  town  in  this  colony,  by  a 
warrant  from  their  town  clerk,  call  a  town  meeting  within  three 
weeks  from  the  rising  of  this  General  Assembly,  and  make 


177G.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  423 

order  that  their  respective  town  councils  give  in  a  list  of  all 
persons  in  their  towns,  being  inhabitants  thereof,  and  obliged 
by  law  to  equip  themselves  with  ;i  good  fire-arm,  bayonet  and 
cartouch  box,  and  who  are  not  able  to  purchase  the  same  ;  and 
make  report  thereof,  to  a  town  meeting  to  be  held  in  one  week 
from  said  first  town  meeting. 

And  thereupon,  said  town  shall  immediately  make  order  for 
the  supplying  such  persons  with  a  good  five-arm,  bayonet  and 
cartouch  box,  at  such  town's  expense,  to  be  lodged  with  the 
captains  of  such  district  wherein  such  poor  persons  belong,  for 
their  use  upon  any  proper  occasion,  by  the  20t.h  day  of  April 
next. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  upon  failure  of  any  town  in 
this  colony,  of  complying  with  the  foregoing  order,  such  town 
be  liable  to  the  fine  of  f  100,  to  be  paid  into  the  general 
treasury  ;  and  to  be  recovered  by  bill,  plaint  or  information, 
before  the  superior  or  inferior  courts  for  the  county  to  which 
such  delinquent  town  belongs. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  all  such  pesons  who  are  by 
law  obliged  to  equip  themselves  with  a  good  fire-arm,  bayonet 
and  cartouch  box  ;  and  who  shall  not  by  report  of  such  town 
council,  be  reported  incapable  of  providing  themselves,  as 
aforesaid,  do  provide  themselves  by  the  20lh  day  of  April 
next,  agreeably  to  law,  under  the  penalty  of  £5,  to  be  recov- 
ered by  bill,  plaint  or  information,  before  the  superior  or  infe- 
rior court,  in  the  county  wherein  such  delinquent  resides  ;  and 
the  same  fine  to  be  lodged  in  the  town  treasury  of  such  town 
where  such  delinquent  resides,  for  the  purpose  of  purchasing 
fire-arms,  and  necessary  accoutrements,  therefor. 

And  each  captain  shall  make  return  of  such  delinquents 
within  his  district,  to  his  colonel  or  commander  in  chief,  by 
the  1st  day  of  May  next,  under  the  penalty  of  £5,  to  be  re- 
covered, as  abovesaid,  and  to  be  dismissed  from  his  office  ; 
which  fines  shall  be  lodged  in  the  tow^n  treasury  to  which  said 
captain  belongs,  and  to  be  recovered  as  the  above  fines  are 
ordered. 

And  that  the  colonels  of  the  regiments  make  return,  thereof, 


424  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

to  the  General  Assembly,  to  be  holclen  on  the  first  Wednesday 
in  May  next. 

And  the  secretary  is  hereby  required  to  send  a  printed  copy 
of  this  act  to  each  of  the  town  clerics  in  this  colony,  within  two 
weeks  from  the  rising  of  this  Assembly. 

Whereas,  the  committee,  who  were  appointed  to  prepare  an 
address  from  the  colony,  to  the  Continental  Congress,  laid  be- 
fore this  Assembly,  p,  draft  of  said  address,  which  is  as  follows, 
to  wit : 

Address  of  the  Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  to  the  Congress^  relative 
to  its  Condition. 

To  the  Honorable  the  Delegates  of  the  United  Colonies,  now  convened  in   General 
Congress,  at  Philadelphia : 

We,  the  General  Assembly  of  the  English  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence 
Plantations,  beg  leave  to  represent  to  you  the  state  and  condition  of  said  colony, 
and  to  request  such  assistance  as  our  situation  and  the  welfare  of  the  United  Col- 
onies shall  appear  to  require. 

Soon  after  the  conclusion  of  the  late  glorious  war,  in  the  successes  of  Avhich,  the 
colonies  had  so  considerable  a  share,  we  were  alarmed  with  divers  acts  of  the  British 
Parliament,  strongly  indicating  a  design  to  divest  the  colonies  of  those  rights  which 
are  essential  to  the  freedom  of  a  people,  and  which  they  had  enjoyed,  with  but  few 
innovations,  from  their  first  settlement. 

The  act  passed  in  1765,  for  levying  stamp  duties  in  America,  and  many  subse- 
quent acts,  manifested  that  design  so  clearly,  as  to  leave  no  room  for  a  doubt. 

This  colony,  ever  tenacious  of  its  liberty,  zealously  took  a  part  in  all  the  common 
measures  entered  into  for  the  common  safety. 

When,  at  length,  the  ministerial  troops,  by  the  attacks  at  Lexington  and  Concord, 
had  reduced  us  to  the  necessity  of  immediately  taking  up  arms,  or  submitting  to  a 
slavery,  which,  at  the  distance  we  are  placed  from  the  seat  of  the  power  to  be  ex- 
ercised over  us,  must  be  the  most  absolute  and  terrible  that  we  can  form  an  idea  of; 
this  colony,  notwithstanding  its  exposed  situation,  did  not  hesitate,  it  did  not  wait  for 
the  example  of  more  powerful  colonies ;  but  conforming  itself  to  the  spirit  of  the 
resolutions  of  the  Honorable  the  Continental  Congress  tor  177-1,  ordered  a  body  of 
men  to  be  raised,  and  marched  to  the  encampment,  near  Boston. 

Unfortunately  for  the  inhabitants,  this  colony  is  scarcely  any  thing  but  a  hue  of 
sea  coast. 

From  Providence  to  Point  Judith;  and  Irom  thence,  to  Pawcatuik  river,  is  nearly 
eighty  miles ;  on  the  east  side  of  the  bay,  from  Providence  to  Seaconnet  Point,  and 
including  the  east  side  of  Seaconnet,  until  it  meets  the  Massachusetts  line,  is  about 
fifty  miles  ;  besides  which,  are  the  navigable  riyers  of  Pawcatuck  and  Warren. 

On  the  west  side  of  the  colony  doth  not  extend  twenty  miles  ;  and  on  the  east  side, 
not  more  than  eight  miles,  from  the  sea  coast  above  described.  Tn  the  colony  are 
also  included  the  following  islands  : 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  425 

Rhode  Island,  about  sixteen  miles  in  length;  Conanicut,  nin"-;  Block  Island, 
nine ;  Prudence,  seven ;  and  the  smaller  islands,  Patience,  Hope,  Gold  Island,  and 
several  others ;  all  Avhich,  are  cultivated  and  fertile,  and  contributed  largely  to  the 
public  expenses ;  the  greater  part  of  the  above  mentioned  shores,  are  accessible  to 
ships  of  war. 

By  an  exact  estimate,  taken  in  the  year  1774,  the  whole  number  of  inhabitants  in 
the  colony,  amounted  to  fifty-nine  thousand  six  hundred  and  seventy-eight ;  the  town 
of  Newport  contained  nine  thousand  two  hundred  and  nine  ;  was  the  principal  place 
•of  trade,  and  paid  above  one-sixth  part  of  the  public  taxes;  a  very  considerable  com- 
merce was  also  carried  on  from  Providence ;  and  several  small  towns  in  the  colony 
were  also  concerned  in  trade  and  navigation  ;  ship  building  was  a  great  branch  of 
business. 

In  short,  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  derived  their  subsistence  almost  wholly 
from  commerce. 

The  convenient  situation  of  this  colony,  for  receiving  supplies  from  the  other 
•colonies,  for  the  Continental  army,  near  Boston,  we  suppose  was  a  principal  reason 
why  so  great  a  number  of  the  King's  ships  have  been  stationed  in  our  bay ;  we  hav- 
ing had,  for  above  seven  months  past,  two  ships,  of  twenty  guns ;  one,  of  sixteen  • 
a  bomb -ketch,  and  about  eight  tenders,  who  having  made  prizes  of  more  vessels  be- 
longing to  this  colony,  than  have  been  lost  by  any  other,  have  put  almost  a  total  end 
to  commerce;  have  committed  repeated  depredations  In  different  parts  of  the 
colony ;  have  kept  our  coasts  constantly  alarmed,  and  obliged  the  Inhabitants  to  keep 
almost  continually  under  arms. 

The  once  flourishing  town  of  Newport,  by  the  loss  of  trade,  and  consequent  cessa- 
tion of  all  business,  instead  of  being  able  to  contribute  to  the  expenses  of  the  war, 
hath  been  reduced  to  so  deplorable  a  state,  that  we  have  been  obliged  to  grant 
money  out  of  the  general  treasury  for  the  support  of  their  poor  ;  and  many  of  the 
wealthy  inhabitants  have  not  only  left  the  town,  but  the  colony. 

Conanicut  and  Prudence,  lately  the  scenes  of  the  most  wanton  and  savage  deso- 
lation anil  barbarity,  deserted  ;  New  Shoreham,  from  Its  situation,  is  rendered  worse 
than  useless  to  the  colony  ;  and  the  other  islands  will  no  longer  be  of  service  to  any 
but  the  enemy. 

The  troops  sent  by  this  colony  to  the  army,  near  Boston,  amounted  to  about  sev- 
enteen hundred,  inclusive  of  officers  ;  of  which,  two  hundred  and  fjfty,  are  in  Col. 
Arnold's  detachment,  its.  Quebec  ;  many  have  entered  on  boanl  the  armed  vessels 
fitted  out  by  General  Washington ;  particularly  almost  every  officer  and  seaman  in 
the  brig  commanded  by  Capt.  Martlndale,  unfortunately  taken  and  carried  into 
Boston,  belonged  to  this  colony ;  and  of  the  others,  the  greater  part  by  far,  have  re- 
enUsted  into  the  Continental  servhe,  so  that  very  fnw  of  them  have  returned,  or 
can  return. 

We  fitted  out  two  armed  vessels  for  the  'protection  of  ouy  commerce  and  coasts, 
which  carried  upwards  of  one  hundred  men  ;  one,  of  which.  Is  now  at  Philadelphia,  in 
the  Continental  service,  with  the  greater  part  of  her  crew ;  above  an  hundred  men 
have  also  been  enlisted  for  the  Continental  navy ;  we  have  also  built  and  equipped 
two  row-gallles,  to  can-y  fifty  men  each. 

Besides  these  extrarordinary  exertions,  we  wei-e  alarmed  In  October  last,  with 
the  arrival  of  a  number  of  transports  from  Boston,  destined  to  procure  fresh  provi- 
sions for  the  ministerial  army.     To  prevent  the.i):  obtaining  supplies,  was  an  object 

VOL.  vn.         54 


426  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

of  such  great  importance,  as  obliged  us  to  send  a  number  of  minute  men  upon  the 
several  islands,  to  defend  the  stock,  Avhich  created  a  most  enormous  expense. 

When  the  Asssembly  met  in  November,  a  regiment  of  five  hundred  men  was  ordered 
to  be  raised,  for  the  defence  of  Rhode  Island  and  the  other  islands ;  notwithstanding 
which,  we  have  been  obliged  repeatedly  to  call  forth  our  minute  men  ;  to  prevent  the 
great  charge  of  which,  we  have  augmented  the  regiment  ordered  to  be  raised  in  Novem- 
ber, to  seven  liundred  and  fifty  men,  exclusive  of  a  company  of  artillery,  consisting  of 
one  hundred  and  five  men,  with  their  officers ;  and  have  also  voted  another  regiment  of 
seven  hundred  and  fifty  men,  to  be  immediately  raised  and  equipped  ;  besides  two 
hundred  and  thirty-eight  artillery  men,  for  the  managing  of  thirty-four  field  pieces, 
oi-dered  to  be  procured  and  placed  in  the  several  towns,  upon  the  sea-coast. 

We  have  ordered  sixty  caunon,  eighteen  and  twelve-pounders,  to  be  cast ;  and 
have  already  sent  a  vessel,  with  a  very  valuable  cargo,  to  purchase  powder  and  other 
warlike  stores ;  and  are  fitting  out  another,  which  will  soon  sail. 

Fi'om  the  abave  representation  of  our  situation,  exertions  and  losses ;  and  the  de. 
predations  of  the  enemy,  which  are  not  exaggerated ;  the  exhausted  state  of  the 
colony,  and  its  utter  inability  to  maintain  the  present  force  established  and  voted,  as 
well  as  to  take  any  further  measures  to  defend  itself,  will  clearly  appear. 

We  need  not  observe  to  you  the  great  importance  of  Rhode  Island,  or  the  dam- 
ages that  would  be  sustained,  by  the  enemy's  possessing  themselves  thereof;  its  har- 
bor and  the  adjoining  Narragansett  Bay  being  greatly  superior  to  any  other  in 
America :  and  its  convement  situation  with  respect  to  the  sea  and  the  other  colonies, 
making  it  still  more  important. 

We  therefore  2-equest  that  you  will  give  the  earliest  attention  to  this  address,  and 
have  no  doubt  that  you  will  take  the  most  proper  measures  for  defending  the  colo- 
ny ;  otherwise,  Rhode  Island,  and  the  other  islands  ia  the  bay,  with  the  surrounding 
sea  coast  upon  the  continent,  must  be  depopulated,  and  the  colony  entirely  ruined. 

We  submit  the  foregoing  to  your  judicious  determination ;  and  are. 
With  great  respect  and  confidence. 

Your  Honors "s  most  obedient,  humble  servants, 
WILLIAM  BRADFORD,  HENRY  MARCH  ANT, 

HENRY  WARD,  SYLVESTER  CHILD, 

WILLIAM  ELLERY.  GIDEON  MUMFORD. 

JOSEPH  BROWN, 
Signed  at  the  request  and  in  behalf  of  the  General  Assembly. 

Providence,  January  15,  177G. 

And  the  said  address  being  duly  considered  by  this  As- 
sembly,— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
approved ;  that  the  secretary  make  a  fair  copy,  thereof,  which 
His  Honor  the  Governor,  is  requested  to  sign,  and  forward  by 
the  first  good  opportunity  to  the  delegates  of  this  colony,  to  be 
presented  by  them  to  the  Continental  Congress. 

Whereas,  on  Saturday,  the  23d  of  December  last,  divers 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  427 

people  were  guilty  of  a  high-handed  riot  in  "West  Greenwich, 
greatly  insulted  the  colonel,  broke  the  sword  of  the  adjutant, 
and  prevented  the  militia  of  the  first  company  from  draughting 
or  enlisting  one-fourth  part  thereof,  agreeably  to  an  order  of 
the  committee,  appointed  to  act  during  the  recess  of  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  ;  and  on  Tuesday,  the  26th  of  the  same  month, 
were  guilty  of  another  riot,  and  prevented  the  said  draught 
and  enlistment. 

And  whereas,  Alexander  Hopkins,  Tibbitts  Hopkins,  Henry 
Hopkins,  William  Sweet,  Simon  Whitford  and  Jonathan  Math- 
ewson,  have  been  accused  to  this  House  of  being  the  principal 
persons  who  were  active  in  said  riot  ;  of  whom,  Tibbitts  Hop- 
kins, Henry  Hopkins  and  Simon  Whitford^  are  now  in  jail,  at 
Providence  ;  there  being  a  warrant  issued  against  the  said  Al- 
exander Hopkins,  who  hath  hitherto  secreted  himself ;  a  Avar- 
rant  having  been  also  issued  against  the  said  William  Sweet, 
who  by  reason  of  sickness,  still  remains  at  his  ovv^n  house  ;  and 
no  warrant  hath  been  yet  granted  for  apprehending  the  said 
Jonathan  Mathewson  ; — 

It  is  therefore  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be  re- 
quested to  issue  his  warrant  for  apprehending  the  said  Jona- 
than Mathewson  ;  and  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Kent, 
use  his  utmost  diligence  to  apprehend  the  said  Alexander  Hop- 
kins and  Jonathan  Mathewson,  and  commit  them  to  jail  in  the 
county  of  Kent ;  and  the  said  William  Sweet,  when  capable  of 
being  removed. 

And  tliat  the  said  Alex.  Hopkins,  Henry  Hopkins,  Tibbits  Hop- 
kins, Wm.  Sweet  and  Jona.  Mathewson,  upon  their  entering  into 
recognizance  in  the  sum  of  £25,  each  ;  with  surety  for  .£25,  for 
each,  before  any  justice  of  the  superior  court,  to  appear  before  the 
superior  court,  at  their  next  term  in  the  county  of  Kent ;  and  to 
abide  by  the  judgment  that  shall  be  then  and  there  given,  they 
shall  be  dismissed  from  jail ;  otherwise,  that  they  remain  confined 
until  the  meeting  of  said  court ;  and  that  the  attorney  general 
be  required  to  prosecute  them  at  said  court,  according  to  law. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved  for  the  future,  that  any  person,  being 
a  member  of  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colonyj  and  who 


428  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776.. 

shall  be  appointed  to  any  military  command,  and  be  under  pay 
as  sach  ;  and  shall  accept  such  office,  and  receive  his  commis- 
sion, his  seat  shall  thereupon  be  immediately  vacant  ;  and  if  a 
member  of  the  lower  house,  a  warrant  shall  thereupon  be  issued 
by  the  speaker,  to  the  town  which  elected  such  member,  order- 
ing such  town  to  elect  a  deputy  in  his  place  ;  and  if  a  member 
of  the  upper  house,  the  General  Assembly  shall  proceed  to  elect 
a  member  in  his  place. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  in  any  future  choice  of  mag- 
istrates or  members  of  the  lower  house,  no  person,  being  a 
military  officer,  under  pay  as  such,  shall  be  elected  to  serve  in 
either  house  of  the  General  Assembly. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  that  this  act  shall  not  extend  to  mi- 
litia oCQcers,  or  officers  of  minute  companies,  and  who  may  only 
receive  pay  upon  particular  and  special  occasions. 

"Whereas,  Mr.  John  Lawton  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly^ 
an  account,  by  him  charged  against  the  lion.  William  Brad- 
ford, Esq.,  for  sundries  provided  for  General  Lee,  and  the 
Guards  who  went  with  him  to  Rhode  Island,  during  their  stay 
at  Newport,  keeping  their  horses,  &c.  ;  and  the  said  account 
being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  £30  Id.,  lawful  money,  being  the  amount 
thereof,  be  paid  to  the  said  John  Lawton,  out  of  the  general 
treasury. 

An  Act  for  encouraging  the  manufactures  of  saltpeter  and  gun- 
powder. 
Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  there  shall  be  given  and  paid 
out  of  the  colony  treasury,  a  premium  or  bounty,  of  £10,  for 
every  hundred  pounds  weight  of  good  and  merchantable  salt 
peter  or  nitre,  that  hath  been  made  or  manufactured  in  this 
colony,  since  the  1st  day  of  September  last  past,  or  that  shall 
be  made  or  manufactured  therein,  before  the  1st  day  of 
January,  1777  ;  and  so  in  proportion,  for  a  greater  or  less 
quantity. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  429' 

Provided  always,  that  in  case  any  proprietor  of  saltpeter 
works,  or  manufacturer  of  saltpeter,  shall,  upon  application  and 
request  made  to  him  by  any  person  or  persons,  neglect  or  re- 
fuse to  communicate  a  full  account  of  the  materials  out  of 
which,  and  the  process  by  which,  such  saltpeter  or  nitre  is 
made,  such  proprietor  or  manufacturer  shall  not  be  entitled  to 
have  or  receive  the  aforesaid  bounty  or  premium,  for  any  salt- 
peter or  nitre  he  shall  make  ;  any  thing  herein  contained,  not- 
withstanding. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
a  suitable  number  of  inspectors  of  saltpeter  or  nitre,  be  ap- 
pointed by  this  General  Assembly  ;  and  that  the  claimants  of 
the  premium  or  bounty,  given  by  this,  or  any  former  act,  for 
the  manufacture  of  saltpeter  or  nitre,  shall  procure  the  saltpeter 
or  nitre,  by  them  made,  to  be  examined  by  one  or  more  of 
said  inspectors  ;  and  shall  also  make  oath  before  such  inspec- 
tor, that  such  saltpeter  or  nitre,  was  made  and  manufjxctured 
in  this  colony,  out  of  materials  collected  therein,  by  him  or 
them,  or  for  his  or  their  account,  and  that  no  other  certificate 
hath  been  had  or  given  for  the  same  ;  which  oath,  such  in- 
spector is  hereby  enabled  to  administer. 

And  that  thereupon,  said  inspector  shall  give  to  the  claimant 
•or  claimants  a  certificate  of  the  quantity  and  quality  of  such 
saltpeter  or  nitre  ;  and  that  proof  hath  been  made,  as  afore- 
said, that  the  same  was  manufactured  in  this  colony,  by  such 
claimant  or  claimants,  and  draw  an  order  on  the  colony 
treasury,  to  pay  such  claimant  or  claimants  the  amount  of  the 
aforesaid  bounty  or  premium  on  such  nitre  or  saltpeter,  out  of 
the  colony  treasury,  and  charge  the  same  to  the  colony's  ac- 
count ;   who  shall  accept  and  pay  such  order,  accordingly. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
every  town  in  this  colony,  in  which  saltpeter  or  nitre  works  are 
not,  or  shall  not  be  erected,  and  the  manufacture  of  saltpeter 
is  not,  or  shall  not  be,  carried  on  by  some  private  person  or 
persons,  shall  be,  and  hereby  are,  enjoined  as  soon  as  may  be, 
to  erect  one  set  of  such  works,  and  carry  on  the  manufacture  of 
nitre  or  saltpeter,  in  the  same. 


430  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

And  that  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  town  council  of  each 
town  in  this  colony,  and  they  are  hereby  authorized  and  enjoined, 
at  the  expense  and  for  the  benefit  of  said  town,  to  cause  such 
works  to  be  erected  ;  and  the  manufacture  to  be  carried  on  in 
the  same,  accordingly. 

And  be  it  also  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaidj 
that  no  saltpeter,  nitre  or  gunpowder,  made  and  manufactured 
in  this  colony,  or  that  shall  be  made  or  manufactured  in 
this  colony,  shall  be  exported  out  of  the  same,  by  land  or 
water,  without  the  license  of  the  General  Assembly,  or  His 
Honor  the  Governor  and  committee  of  safety,  under  the  penalty 
of  £20,  for  every  hundred  weight  of  such  saltpeter,  nitre  or 
gunpowder  ;  and  proportionably  for  a  greater  or  less  quantity 
so  without  license  exported  ;  to  be  recovered  by  bill,  plaint 
or  information,  in  any  court  of  record  in  this  colony,  by  law 
proper  to  take  cognizance  thereof. 

And  whereas,  it  is  necessary  that  one  powder  mill  be 
immediately  erected  in  this  colony,  for  manufacturing  gun- 
powder,— 

Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  a 
bounty  or  premium  of  £30,  shall  be  paid  out  of  the  colony 
treasury  to  the  person  or  persons  who  shall  erect  a  powder  mill 
in  this  colony,  and  shall  make  and  manufacture  therein  five 
hundred  pounds  weight  of  good  and  merchantable  gunpowder. 

And  whereas,  it  is  expedient  that  such  powder  mill  should  be 
so  situated  as  to  accommodate  the  public  in  the  best  manner, — 

Be  it  therefore  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid, 
that  no  powder  mill  shall  be  erected  in  this  colony,  for  the 
manufacture  of  gunpowder,  without  the  license  of  the  General 
Assembly  ;  or  in  their  recess,  of  the  general  committee,  ap- 
pointed to  act  during  the  recess  of  the  General  Assembly,  first 
had  and  obtained,  under  the  penalty  of  £30,  for  every  such  of- 
fence ;  to  be  recovered  in  manner  as  the  aforesaid  penalty  in 
this  act  as  above  directed. 

And  it  is  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  inspector  or  inspectors,  who  shall  inspect  and  give  a  cer- 
tificate for  any  quantity  of  saltpeter,  as  before  directed,  shall 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  431 

purchase  and  receive  such  saltpeter,  for  the  colony's  use  and 
benefit,  and  give  his  or  their  receipt  therefor,  to  the  claimant 
or  claimants,  who  shall  be  paid  therefor,  out  of  the  colony 
treasury,  at  the  rate  of  four  shillings  and  four  pence,  for  every 
pound  weight  of  saltpeter  or  nitre,  so  made,  as  aforesaid,  ex- 
clusive of  the  said  bounty  so  to  be  given,  as  aforesaid. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  ihat 
the  following  persons  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  in- 
spectors of  nitre  or  saltpeter,  in  this  colony,  to  wit : 

His  Honor  the  Governor,  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Joshua  Babcock, 
Jabez  Bowen,  Hezekiah  Usher,  Nicholas  Paris  Tillinghast, 
Stephen  Wigneron,  Andrew  Balfour  and  Benjamin  Slack. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  act  passed  by  this  Assembly,  at  the  session  held  on  the 
third  Monday  in  August  last,  for  encouraging  the  manufacture 
of  saltpeter,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  repealed. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
a  copy  of  this  act  be  published  in  the  next  Newport  Mercury 
and  Providence  Gazette. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  thanks  of  this  General 
Assembly  be  given  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  towns  of  Rehoboth 
and  Swanzey,  in  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  for 
their  spirited  zeal  and  activity,  exerted  in  defence  of  this 
colony,  upon  every  alarm  that  hath  happened  in  those  parts  of 
this  colony  bordering  upon  them  ;  and  that  His  Honor  the 
Governor  be  requested  to  transmit  the  same  to  the  selectmen  of 
the  said  towns,  to  be  communicated  to  the  inhabitants. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  there  be  appointed,  for  the 
.regiment  ordered  at  the  last  session  to  be  raised,  a  surgeon,  at 
the  wages  of  £7  IO5.,  per  month  ;  and  a  surgeon's  mate,  at 
the  wages  of  £4,  per  month. 

And  that  every  able-bodied,  effective  man,  who  hath  enlisted 
into,  and  still  remains  in,  the  said  regiment,  or  shall  enlist 
.therein,  finding  himself  a  musket,  bayonet  and  other  acccou- 
;trements,  shall  receive  sixteen  shillings,  and  receive  two 
months'  wages  advance. 


432  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1T76" 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  stock,  corn,  provisions" 
and  hay,  upon  the  island  of  Prudence,  be  removed  with  all 
possible  dispatch  ;  and  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be  re- 
quested to  give  orders  to  Col.  Christopher  Lippitt,  to  assist 
with  the  troops  under  his  command  in  removing  the  same. 

An  Act  for  raising  an  additional  regiment,  for  the  defence  of 
the  United  Colonies  in  general,  and  this  colony  in  particu- 
lar, and  for  embodying  the  same  ;  and  the  regiment  or- 
dered to  be  raised  at  the  last  session  of  Assembly,  into  one 
brigade. 

Whereas,  the  present  alarming  situation  of  this  colony,  from 
the  powerful  invasions  of  the  enemy,  and  the  danger  of  still 
more  formidable  attacks,  render  it  necessary  that  a  considera- 
ble addition  be  made  to  the  forces  of  this  colony  ;  — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  a  regiment,  consisting 
of  seven  hundred  and  fifty  men,  including  officers,  be  immedi- 
.ately  raised  for  the  defence  of  the  United  Colonies  in  general, 
and  this  colony  in  particular,  to  b@  commanded  by  one  colonel, 
one  lieutenant  colonel  and  one  major ;  that  there  be  appointed 
itherefor,  one  adjutant  and  one  quartermaster. 

That  the  said  regiment  consist  of  twelve  companies  ;  which 
■shall  be  commanded  by  one  captain,  one  lieutenant  and  one 
•ensign  ;  excepting  the  companies  of  the  three  field  officers, 
which  shall  have  one  captain-lieutenant,  one  lieutenant  and 
,one  ensign. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the   authority  aforesaid,  that'., 
-each  able-bodied,  effective  man,  who  shall  enlist  into  the  said' 
regiment,  and  find  himself  a  small-arm,  bayonet  and  other  ac- 
coutrements, shall  be  allowed  sixteen  shillings,  therefor,  and 
and  shall  receive  two  months  pay   advance,  at  the  time  of 
enlisting. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
each  officer  and  soldier  shall  receive  the  following,  monthly 
wages^  wh.Ue  in  the  service,  to  wit  • 


1776.']  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS..  43S 

£  s. 

The  colonel 15  00 

"    lieutenant  colonel        -  -  -  -  12  00 

"    major  -  -  -  -         10  00 

Each  captain  and  captain-lieutenant  -  -     6  00 

"     lieutenant  -  -  -  -  4  00 

*'     ensign  -  -  -  -  -     3  10 

*'     adjutant  -  -  -  -  5  10 

*'     quartermaster  -  -  -  -     3  00 

"     sergeant  -  -  -  -  2  08 

"     corporal,  drummer  and  fifer  -  -  -     2  04 

*'     private    -  -  -  -  -  2  00 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
^each  field  and  commissioned  officer  shall  receive  ten  shillings 
per  week  ;  and  each  non-commissioned  officer  and  private,  six 
shillings  per  week,  for  billeting,  from  the  time  of  his  enlist- 
ment, until  they  shall  be  embodied  ;  and  shall  also  receive  two 
months'  pay  before  they  join  the  body,  and  the  weekly  billet 
due  to  him,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

That  each  soldier  shall  also  have  a  blanket  and  knapsack 
given  him  by  the  colony  ;  and  that  each  soldier  finding  him- 
self a  blanket,  shall  receive  tberefor,  twelve  shillings.  i ; 
And  the  field  and  commissioned  officers,  after  the  regiment 
shall  be  embodied,  be  allowed  the  same  rations,  in  lieu  of 
billet,  as  are  allowed  to  the  officers  pf  tho  Continental  army. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  no 
officer  or  soldier  shall  be  arrested,  prosecuted  or  detained  in 
jail,  for  any  debt  whatsoever,  less  than  £15,  lawful  money, 
due  to  one  creditor. 

,  And  that  every  apprentice,  who  shall  enlist  into  the  said 
regiment,  shall  be  entitled  to  three-quarters  of  his  wages  ;  he 
finding  his  own  clothes  ;  and  his  master  shall  be  entitled  to  the 
■other  quarter ;  provided,  he  shall  deliver  to  such  enlisted  iip- 
prentice,  all  his  wearing  apparel ;  otherwise,  the  apprentice 
.shall  receive  the  whole  wages. 

■j,    And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
VOL.  VII.         55 


434  KECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

each  soldier  shall  be   enlisted  by  signing   the  following  en- 
listment, to  wit : 

Form  of  Enlistment. 

"  I,  the  subscriber,  hereby  solemnly  engage  and  enlist  my- 
self as  a  soldier  in  the  pay  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  for 
the  preservation  of  the  liberties  of  America,  and  the  defence  of 
the  United  Colonies  in  general,  and  this  colony  in  particular, 
from  the  day  of  my  enlistment,  for  one  year  ;  unless  the  ser- 
vice shall  admit  of  a  discharge  sooner,  which  shall  be  at  the 
discretion  of  the  General  Assembly. 

And  I  hereby  promise  to  submit  myself  to  all  the  orders  and 
regulations  of  the  army,  and  faithfully  to  observe  and  obey 
such  orders  as  I  shall  receive  from  time  to  time  from  my  su- 
perior officers." 

And  whereas,  this  Assembly,  at  the  session  held  on  the  last 
Wednesday  in  October  last,  ordered  a  regiment  of  five  hun- 
dred men  to  be  raised,  for  the  defence  of  the  United  Colonies 
in  general,  and  of  this  colony  in  particular  ;  and  at  the  present 
session  ordered  the  said  regiment  to  be  augmented  to  seven 
hundred  and  fifty  men,  inclusive  of  officers,  and  exclusive  of 
the  artillery  company  to  the  same  belonging,  consisting  of  one 
hundred  and  five  men,  officers  included  ; — 

Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  for  the 
better  governing,  directing  and  exerting  the  force  of  the  said 
regiment,  and  the  regiment  by  this  act  ordered  to  be  raised, 
that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  are,  formed  into  one  brigade, 
under  one  commander  in  chief,  who  shall  have  the  title  of  brig- 
adier general ;  that  a  major  of  brigade  be  appointed  therefor  ; 
and  that  the  brigadier  general  shall  receive  £20,  lawful  money, 
per  month ;  and  the  major  of  brigade,  £9,  lawful  money,  per 
month  ;  and  shall  also  receive  the  same  allowances  for  billet- 
ing, as  are  made  to  officers  of  their  rank,  in  the  Continental 
service. 

And  Ije  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
there  be  a  surgeon,  and  three  surgeon's  mates,  appointed  for 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  435 

said  brigade  ;  that  the  surgeon  shall  receive  £9,  per  month, 
and  the  surgeon's  mates,  each  £4,  per  month  ;  and  that  the 
surgeon  and  the  mates  shall  receive  the  same  rations  in  lieu  of 
billet,  as  such  officers  receive  in  the  Continental  army. 

And  for  the  better  supplying  the  said  brigade  with  clothing, 
and  other  necessaries, — 

Be  it  farther  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  a  com- 
missary be  appointed,  who  shall  also  be  sutler  to  the  said  brigade, 
and  shall  receive  one  per  cent,  upon  all  the  business  he  shall 
transact  ;  that  he  be,  and  hereby  is,  directed  and  required  to 
deliver  out  such  things  as  shall  be  provided  by  the  colony,  for 
the  use  of  the  troops,  at  prime  cost,  including  the  charges  that 
shall  accrue  thereon  ;  and  that  he  deliver  nothing  to  any  sol- 
dier, without  an  order  from  the  captain  or  commanding  officer 
for  the  time  being,  of  the  company  to  which  such  soldier  shall 
belong  ;  and  that  the  commissary  or  sutler  do  not  pay  any  sol- 
dier more  than  one-third  of  his  wages  ;  and  such  officer  is 
hereby  restricted  from  drawing  in  favor  of  any  soldier  for  more 
than  one-third  of  the  amount  of  the  wages  due  to  him. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
whosoever  shall  be  appointed  commissary  and  sutler,  shall  give 
security  to  the  general  treasurer,  in  the  penal  sum  of  £10,000, 
for  the  faithful  performance  of  his  duty  ;  that  he  be,  and  here- 
by is,  forbidden  to  carry  with  him,  or  offer  to  the  soldiers  upon 
his  own  account,  any  necessaries  of  the  same  kind  with  those 
that  shall  be  sent  by,  or  on  account  of  the  government ;  and 
that  he  be  empowered  to  appoint  one  or  more  deputies  under 
him,  being  accountable  for  his  or  their  conduct. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  the 
committee  of  safety  for  this  colony  provide  arms,  tents,  and  all 
other  necessaries,  for  the  said  brigade,  provisions  excepted  ; 
that  they  pay  the  wages  of  the  officers  and  soldiers,  thereof, 
once  in  three  months,  as  they  shall  become  due. 

And  that  they  be  allowed  one  per  cent,  for  transacting  the 
business ;  any  law,  custom  or  usage,  to  the  contrary  hereof, 
notwithstandinjr. 


446  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

Both  Houses  being  resolved  into  a  grand  committee,  chose 
the  follo^Ying  officers,  to  wit : 

Officers  for  the  Regiment  Ordered  at  this  Session  to  be  Raised. 

Henry  Babcock,  Esq.,  colonel  ;  Christopher  Lippitt,  Esq., 
lieutenant  colonel ;   and  Adam  Comstock,  Esq.,  major. 

John  Angell,  captain  of  the  first  company  ;  who  declining 
to  serve.  Job  Olney,  Avas  chosen  in  his  stead. 

Jonathan  Brownell,  captain  of  the  second  company. 

James  Tew,  Jr.,  captain  of  the  third  company. 

Asa  Kimball,  captain  of  the  fourth  company. 

Andrew  Waterman,  captain  of  the  fifth  company. 

Loring  Peck,  captain  of  the  sixth  company. 

David  Dexter,  Jr.,  captain  of  the  seventh  company. 

William  Potter,  son  of  John,  captain  of  the  eighth  company. 

Benjamin  Peirce,  captain  of  the  ninth  company. 

Augustus  Stanton,  captain-lieutenant  of  the  colonel's  company. 

John  Carr,  captain-lieutenant  of  the  lieutenant  colonel's 
company, 

Thomas  Gorton,  captain-lieutenant  of  the  major's  company, 

William  Drowne,  lieutenant  of  the  first  company. 

William  Jones,  lieutenant  of  the  second  company, 

Joseph  Belcher,  Jr.,  lieutenant  of  the  third  compfmy. 

Benjamin  Hoppen,  lieutenant  of  the  fourth  company. 

Nehemiah  Randall,  lieutenant  of  the  fifth  company. 

Arthur  Fenner,  son  of  Edward,  lieutenant  of  the  sixth 
company. 

Peleg  Slocum,  lieutenant  of  the  seventh  company. 

Christopher  Dyer,  lieutenant  of  the  eighth  company. 

Simeon  Martin,  lieutenant  of  the  ninth  company. 

Joshua  Bliven,  lieutenant  of  the  colonel's  company. 

Alexander  Thomas,  lieutenant  of  the  lieutenant  colonel's 
company. 

Thomas  Arnold,  lieutenant  of  the  major's  company 

Jacob  WilUams,  ensign  of  the  first  company. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  437 

Gilbert  Richmond,  ensign  of  the  second  company. 
Bryant  Milhnan,  ensign  of  the  third  company, 
Anan  Winsor,  ensign  of  the  fourth  company. 
Wilson  Rawson,  ensign  of  the  fifth  company. 
Stephen  Paine,  ensign  of  the  sixth  company. 
David  Sayles,  ensign  of  the  seventh  company. 
William  Potter,  son  of  Ichabod,  ensign  of  the  eighth  company. 
William  Belcher,  ensign  of  the  ninth  company. 
Thomas  Noyes,  ensign  of  the  colonel's  company. 
Stephen  Borden,  ensign  of  the  lieutenant  colonel's  company. 
Michael  Spencer,  ensign  of  the  major's  company. 
William  Tyler,   adjutant  ;   and   Benjamin  Bourne,  quarter- 
master. 

Officers  for  the  Regiment  Ordered  at  the  last  Session. 

James  Wallace,  captain-lieutenant  of  the  lieutenant  colonel's 
company  ;   in  the  room  of  Peter  Wanton,  who  resigned. 

Josiah  Gibbs,  Jr.,  captain  of  the  ninth  company. 

Cornelius  Briggs,  captain  of  the  tenth  company. 

Benjamin  Diamond,  captain  of  the  eleventh  company. 

Samuel  Phillips,  Jr.,  captain  of  the  twelfth  company. 

John  Rogers,  lieutenant  of  the  lieutenant-colonel's  company. 

John  Holden,  son  of  Charles,  lieutenant  of  the  ninth  company. 

Lemuel  Bailey,  lieutenant  of  the  tenth  company. 

James  Smith,  lieutenant  of  the  eleventh  company. 

Paul  Herrington,  lieutenant  of  the  twelfth  company. 

William  Davis,  Jr.,  ensign  of  the  lieutenant  colonel's 
company. 

Philip  Arnold,  son  of  James,  ensign  of  the  ninth  company. 

Benjamin  Church,  ensign  of  the  tenth  company. 

Isaac  Eastlick,  ensign  of  the  eleventh  company. 

Benjamin  West,  ensign  of  the  twelfth  company. 

John  Handy,  quartermaster. 

Artillery  Company, 
Edward  Spalding,  captain  ;  Wm.  Bull,  captain-lieutenant ; 


•438  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

■Joshua  Snyer,  Jr.,  first  lieutenant ;   Ebenezer  Sherman,  second 
lieutenant  and  Timothy  Brown,  lieutenant  fire-worker. 

For  the  Brigade. 

Christopher  Olney,  major  of  brigade  ;  John  Bartlett,  sur- 
geon ;  Joseph  Rhodes,  surgeon's  mate  ;  Ebenezer  Richmond,. 
surgeon's  mate  ;   and  John  Chace,  surgeon's  mate. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Benjamin  Page,  captain  of 
one  of  the  row-gallies,  be  immediately  sent  for,  to  appear  be- 
fore this  Assembly,  to  answer  for  his  conduct ;  and  that  David 
Arnold,  Matthew  Allen  and  Samuel  Bosworth,  be  also  cited  to 
appear  before  this  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  money  lately  received  from 
the  Continental  treasury  be  improved  in  paying  off  and  dis- 
charging all  debts  due  from  the  colony,  of  any  kind  or  nature, 
whatsoever  ;   any  law  to  the  contrary,  notwithstanding. 

Whereas,  this  Assembly,  at  the  session  held  on  the  second 
Monday  in  June  last,  passed  an  act,  establishing  rules  and 
regulations  for  the  forces  raised  by  this  colony. 

And  whereas,  the  Continental  Congress  soon  after  estab- 
lished rules  and  articles  of  war,  for  the  Continental  army,  and 
have  lately  made  divers  additions  and  alterations  thereto,  ne- 
cessary for  the  well  governing  of  an  army,  which  are  better 
calculated  for  that  purpose  than  those  made  by  this  colony,  as 
aforesaid  ;  — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  brigade  formed 
at  this  session,  and  all  the  troops  that  shall  be  raised  in  the 
colony,  shall  be  governed  by  the  rules,  regulations  and  orders 
established  by  the  Continental  Congress,  for  the  governing 
of  the  Continental  army  ;  that  the  officers  in  said  brigade, 
take  rank  according  to  the  rules  and  customs  of  the  Conti- 
nental army  ;  that  the  secretary  procure  to  be  printed,  and  de- 
liver to  each  of  the  field  and  commissioned  officers,  a  copy  of 
said  Continental  rules. 

And  that  the  said  act  passed  in  June  ;  and  also  the  act 
passed  at  the  last  session,  putting  the  regiment  ordered  then  to 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  439^ 

he  raised  under  the  regulations  of  the  said  act,  be,  and  they 
are  hereby,  repealed. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  town  council  of  the  town 
of  Newport,  be  allowed  to  supply  Captain  Wallace,  so  long  as 
he  shall  remain  peaceably  within  the  colony,  without  com- 
mitting any  depredations  upon  the  islands,  or  upon  any  of 
the  lands  in  the  colony,  weekly  with  two  thousand  pounds 
weight  of  beef ;  and  with  beer  as  usual,  under  the  direction 
of  the  commanding  officer  of  the  forces  stationed  on  Rhode  Is- 
land ;  that  he  appoint  the  person  to  provide  and  deliver  said 
provisions  ;  and  that  no  member  of  either  House  of  Assembly 
be  appointed  to  deliver  the  same,  or  to  go  on  board  of  either 
of  the  ships  of  war,  under  said  Wallace's  command,  on  any  oc- 
icasion  whatsoever. 

And  this  Assembly  considering  the  situation  and  defenceless 
state  of  the  town  of  Newport,  do  advise  and  strongly  recommend 
it  to  the  inhabitants  of  said  town  forthwith  to  remove  to  some 
place  of  safety  all  their  aged  people,  women,  children  and 
those  who  are  unable  to  assist  in  defence  of  the  place,  together 
with  their  valuable  effects. 

And  do  further  vote  and  resolve,  that  the  sum  of  £200, 
lawful  money,  be  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury  to  the  com- 
mittee hereinafter  appointed,  which  shall  be  improved  in  re- 
moving such  poor  persons  in  said  town  as  are  incapable  of  re- 
moving themselves,  and  for  no  other  use,  whatever. 

That  Messrs.  John  Collins,  John  Cooke,  Thomas  Freebody^ 
Oeorge  Irish  and  Daniel  IIollowa,y,  or  the  mnjor  part  of  them, 
be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee  for  that  pur- 
pose ;  that  the  said  committee  be  empowered  to  settle  the  price 
of  the  transportation  of  the  effects  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  said 
town,  to  the  places  where  they  shall  be  shipped  ;  and  also  the 
price  of  transportation  over  the  ferries. 

And  that  each  of  the  said  committee  be  empowered  to  im- 
press teams,  horses  and  cattle,  to  remove  such  effects,  at  the 
prices  which  shall  be  so  affixed. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  William  Ellery,  Esq.,  be  added 
to  the  committee  already  appointed  for  the  county  of  Newport, 


440  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  1776. 

to  collect  a  well  authenticated  account  of  hostilities  committed 
by  the  ministerial  troops  and  navy  within  this  colony,  since  last 
March. 

It  i:5  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  guns,  when  purchased  for 
the  poor  of  the  first  company,  in  the  town  of  East  Greenwich^ 
be  deposited  in  the  hands  of  Col.  Bichard  Fry,  instead  of  the 
captain. 

And  that  the  guns,  when  purchased  for  the  poor  of  the  town 
of  North  Kingstown,  be  deposited  where  the  town  shall  think 
proper,  instead  of  being  lodged  in  the  hands  of  the  captains  in 
said  town. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Nathan  Miller  be  appointed 
commissary  of  the  brigade  established  at  this  session  ;  and 
that  Col.  John  Cooke  be  appointed  one  of  the  committee  of 
safety  for  the  county  of  Newport,  in  addition  to  Metcalfe 
Bowler,  Esq. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  a  number  of  men,  not  exceed- 
ing fifty,  ba  stationed  at  Warwick  Neck,  including  the  Artil- 
lery Company,  in  Warwick  ;  the  remainder  to  be  minute  men  ; 
that  Col.  John  Waterman  have  the  command,  and  appoint 
proper  officers  to  act  under  him  ;  that  they  continue  there,  and 
be  kept  upon  pay  until  the  enemy's  fleet  shall  go  down  he 
river,  and  then  be  discharged,  if  His  Honor  the  Governor  shall 
think  proper. 

And  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor,  General  West 
and  Mr.  Joseph  Brown,  or  either  of  them,  be  appointed  to  lay 
out  such  fortifications  upon  the  said  Neck,  as  they  shall  think 
necessary  ;  and  that  the  troops  be  employed  in  erecting  them,, 
while  continued  there. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  safety  be,  and 
they  are  hereby,  directed  and  empowered  to  erect  two  barracks 
at  head-quarters,  upon  Rhode  Island,  and  one  barrack  at  How- 
land's  Ferry,  under  the  inspection  of  the  commanding  officer. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Ephraim  Pendleton  be,  and  he^ 
is  hereby,  appointed  ensign  of  the   First  Company,  in  Wes- 
terly, in  the  room  of  John  Pendleton,  who   was  appointed  by 
paistake. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  441 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  one  of  the  colony's  companies 
now  on  Prudence,  as  soon  as  the  stock,  hay,  &c.,  shall  be  re- 
moved from  the  island,  be  ordered  to  proceed  to  Bristol,  for  the 
defence  of  that  town  ;  to  be  there  subject  to  the  control  of  His 
Honor  the  Deputy  Governor,  till  further  orders. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  thirty  thousand  bushels  of  salt 
be  imported  into  this  colony,  as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be, 
to  wit : 

Seven  thousand  bushels  for  the  county  of  Newport ;  ten 
thousand  bushels  for  the  county  of  Providence  ;  six  thousand 
bushels  for  the  county  of  Kings  county  ;  four  thousand  bushels 
for  the  county  of  Kent  ;  and  three  thousand  bushels  for  the 
county  of  Bristol. 

Thiit  the  following  persons  be  the  coummittee  to  charter 
vessels,  fit  them  out  and  send  for  said  salt,  viz.  : 

For  the  county  of  Providence — Messrs.  John  Smith  and 
John  Mathewson 

For  the  county  of  Newport — Messrs.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Geo. 
Irish  and  Thomas  Corey. 

For  the  county  of  King's  county — Messrs.  John  Northup, 
Benjamin  Gardner  and  Joseph  Stanton,  Jr. 

For  the  county  of  Kent — Messrs.  William  Greene  and  Jacob 
Greene. 

For  the  county  of  Bristol — William  Bradford  and  Sylvester 
Child,  Esqs. 

That  said  committees  charter  suitable  vessels  for  importing 
■said  salt,  and  send  money  and  provisions  to  purchase  the  same  ; 
and  that  they  draw  a  sufficient  sum  out  of  the  general  treasury 
for  that  purpose. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Thomas  Greene,  Na- 
thaniel Mumford  and  Gideon  Mumford  be,  and  they  are  here- 
by, appointed  a  committee,  to  settle  the  accounts  of  the  com- 
mittee of  safety  to  this  time  ;  and  also,  the  account  of  Mr. 
John  Jenckes  ;  and  that  they  make  report  to  this  Assembly  at 
the  next  session. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Henry  Ward,  Henry  Mar- 
ohant  and  John  Cole,  Esqs.,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  be,  and 

VOL.  VII.         56 


442  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  draw  an  act  for 
constituting  a  court,  and  appointing  a  mode  of  trial,  for  the  ac- 
quittal or  condemnation  of  such  vessels  as  shall  be  captured  by 
any  A'essels  commissioned  by  the  Continental  Congress,  or  from 
any  one  of  the  United  Colonies  ;  and  that  they  present  the 
same  to  this  Assembly,  at  the  next  session. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  James  Albro,  be  chosen  cap- 
tain ;  Eldred  Spink,  lieutenant  ;  and  James  Eldred,  son  of 
Seth,  ensign  of  the  company  of  minute  men,  in  North  Kings- 
town, 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  His 
Honor  the  Deputy  Governor  and  Messrs.  Ambrose  Page,  James 
Arnold,  Jr.,  Jonathan  Randall,  John  Sayles,  Jr.,  Henry  AVard, 
Metcalfe  Bowler,  Joseph  Anthony,  Joshua  Babcock,  John 
Jenckes,  John  Smith,  John  Matthewson,  John  Dexter,  Stephen 
Whipple,  William  Greene,  Paul  Mumford,  John  Potter,  John 
G.  Wanton,  Sylvester  Gardner  and  Thomas  Freebody,  or  any 
seven  of  them,  together  with  such  other  members  of  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly,  as  shall  be  present  at  any  meeting,  be  a  gen- 
eral committee  to  act  during  the  recess  of  the  General  Assem- 
bly, with  full  power  and  authority,  in  case  of  any  sudden 
emergency  or  danger,  to  exert  the  whole  force  and  strength  of 
the  colony,  for  the  defence  and  safety  of  this  and  the  neighbor- 
ing colonies  ;  and  also  to  draw  money  out  of  the  general 
treasury  for  those  purposes. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  gentlemen  who  signed  the 
last  emission  of  bills  ordered  by  this  Assembly,  lay  their  ac- 
counts before  the  general  committee  appointed  to  act  in  the 
recess  of  the  General  Assembly,  who  are  empowered  to  audit 
the  same,  and  to  give  orders  on  the  general  treasurer  for  what 
shall  be  due  to  them. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  it  be  in  the  power  of  the  com- 
manding oC&cer  on  Rhode  Island,  to  discharge  Capt.  John 
Earle's  company  of  minute  men,  within  two  days  after  the 
rising  of  this  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  and 
Messrs.  John  Smith  and  Daniel  Tillinghast,  be  a  committee  to 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  44o 

confer  with  Major  Wales,  who  hath  the  care  of  the  Indian 
chiefs  now  in  the  town  of  Providence,  respecting  what  will  be 
suitable  to  make  them  a  present  of ;  and  that  the  said  com- 
mittee be  empowered  to  make  such  present,  at  the  expense  of 
the  colony. 

God  save  the  King. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Gen.  Washington. 

Providence,  Dec.  11th,  1775. 
Sir : — I  do  myself  the  honor  to  address  this  letter  to  you,  by  Mr.  Prenet,  and 
another  French  gentleman,  who  arrived  here  last  night,  with  Captain  Ehodes,  from 
Cape  Francois,  who  were  dispatched  some  time  since  from  this  place,  for  powdei*. 

Mr.  Prenet  comes  extremely  well  recommended  to  om-  committee,  for  providing 
powder,  from  a  merchant  of  character,  at  the  Cape.  He  hath  proposals  to  make  for 
supplying  the  United  Colonies  with  arms  and  warlike  stores.  I  am  informed  tha* 
the  other  gentleman  is  a  person  of  some  consequence.  I  beg  leave  to  introduce 
them  to  Your  Excellency,  and  to  assure  you  that — 

I  am,  with  great  respect,  sir, 
Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 
To  General  "Washington. 

Gen.  Washington  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Cambridge,  Dec.  14th,  1775. 

Sir : — Your  favor  of  the  11th  inst.,  was  handed  me,  by  the  two  French  gentlemen, 
Messrs.  Prenet  and  DePhance,  for  which  I  am  exceedingly  obliged  to  you. 

I  have  heard  their  proposals  and  plans  for  supplying  the  continent  with  arms  and 
ammunition,  which  appear  plausible,  and  to  pi-omlse  success.  But  not  thinking  my- 
self authorized  to  enter  nito  any  contract  respecting  the  same,  and  being  not  fully 
acquainted  with  the  measures  Congress  have  adopted  for  procuring  these  articles,  I 
have  prevailed  upon  them  to  go  to  Philadelphia,  and  recommended  them,  and  a 
consideration  of  their  plan,  to  that  body,  when  the  matter  will  be  finally  agi-eed 
upon,  or  rejected. 

I  must  request  the  favor  of  you  to  furnish  every  necessary  for  accommodating 
them,  and  carriages,  with  all  expedition,  as  far  as  Governor  Trumbull's.  They  are 
to  travel  at  the  continental  expense  ;  and  whatever  charge  you  may  be  at  on  their 
account,  you  will  be  pleased  to  transmit  to  me,  and  it  shall  be  immediately  reim. 
bursed.  Yours,  &c.,  GEORGE  WASHINGTON. 

To  Governor  Cooke,  Rhode  Island. 


444  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1776. 


Gen.  Washington  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Cambridge,  Dec.  17th,  1775. 
Sir: — By  sundry  persons  and  accounts,  just  from  Boston,  I  am  informed  that  the 
ministerial  army  is  in  very  great  distress  for  want  of  fresh  provisions,  and  having  re- 
ceived intelligence  that  there  are  two  hundred  fat  cattle  on  Block  Island,  and  some 
transport  vessels  cruising  that  way  in  quest  of  necessaries  for  the  army,  I  must  re- 
quest you  to  have  the  cattle,  &c.,  removed  from  thence,  immediately ;  and  from 
every  other  place  where  their  ships  can  come  and  take  them  off.  It  is  a  matter  of 
the  utmost  importance  to  prevent  their  getting  a  supply  ;  if  they  can  be  hindered 
now,  the  advanced  season  of  the  year,  and  the  inclement  weather,  which  we  may 
expect  ere  long,  will  put  it  out  of  their  power. 

I  yesterday  received  the  enclosed  information  from  several  persons  Avho  lately 
came  out  from  Boston,  which  I  thought  my  duty  to  transmit  to  you.     It  is  more  thaa 
probable  that  the  destination  of  the  troops  may  be  very  different  from  what  they 
have  given  out.     They  may  have  made  use  of  that,  to  deceive  in  another  quarter. 
I  am,  &c.,  GEORGE  WASHINGTON. 

To  Governor  Cooke,  Ehode  Island. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Gen.  Washington. 

Providence,  Dec.  19th,  1775. 

Sir  : — I  have  Your  Excellency's  of  the  1 7th,  which  I  have  laid  before  the  general 
committee. 

Should  the  force  sailed  from  Boston,  be  destined  for  Rhode  Island,  I  tremble  for 
the  consequences ;  as  the  colony,  in  its  present  exhausted  state,  cannot,  without  as- 
sistance, defend  the  island. 

At  their  unanimous  request,  I  apply  to  Your  Excellency  for  a  detachment  from 
the  continental  army  of  one  regiment,  to  be  stationed  upon  Rhode  Island ;  and  that 
you  will  please  to  appoint  a  general  officer,  to  take  the  command  of  the  whole  force 
there. 

They  also  desired  me  to  inform  you,  that  Gen.  Leo  will  be  very  acceptable  to  the 
colony  ;  and  to  request  that  the  general  officer  who  may  be  appointed,  may  set  out 
immediately,  to  take  the  command  of  the  troops  upon  the  island,  and  put  it  in  the 
best  posture  of  defence. 

We  have,  at  head  quarters,  about  two  hundred  and  fifty  Qien  ;  and  shall  immedi- 
ately place  there,  about  four  hundred  more  ;  and  hold  as  many  more  in  readiness, 
as  possible.  I  need  not  point  out  to  you  the  importance  of  the  island,  and  the  ina- 
bility of  the  colony.  I  am,  in  gi-eat  haste, 

Y'^our  very  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 

To  His  Excellency  General  Washington. 

P.  S.  Capt.  Wallace  hath  hinted  to  some  of  his  friends,  that  he  expects  a  rein- 
forcement, daily 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  445 


Gen.  Washington  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Cambridge,  Dec.  20tL,  1775. 

Sir  : — The  letter  accompanying  this,  Avas  -written  before  your  favor  of  the  1 9th, 
per  express,  came  to  band. 

Under  my  present  instructions,  and  in  my  present  situation,  I  could  not  justify  the 
sending  a  regiment  from  these  lines  to  you,  unless  there  was  an  apparent  design  of  land- 
ing a  body  of  ministerial  troops  on  Rhode  Island.  At  present,  I  do  not  think  this  to  be 
apprehended  ;  as  a  deserter  out  of  Boston,  since  my  last,  is  particular  in  declaring 
that  only  four  companies,  amounting  to  little  over  four  hundred  men,  embarked,  as 
was  said,  for  Halifax ;  agreeing  with  others,  that  invalids  and  the  officers  of  the  18th 
and  59th,  who  are  going  home  to  recruit,  had  sailed  for  England. 

The  intention  of  my  last,  containing  the  information  as  it  was  received,  Avas  only 
designed  to  put  you  upon  you  upon  your  guard  ;  not  that  I  expected  a  visit  was  in- 
tended you.  If  any  small  body  of  troops  move  from  hence  southerly,  I  have  no  ex- 
pectation of  their  stopping  short  of  Virginia,  unless  it  should  be  on  a  pillaging  party. 

To  conclude,  sir,  when  I  inform  you,  that  I  have  been  obliged  to  call  in  five 
thousand  militia,  to  supply  the  deficiency  of  the  Connecticut  regiments,  and  those 
absent  upon  furlough,  you  Avill  do  me  the  justice  to  beheve  that  not  a  want  of  incli- 
nation, but  of  ability,  prevents  me  from  complying  with  your  request ;  unless,  as  is 
before  observed,  I  had  some  ovious  reasons  to  believe  the  visits  of  more  men  than 
we  are  well  assured  are  embarked,  was  intended  for  your  government. 

I  am,  with  very  great  esteem  and  regard,  sir,  &c., 

GEO.  WASHINGTON. 

To  Governor  Cooke,  Ehode  Island. 

Gen.  Washington  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Cambridge,  Dec.  23d,  1775. 
Sir : — Notwithstanding  the  great  pains  taken  by  the  quartermaster  general,  to 
procure  blankets  for  the  army,  he  finds  it  impossible  to  procure  a  number  sufficient. 
He  has  tried  the  different  places  to  the  southward,  without  success  ;  as  what  were 
there,  are  engaged  to  supply  the  troops  in  each  place. 

Our  soldiers  are  in  great  distress  ;  and  I  know  of  no  other  way  to  remedy  the 
evil,  than  applying  to  you.  Cannot  some  be  got  from  the  different  towns  ?  Most 
houses  could  spare  one  ;  some  of  them,  many. 

If  Your  Honorable  House  will  please  to  take  this  affair  under  your  immediate 
consideration,  and  by  some  means  or  other,  procure  as  many  as  can  be  spared  from 
the  house-keepers,  you  will  do  infinite  service  to  the  army,  and  very  much  oblige — 

Your  humble  servant, 

GEORGE  WASHINGTON. 
To  Governor  Cooke,  Rhode  Island. 


446  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 


The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Gen.  Washington. 

rrovidenco,  January  Ist,  1776. 
Sir: — rpoii  receijit  of  Your  Excellency's  letter  of  the  23d  ultimo,  I  employed  two 
persons  to  a})ply  to  the  house-keepers  in  this  town,  individually,  for  the  blankets  for 
the  army. 

Tliey^have  collected  about  one  hundred  and  eighty ;  which  will  be  sent  forward 
this  day.  It  is  full  as  large  a  number  as  I  expected  to  procure,  considering  how  we 
have  been  exhausted  by  supplies  to  various  parts  of  the  service.  I  shall  immediately 
take  measures  for  collecting  more  from  the  country  towns. 

I  refer  Your  Excellency  to  General  Lee,  for  the  particulars  of  his  expedition  ta 
Hhode  Island,  which  I  hope  will  be  attended  with  beneficial  consequences  to  the 
colony. 

I  received  yours,  upon  the  subject  of  re-enlisting  the  army  ;  but  from  the  dis- 
tressed state  of  the  colony,  and  the  multiplicity  of  business  pressing  me,  was  incapa- 
ble of  giving  you  a  satisfactory  answer ;  nor  can  I,  at  present,  do  any  thing  more 
than  renew  my  assurances  of  giving  every  assistance  in  my  jiower,  to  the  service. 
I  am,  with  truth  and  esteem,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 
To  His  Excellency  George  Washington,  Esq.,  general  of  the  armies  of  the  United 
Colonies. 

P.  S.  You  will  receive  by  Mr.  Coomer  Haile,  who  carries  the  blankets,  an  ac- 
count of  the  cost  of  them.  I  shall  be  obliged  to  Your  Excellency  for  giving  orders 
for  the  payment  of  It  to  him. 

By  the  same  conveyance,  I  send  you  a  box  and  basket,  left  for  Y'^our  Excellency^ 
by  Mr.  Prenet,  and  the  other  French  gentleman,  who  accompanied  him. 


Gen.  Washington  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Cambridge,  January  Gth,  1776. 

Sir: — I  received  your  favor  of  the  1st  instant,  and  return  you  my  thanks  for  the 
blankt'ts,  and  your  promise  of  having  more  procured,  as  they  are  much  wanted.  I 
did  not  see  Mr.  Ilailc,  who  brought  them,  nor  the  account,  or  the  money  should  have 
been  transmitted  to  you  by  his  return.  You  will  please  to  draw  on  the  quarter- 
master general,  and  it  shall  be  immediately  paid. 

I  have  seen  General  Lee  since  his  expedition,  and  hope  that  Rhode  Island  will 
derive  some  advantage  from  it. 

I  am  told  that  Capt.  Wallace's  ships  have  been  su])plied,  for  some  time,  with  provi- 
sions, by  the  town  of  Newport,  on  certain  conditions,  stipulated  between  him  and  the 
committee.  When  this  treaty  was  first  obtained,  perhaps  it  was  right;  there  then 
might  have  been  some  hopes  of  an  accommodation  taking  place  ;  but  now,  when 
every  prospect  seems  to  be  cut  off  by  His  Majesty's  late  speech  ;  when  the  throne? 
from  which  we  had  supplicated  redress,  breathes  forth  vengeance  and  indignation, 
and  a  firm  determination  to  remain  unalterable  in  its  jsurposes,  and  to  prosecute  the 
system  and  plan  of  ruin  formed  by  the  ministry  against  us,  should  not  an  end  be  put 


1776.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  447 


to  it,  and  every  possible  method  be  follen  upon  to  prevent  their  getting  necessaries 
of  any  kind  V 

We  need  not  expect  to  conquer  our  enemies  by  good  ofBces ;  and  I  know  not 
■what  pernicious  consequences  may  result  from  a  precedent  of  this  sort.  Other 
places,  circumstanced  as  Newport  is,  may  follow  the  example,  and,  by  that  means, 
their  whole  fleet  and  army  will  be  furnished  with  what  it  highly  concerns  us  to  keep 
them  from ;  this,  however,  with  all  deference,  I  leave  to  your  consideration. 

I  received  a  letter  from  Governor  Trumbull,  of  the  1st  instant,  by  which  I  am  in- 
formed, that  the  Connecticut  Assembly  are  very  unanimous  in  the  common  cause ; 
and,  among  others,  have  passed  an  act  for  raising  and  equipping  a  fourth  of  their 
militia,  to  be  immediately  selected  by  voluntary  enlistments ;  with  such  other 
able,  effective  men,  as  are  not  included  in  their  militia  rolls,  who  may  be  inclined  to 
enlist,  to  act  as  minute  men,  for  their  own,  or  the  defence  of  any  of  the  United 
Colonies ;  and  this  under  proper  encouragements. 

Another  act,  for  restraining  and  punishing  persons  inimical  to  us,  and  directino- 
proceedings  thereon ;  no  person  to  supply  the  ministerial  army  and  navy  ;  to  give 
them  intelligence,  to  enlist,  or  to  procui-e  others  to  enlist  in  their  service,  to  pilot 
their  vessels,  or  in  any  way  assist  them,  under  pain  of  forfeiting  his  estate,  and  an 
imprisonment,  not  exceeding  three  years ;  none  to  write,  speak  or  act  against  the 
proceedings  of  Congress,  or  their  acts  of  Assembly,  under  penalty  of  being  dis- 
armed, and  disqualified  from  holding  any  office  ;  and  be  further  punished  by  impris- 
onment ;  for  seizing  and  confiscating,  for  the  use  of  the  colony,  the  estates  of  those 
who  put  or  continue  to  shelter  themselves  under  the  protection  of  the  ministerial 
fleet  or  army,  or  assist  in  carrying  on  their  measures  against  us;  a  resolve  to 
provide  two  armed  vessels,  of  sixteen  and  fourteen  guns,  with  a  spy  schooner  of  four, 
and  six  row-gallies  ;  an  act  exempting  the  polls  of  soldiers  from  taxes,  for  the  last 
and  ensuing  campaign  ;  another,  for  encouraging  the  making  of  saltpeter  and  gun- 
powder ;  a  considerable  cpiantity  of  both  which,  Mr.  Trumbull  hopes  to  make  early 
in  the  spring.  He  says  the  furnace  at  Middletown  is  smelting  lead,  and  likely  to 
turn  out  twenty  or  thirty  tons ;  and  that  ore  is  plenty. 

They  have  also  passed  an  act  empowering  the  commander  in  chief  of  the  conti- 
nental army,  or  officers  commanding  a  detachment  or  out-posts,  to  administer  an 
oath,  and  swear  any  person  or  persons  to  the  truth  of  any  matters  concerning,  and 
relative  to,  the  public  service. 

The  situation  of  our  affairs  seems  to  call  for  regulations  like  these ;  and  I  shoulc^ 
think  the  other  colonies  ought  to  adopt  similar  ones,  or  such  of  them  as  they  have 
not  already  made.  Vigorous  measures,  and  such  as,  at  another  time,  would  appear 
extraordinary,  are  now  become  absolutely  necessary  for  preserving  our  country 
against  the  strides  of  tyranny  making  against  us. 

Governor  Trumbull,  in  his  list,  has  not  mentioned  an  act  for  impressing  carriages, 
and  agreeably  to  the  recommendation  of  Congress ;  this,  I  hope,  they  have  not  for- 
gotten. 

It  is  highly  necessary  that  such  an  authorit}-  should  be  given,  under  proper  re- 
strictions, or  we  shall  be  greatly  embarrassed  whenever  the  armj-,  or  any  detach- 
ment from  it,  should  find  it  necessary  to  march  from  hence. 

I  am,  sir,  with  very  great  esteem. 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

GEORGE  WASHINGTON, 

To  Governor  Cooke. 


448  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 


Gm.  Washington  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Cambridge,  January  16,  1776. 

Sir : — It  is  exccedinglv  painful  to  me,  that  I  should  so  often  trouble  you  respectr.. 
in<T  this  army,  and  that  I  am  under  the  necessity  of  applying  to  you  again ;  but  you 
must,  in  some  measure,  be  involved  in  whatever  difliculties  attend  me. 

To  my  great  surprise,  I  find,  that,  notwithstanding  I  had  taken  the  utmost  care  to- 
prevent  the  soldiers  that  would  not  re-enlist  in  the  new  army,  from  carrying  away 
their  arms,  or  such  of  them  as  were  good,  the  number  collected  is  trifling  and  incon- 
siderable, of  which  there  are  but  very  few,  if  any,  now  in  store;  they  having  been 
delivered  to  the  recruits  which  have  come  in. 

I  also  find,  from  the  report  of  the  recruiting  ofiicers,  that  a  few  more  are  to  be 
enlisted  who  have  arras  in  their  hands ;  and  that  they  are  reduced  to  the  disagreea- 
ble alternative  of  taking  men  without  any,  or  no  men  at  all. 

Unhappy  alternative  !  Must  not  those  governments  exert  themselves  in  procuring 
them  froui  the  several  towns,  or  in  such  other  manner  as  to  them  shall  seem  most 
speedy  and  effectual  ? 

To  account  minutely  for  this  great  deficiency,  would  bo  of  no  importance.  I  shall 
only  say,  that  it  has  arisen  from  two  causes,  to  wit : 

The  badness  of  the  arms  of  the  old  army,  which  the  inspectors  and  appraisers  did 
not  think  worth  detaining  ;  and  to  the  disobedience  of  some  regiments  in  carrying 
theirs  away,  contrary  to  every  order  I  could  issue;  and  even  solemn  threats  of' 
stopping  their  pay  for  the  months  of  Xovember  and  December,  of  those  that 
should. 

The  prospect  of  getting  imported  arms,  is  so  remote  and  uncertain,  that  I  cannot  de- 
pend upon  it.  I  therefore  request  the  favor  of  you  to  inform  me  whether  you  have 
any,  and  what  number,  belonging  to  government ;  as,  also,  if  you  will  be  able  to, 
procure  more  ;  and  in  what  time.  If  you  have  any,  or  can  get  them,  I  shall  be  gla^ 
to  take  them,  on  account  of  the  Continent ;  they  must  be  had,  if  possible. 

I  have  written  to  the  other  New  England  governments  on  the  same  subjects. 
I  am,  sir,  with  great  regard  and  esteem. 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

GEORGE  WASHINGTON. 

To  tlie  Honorable  Governor  Cooke. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island,  to  General  Lee,  at  New  York. 

Providence,  January  21st,  1776. 

Sir : — I  take  the  liberty  to  enclose  to  you,  a  copy  of  the  address  froni  this  colony^ 
to  the  Continental  Congress ;  and  to  request  your  assistance  in  procuring  a  body  of 
troops  to  be  stationed  in  the  colony,  which  I  think  a  measure  absolutely  necessary 
for  the  common  defence. 

We  are  not  without  hopes  that  the  Congress  will  take  the  whole  brigade  into  their- 
service ;  especially,  as  the  necessity  arising  from  so  powerful  an  invasion,  of  estab- 
lishing the  whole  force  we  have  ordered,  is  clear  and  manifest. 

From  the  nature  of  the  war,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  colonies,  I  think  every 
idea  of  partial  and  colonial  defence,  ought  to  be  given  up.  There  must  be  a  sur- 
preme,  sjiperintending  power,  to  exert  and  direct  the  force  of  the  whole,  for  the 


1776.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  449 


safety  and  defence  of  all ;  otherwise,  the  exertions  and  burthens  will  not  only  be 
very  unequal,  to  the  greatly  endangering  ot  the  union,  upon  which  the  welfare  of 
America  depends,  but  colony  after  colony  may  be  destroyed,  without  a  chance  of 
making  resistance. 

I  shall  only  add,  on  this  head,  that  unless  the  continent  defends  the  colony,  it  must 
be  abandoned ;  an  event  that  will  be  attended  with  the  most  pernicious  conse- 
(juences  to  the  common  cause. 

I  am,  with  great  sincerity  and  esteem,  sir, 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 
To  the  Honorable  General  Lee. 

P.  S.  The  town  of  Newport  addressed  a  petition  to  the  Congress,  for  permission 
to  supply  the  King's  ships. 

The  Congress  referred  it  to  the  General  Assembly ;  but  at  the  same  time,  our 
delegates  informed  us,  that  every  member  who  spoke  in  the  debate,  gave  it  as  his 
opinion,  that  the  ships  should  be  supphed  with  necessaries  for  their  own  support ; 
taking  the  greatest  care,  lest  through  them,  the  common  enemy  in  other  parts  of 
America  should  obtain  provisions ;  in  consequence  of  which,  the  General  Assembly  have 
ordered  that  Capt.  Wallace  should  be  supplied,  as  you  will  see,  by  the  enclosed  vote. 

But  as  he  may  cannonade,  and  even  burn  the  town,  a  discretionary  power,  by  a 
private  vote,  which  it  is  designed  shall  be  kept  secret,  is  given  to  the  commander  of 
the  forces  on  Rhode  Island,t  o  permit  supplies  in  cases  of  imminent  danger,  until  the 
Assembly  meets,  on  the  last  Monday  in  next  month. 


The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island,  to  General  Washington, 

Providence,  January  21st,  1776. 

Sir  : — Your  favor  of  the  6th  instant,  I  received,  and  laid  before  the  General  Assem- 
bly. It  had  great  weight ;  and  I  believe  that  no  supplies  to  the  enemy's  ships  would 
have  been  permitted,  had  it  not  appeared  to  us  that  the  members  of  the  Continental 
Congress  were  of  opinion  that  they  should  be  continued.  The  following  is  an  ex- 
tract of  a  letter  from  our  delegates,  on  that  subject : 

"  A  memorial  from  the  town  of  Newport,  forwarded  to  us  by  express,  having  been 
referred  to  the  General  Assembly,  we  now  enclose  that,  with  the  papers  pertinent 
thereto. 

We  should  not  do  justice  to  the  benevolence  of  Congress,  or  to  the  distressed 
situation  of  the  town,  if  we  did  not  acquaint  you,  that  all  the  gentlemen  who 
spoke  In  this  debate,  expressed  the  most  tender  regard  for  the  distressed 
people ;  and  gave  it  as  their  opinion,  that,  as  long  as  the  ships  of  war  now 
in  our  harbor  could  bs  supplied  with  fresh  provisions,  beer,  and  su;h  like  ne 
.cessaries,  merely  for  their  own  immediate  support,  consistently  with  the  great  prirj 
ciples  of  the  general  good  and  safety  of  America,  the  town  ought  to  be  permitted  to 
furnish  them  ;  the  greatest  care  being  taken  by  government,  that  no  more  than  the 
barely  necessary  supplies  be  furnished  them  from  time  to  time,  lest  the  common 
enemy  in  other  parts  of  the  continent,  should  through  them  obtain  provisions." 

In  consequence  of  which,  the  General  Assembly  have  ordered  that  Capt.  Wallace 

VOL.  VII.        57 


450  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OP    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

should  be  supplied,  as  you  will  see,  by  the  enclosed  vote.  But  as  he  may  cannonade, 
and  even  burn  the  toAvn,  a  discretionary  power,  by  a  private  vUe,  which  it  is  de- 
signed should  be  kept  a  profound  secret,  is  given  to  the  commander  of  the  forces  on 
Rhode  Island,  to  permit  supplies,  in  cases  of  imminent  danger,  until  the  next  session, 
to  be  liolden  on  the  last  Monday  in  next  month. 

Similar  measures  to  those  taken  by  Connecticut,  as  mentioned  in  your  letter,  have 
been  adopted  by  this  colony.  Besides  -which,  the  commanding  ofiicer  of  any  body  of 
the  Continental  troops,  is  empowered  to  impress  carriages,  &c. 

The  General  Assembly  have  ordered  an  address  to  the  Congress,  a  copy  of  which, 
I  do  myself  the  honor  to  enclose  you. 

We  are  not  without  hopes  that  the  Congress  M'ill  take  the  whole  brigade  into  their 
service  ;  especially,  as  the  necessity,  arising  from  so  powerful  an  invasion,  of  estab- 
lishing the  whole  force  we  have  ordered,  is  clear  and  manifest. 

From  the  nature  of  the  war,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  colonies,  I  think  every 
idea  of  partial  and  colonial  defence,  ought  to  be  given  uj).  There  must  be  a  su- 
preme, superintending  power,  to  exert  and  direct  the  force  of  the  whole,  for  the 
defence  and  safety  of  all ;  otherwise,  the  exertions  and  burthens  will  not  only  be 
very  unequal,  to  the  greatly  endangering  of  the  union,  upon  which  the  welfare  of 
America  depends,  but  colony  after  colony  may  be  subdued,  without  a  chance  of 
making  resistance. 

I  shall  only  add.  on  this  head,  that  unless  the  continent  enter  upon  the  defence  of 
the  colony,  it  must  be  abandoned,  to  the  great  injury  of  the  common  cause.  I  beg 
the  favor  of  Your  Excellency  seriously  to  consider  this  matter,  and  to  give  us  your 
assistance  with  the  members  of  the  Congress,  for  procuring  such  a  body  of  forces  as 
the  interest  of  this  and  the  united  colonies  in  general,  shall  require. 

We  had  procured  upwards  of  an  hundred  blankets,  which  were  designed  for  the 
army  under  your  immediate  command  ;  but  the  descent  upon  Prudence,  obliged  us 
to  send  forty  of  them  to  our  troops  upon  that  island;  and  to  supply  the  additional 
forces  ordered  to  be  raised,  will  demand  every  blanket  that  can  be  spared  in  the 
colony. 

I  am,  with  great  respect  and  esteem,  sir, 

Your  Excellency's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 

To  His  Excellency  General  "Washington. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island ,  to  Stephen  Hopkins  and  Samuel 
Ward,  Delegates  of  the  Colony,  at  the  Continental  Congress. 

Providence,  January  21st,  1776. 

Gentlemen :— .1  enclose  you,  at  the  request  of  the  General  Assembly,  an  address 
to  the  Congress,  representing  the  deplorable  state  of  the  colony,  and  j^raying  for 
assistance. 

We  might  have  entered  into  a  more  minute  detail ;  but  the  Assembly  having  a  full 
reliance  upon  your  giving  the  Congress  every  needful  information  i-especting  the 
colony,  thought  it  unnecessary.  You  will  please  to  deliver  and  enforce  it  as  soon  as 
you  have  a  rational  prospect  of  its  meeting  with  success. 

Notwithstanding  the  propriety  of  our  petition  is  such,  that  we  ought  not  to  doubt 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  451 

of  its  being  granted,  yet  it  may  be  prudent  to  interest  some  of  the  leading  members 
in  om-  favor,  before  it  be  brought  on.  But  as  yoil  are  upon  the  spot,  the  Avhole 
matter  must  be  submitted  to  you;  and  I  am  perfectly  satisfied  that  you  will  manage 
it  with  proper  address. 

The  General  Assembly  are  not  without  hopes  that  the  Cougress  will  take  the 
Avhole  brigade  into  their  service  ;  especially,  as  the  necessity  arising  from  so  power- 
ful an  invasion,  of  establishing  the  whole  Ibrce  we  have  ordered,  is  clear  and  mani- 
fest; and  you  will  use  your  utmost  endeavors  to  procure  a  resolution  for  that 
purpose. 

From  the  nature  of  the  war,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  colonies,  every  idea  of 
partial  and  colonial  deience,  ought  to  be  given  up.  There  must  be  a  supreme,  su- 
perintending power  to  exert  and  direct  the  fotfce  of  the  whole,  for  the  defence  and 
safety  of  all ;  otherwise,  the  exertions  and  burthens  will  not  only  be  very  unequal, 
to  the  greatly  endangering  of  the  union  upon  which  the  welfare  of  America  de- 
pends, but  colony  after  colony  may  be  subdued,  without  a  chance  of  making 
resistance. 

I  will  only  add,  upon  this  heail,  that  our  circumstances  will  not  admit  of  delay ; 
and  that  unless  the  Cougress  enter  upon  the  defence  of  the  colony,  it  must  be 
abandoned. 

I  am  also,  at  the  request  of  the  General  Assembly,  to  desire  you  "  to  inform  them 
what  information  you  have  had,  respecting  any  letters  being  Avritten  by  any  of  the 
inhabitants  of  this  colony  to  any  person  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  respecting  the 
situation  of  the  town  of  Newport,  and  the  sujiplying  of  Capt.  Wallace  with  provi- 
sions ;  and  of  any  reflections  that  have  been  cast  by  such  letters  upon  any  part  of 
this  colony  ;  and  to  inform  them  of  the  names  of  such  letter  writers ;  and  to  procure 
and  transmit  to  them,  copies  of  such  letters,  if  they  can  be  obtained." 

The  particulars  of  the  unfortunate  attack  upon  Quebec,  are  not  yet  come  to  hand. 
I  suppose  you  have  received  them  before  now.  It  is  a  severe  check ;  but  we  have 
still  great  successes  to  be  thankful  for ;  and  in  a  war  so  extensive,  we  must  expect 
to  meet  with  some  disagreeable  events.  I  most  sincerely  sympathize  with  Mr.  Ward 
upon  this  occasion,  and  heartily  wish  he  may  have  some  comfortable  intelligence  from 
his  son. 

I  am  informed  by  a  letter  from  Xew  Providence,  that  the  militia  from  the  western 
parts  of  Connecticut,  are  pushing  off  in  sleighs,  in  great  numbers  for  Canada. 

The  secretary  tells  me  he  hath  given  his  brother  an  account  of  the  descent  upon 
Prudence.     I  shall  only  add,  that  the  stock  is  now  very  nearly  removed. 

In  consequence  of  the  recommendation  of  the  members  of  the  general  Cono-ress, 
as  mentioned  in  Mr.  Ward's  letter,  the  Assembly  have  agreed  to  supply  the  King's 
ships,  as  you  will  see  by  the  enclosed  vote.  But  as  Wallace  may  cannonade,  and 
even  burn  the  town,  a  discretionary  power,  by  a  private  vote,  which  it  is  desio-ned 
shall  be  kept  a  profound  secret,  is  given  to  the  commander  of  the  forces  on  Rhode 
Island,  to  permit  supplies  in  cases  of  imminent  danger,  until  the  next  session,  to  be 
holden  on  the  last  Monday  in  February. 

Capt.  Greenell  hath  exerted  himself  greatly  in  procuring  men  for  the  navy  ;  and 
hath  an  inclination  to  enter  the  service,  if  he  can  obtain  a  place  sufficient  to  support 
himself  and  family.     I  beg  leave  to  recommend  him  to  your  assistance. 
I  am,  with  great  truth  and  regard,  gentlemen. 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 
To  the  Honorable  S.  Hopkins  and  S.  Ward,  Esqs. 


452  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Culony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations^  at  East  Green- 
wich, on  the  last  Monday  in  February,  177G. 

The  Hon.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  AVilliam  Bradford,  Deputy  Governor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  company  of  soldiers  under 
the  command  of  Capt.  Thomas  Gorton,  in  the  pay  of  this  colony, 
be  stationed  upon  Warwick  Neck. 

That  Col.  John  Waterman  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  directed  and 
empowered  to  procure  as  many  fire-arms  and  blankets  as  shall 
be  necessary  for  said  company,  by  either  borrowing  or  purchas- 
ing, upon  the  best  terms  he  can,  and  to  direct  said  company  to 
proceed  to  their  said  station  ;  and  that  he  be  paid  for  his 
trouble. 

That  Capt.  Josiah  Gibbs's  company  be  immediately  ordered 
to  proceed  to  their  station,  at  Adquenesit  ;  and  that  as  many 
of  the  minute  men  there  be  discharged  from  government  pay, 
as  said  company  shall  relieve. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of 
Newport  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  directed  and  fully  empowered, 
to  take  sufficient  aid,  and  proceed  to  the  Honorable  Joseph 
Wanton,  Esq.,  late  Governor  of  this  colony,  and  to  take  pos- 
session of  the  charter  and  papers,  together  with  the  chest,  and 
all  other  things  appertaining  to  this  colony,  which  are  in  his 
custody  ;  and  to  deliver  the  same  to  the  committee  appointed 
by  the  General  Assembly  to  receive  them,  to  be  delivered  to 
His  Honor  the  present  Governor  ;  and  in  case  of  any  resistance 
being  made  by  the  said  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  to  take  him  into 
custody,  and  bring  him  before  this  General  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  whereas,  this  Assembly  bath 
received  information  that  Mr.  Martin  Luther,  of  Warren,  hath 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  463 

fitted  out  and  sent  a  vessel  to  sea,  contrary  to  the  resolves  of 
the  Continental  Congress  ;  which  vessel  is  returned  from  her 
voyage  from  the  West  Indies,  with  a  cargo  of  goods,  that  the 
said  Martin  Luther,  together  with  Capt.  Collins,  master  of  said 
vessel,  be  forthwith  had  before  this  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  book  in  the  secretary's  of- 
fice, in  which  is  entered  an  account  of  all  the  vessels  and  mer- 
chandize which  have  been  sent  out,  or  brought  within  this 
colony,  since  the  10th  day  of  September  last  past ;  and  that  all 
the  bonds  in  said  office,  which  have  been  given  respecting  said 
vessels,  and  merchandize,  be  immediately  brought  and  laid 
before  this  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  one  thousand  weight  of  gun- 
powder (including  the  five  hundred  weight  already  ordered,)  be 
immediately  sent  from  the  colony's  magazine  to  the  head- 
quarters, upon  Rhode  Island,  under  the  care  of  Lieut.  Colonel 
Lippitt ;  and  that  he  make  application  to  the  committee  for 
the  same. 

This  Assembly  taking  into  consideration  a  resolution  of  the 
Honorable  the  Continental  Congress,  of  the  20th  of  January 
last,  for  procuring  gold  and  silver  coin,  for  the  operations  in 
Canada, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
committee  of  safety,  the  commissary,  Messrs.  John  G.  Wanton, 
Joseph  Anthony,  John  Jenckes,  John  Brown,  John  Mathew- 
son^  Joseph  Nightingale,  Daniel  Owen,  Stephen  Whipple, 
Joshua  Babcock,  John  Potter,  Joseph  Noyes,  William  Potter, 
George  Hazard,  Henry  Marchant,  Christopher  Champlin,  Jr., 
George  Champlin,  Simeon  Potter,  Shearjashub  Bourn,  John 
Waldron,  Ezekiel  Gardner,  Benjamin  Ellery,  William  Greene, 
Richard  Mathewson,  Pardon  Tillinghast,  Charles  Holden, 
Israel  Bowen,  Edward  Hull,  Francis  Malbone,  George  Irish, 
John  Negus,  Philip  Taylor,  John  Weeden,  Arnold  Paine,  Na- 
thaniel Martin,  Andrew  Harris,  Cromel  Child,  John  Mawdfley,. 
Simon  Pease,  Benjamin  Wilkinson,  George  Corlis,  Joseph 
Hewes,  Thomas  Brown,  James  Potter,  Thomas  Olney,  Thomas 
Wickes,   Josias  Lyndon,  John  Almy,  Job  Sweeting,  Samuel 


454  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

Nightingale  and  Benjamin  Greene,  be  a  committee,  to  pro- 
cure as  much  gold  and  silver  coin,  as  they  can,  for  the  use 
aforesaid. 

That  it  bCj  and  hereby  is,  recommended  to  every  member  of 
the  General  Assembly,  to  use  his  best  endeav'ors  to  promote  the 
above  mentioned  service. 

That  the  committee  of  safety  be  empowered  to  receive  such 
silver  and  gold  coin,  as  shall  be  procured,  as  aforesaid,  and 
pay  for  the  same  in  lawful  money  bills,  which  they  are  hereby 
empowered  to  dra'v  out  of  the  general  treasury  for  that 
purpose. 

That  the  committee  of  safety  pay  the  gold  and  silver  coin 
they  shall  so  receive,  into  the  general  treasury,  within  one 
month  ;  that  the  whole  of  the  above  mentioned  business  be 
done  without  any  charge  to  the  colony. 

That  the  secretary  forthwith  furnish  every  person  hereby  ap- 
pointed, with  a  copy  of  the  said  resolution  of  the  Continental 
Congress  ;   and  also  with  a  copy  of  this  vote. 

Resolution  of  the  Continental  Congress. 

"  In  Congress,  January  20,  1776. 
It  being  necessary  to  procure  a  large  quantity  of  specie,  for 
the  operations  in  Canada,  which  cannot  be  successfully  carried 
on  without  that  article, — 

Resolved,  that  it  be  recommended  to  the  General  Assem- 
blies, conventions  and  councils  or  committees  of  safety,  upon 
the  continent,  to  employ  proper  persons  within  their  respective 
colonies,  to  collect  all  the  gold  and  silver  coin  they  can,  and 
inform  the  Congress  of  the  sum  collected. 
Extract  from  the  minutes. 

CHARLES  THOMSON,  Secretary." 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  government  will  purchase 
of  Mr.  Silas  Casey  and  Mr.  Nathan  Miller,  all  the  salt  they  now 
have,  at  three  shillings  per  bushel. 

That  Mr.  Jacob  Greene  be  appointed  to   receive  the  salt  of 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  455 

Mr.  Casey  ;  and  Col.  Sylvester  Child  to  receive  the  salt  from 
Mr.  Miller,  and  to  store  the  whole  in  some  places  of  safety,  to 
be  hereafter  delivered  out  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  colony,  as 
the  General  Assembly  shall  think  proper ;  that  the  persons  so 
appointed,  draw  for  the  amount  thereof,  out  of  the  general 
treasury. 

And  also,  that  Col.  Joseph  Noyes  purchase  all  the  salt  he 
can,  at  as  low  a  rate  as  possible,  but  not  to  exceed  three  shil- 
lings, per  bushel. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Samuel  Tomkins  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly 
an  account,  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  supplying 
the  minute  men  and  others,  who  went  upon  Prudence,  for  the 
defence  of  said  island,  with  provision  and  other  necessaries  for 
their  support  ;   and  the  same  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  amount  thereof,  be- 
ing £100  12,f.  QcL,  be  allowed  ;  and  that  the  aforesaid  sum 
be  paid  unto  the  said  Samuel  Tomkins,  out  of  the  general 
treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  it  be  recommended  to  the  in- 
habitants upon  Block  Island,  to  use  their  utmost  endeavors  and 
diligence,  to  remove  the  stock,  or  so  much  thereof,  as  the  oom- 
mittee  to  be  appointed  by  this  Asssembly  for  that  purpose,  shall 
judge  not  absolutely  necessary  for  the  use  and  consumption  of 
the  said  inhabitants,  to  the  main. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  Capt.  John  Sands, 
Mr.  Joshua  Sands  and  Mr.  William  Littlefied,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby,  appointed  a  committee  to  determine  what  number  of 
neat  cattle  and  sheep  shall  be  left  upon  said  Block  Island,  for 
the  necessary  use  of  the  inhabitants  ;  and  agree  with  proper 
persons  for  the  removal  of  the  remainder,  upon  the  best  terms 
they  can. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  men 
aforesaid,  agree  with  the  inhabitants  for  the  fire  arms  now  on 
said  island,  and  purchase  them  for  the  use  of  the  colony,  as 
soon  as  possible,  and  deliver  them  to  the  committee  of  safety  ; 
and  that  they  draw  for  the  amount  of  the  fire-arms,  so  deliv- 
ered, out  of  the  general  treasury. 


456  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

And  that  all  warlike  stores  now  on  said  island,  be  immediately 
removed  therefrom,  and  delivered  to  the  committee  of  safety. 

Both  Houses  being  resolved  into  a  grand  committee,  Briga- 
dier General  William  Wests's  resignation  of  the  command  of 
the  colony's  brigade  being  read  and  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be  accepted,  and  he 
is  hereby  discharged  from  the  command  thereof,  accordingly. 

This  Assembly  taking  into  consideration  a  letter  from  Brig. 
Gen.  West,  respecting  a  dispute  between  Col.  Henry  Babcock 
and  Col.  William  Richmond,  concerning  rank, — 

Do  resolve,  that  by  the  rules  of  the  army,  Col.  Babcock  is 
entitled  to  take  rank  of  Col.  Richmond  in  the  colony's  brigade  ; 
and  that  he  do  take  rank,  accordingly. 

The  grand  committee  then  proceeded  to  make  choice  of  the 
following  oflicers,  to  wit : 

Officers  for  the  First  Regimc?it  in  the  Colony  s  Brigade. 

Caleb  Gardner,  major. 

Benjamin  Fry,  captain  ;  Jonathan  Wallen,  lieutenant  ;  and 
Edmund  A.  Smith,  ensign  of  the  first  company. 

Caleb  Carr,  captain  ;  Peleg  Heath,  lieutenant ;  and  Benja- 
min Bosworth,  Sd,  ensign,  of  the  second  company. 

Jeremiah  Pearce,  ensign  of  the  third  company. 

Nathaniel  Church,  captain  of  the  tenth  company. 

Officers  for  the  Second  Regiment  in  the  Colony  s  Brigade. 

Arthur  Fenner,  son  of  Edward,  lieutenant  of  the  first  com- 
pany, in  the  place  of  V/illiam  Drown,  who  is  appointed  to  a 
lieutenancy  in  the  sixth  company. 

Abraham  Tourtelot,  ensign  of  the  fourth  company. 

Nathaniel  Blackmar,  captain  of  the  fifth  company. 

William  Drown,  lieutenant  of  the  sixth  company. 

Ichabod  Prentice,  ensign  of  the  twelfth  company. 

John  Bartlett,  Jr.,  surgeon's  mate  of  the  brigade,  in  the 
room  of  John  Chace,  who  declined. 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  457 

Stephen  Wigneron,  surgeon's  mate,  in  the  room  of  Ebenezer 
Richmond,  who  declined. 

Enoch  Stanton,  armorer  of  the  brigade,  at  the  same  wages 
as  are  allowed  to  the  armorers  of  the  Continental  army. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  quartermaster  of  each  regi- 
ment in  this  colony's  brigade,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  allowed  the 
same  wages  that  a  quartermaster  is  paid  in  the  Continental 
army. 

lb  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  each  of  the  mnjors,  as  also 
the  major  of  brigade,  and  each  of  the  two  adjutants  belonging 
to  the  colony's  brigade,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  allowed  six 
shillings  per  week,  for  horse- keeping,  when  their  horses  shall 
be  kept  upon  hay  ;  and  two  shillings  per  week,  when  kept 
upon  grass. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  commissary  of  the  colony's 
brigade,  upon  Rhode  Island,  purchase  beef  for  the  use  of  said 
brigade,  upon  the  best  terms  he  can  procure  the  same  ;  pro- 
vided, ho  does  not  exceed  the  price  that  is  given  for  beef  by 
the  commissary  of  the  Continental  army,  at  Cambridge. 

Both  Houses  being  joined  in  a  grand  committee,  made  choice 
of  the  following  officers  for  the  militia,  in  the  colony,  to  wit  : 

Militia  Officers  for  the  Colony,  Chosen. 

Stephen  Jillson,  captain  of  the  second  company  of  militia, 
in  the  town  of  Cumberland,  in  the  room  of  Levi  Tower,  who 
resigned. 

Roger  Sheldon,  lieutenant  of  the  same  company,  in  the  room 
of  Stephen  Jillson,  promoted. 

Abraham  Cooke,  ensign  of  the  same  company,  in  the  room 
of  Roger  Sheldon,  promoted. 

Charles  Olney,  captain  ;  Eleazer  Jenks,  lieutenant  ;  and 
Samuel  Olney,  ensign,  of  the  company  of  militia,  in  the  town 
of  North  Providence. 

John  Vars,  lieutenant  and  Thomas  Coggeshall,  Jr.,  ensign, 
of  the  company  of  militia,  in  the  town  of  Middletown. 

VOL.  VII.         58 


468  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

David  Giffiird,  captain  of  the  first  company  of  militia,  in  the 
town  of  Portsmouth,  in  the  room  of  Burringtou  Anthony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  James  Arnold,  Jr.,  Col. 
John  Waterman  and  Capt.  John  Aborn,  be  a  committee,  to  ex- 
amine the  damages  sustained  by  Capt.  Samuel  Tomkins,  occa- 
sioned by  the  soldiers'  being  quartered  at  his  house,  upon  Pru- 
dence Island  ;  and  that  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  in- 
quire into  the  same,  and  make  report  at  the  next  session  of  this 
Assembly,  what  they  shall  think  reasonable  and  right  to  be  al- 
lowed therefor. 

Whereas,  Mrs.  Mary  Clarke,  wife  of  James  Clarke,  late  of 
Newport,  in  this  colony,  preferred  her  petition  before  this  As- 
sembly, setting  forth  that  her  said  husband  having  been  a  long 
voyage  at  sea,  and  about  coming  home  ;  but  hearing  of  the 
troublesome  times  in  this  country,  and  being  under  great  con- 
cern for  his  family,  hath  concluded  to  settle  in  the  island  of 
Dominica,  where  he  has  an  estate,  and  has  sent  for  the  peti- 
tioner and  his  whole  family,  to  come  to  him. 

And  the  petitioner  being  very  desirous  of  obtaining  a  place 
of  safety,  humbly  prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  her  liberty  of 
fitting  out  a  vessel,  for  transporting  herself,  family  and  house- 
hold furniture,  to  said  island  of  Dominica,  and  for  no  other 
purpose,  whatever  ;  this  Assembly  taking  the  aforesaid  petition 
into  consideration, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  above  mentioned 
petition  be  granted,  under  the  direction  and  care  of  the  com- 
mittee of  inspection  of  the  town  of  Cranston. 

Whereas,  Miss  Martha  Duncan,  Miss  Elizabeth  Duncan  and 
Miss  Mary  Duncan,  preferred  their  petition  to  this  Assembly, 
setting  forth  that  from  the  distressed  situation  of  the  town  of 
Newport,  and  from  the  dreadful  apprehension  of  the  danger 
with  which  the  same  was  threatened,  they  were  induced  to 
transpori  their  most  valuable  effects  to  Updike's  Newtown,  a 
place  they  esteemed  of  more  safety  ;  but  unhappily,  the  boat 
in  which  the    same  were    conveying,  was   captured   by  Capt. 


177C.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  459 

Wallace,  and  the  goods  with  which  she  \vas  laden,  taken  on 
board  the  ships  of  war,  in  Newport  harbor. 

That  after  the  above  capture,  application  was  repeatedly 
made  in  behalf  of  the  petitioners  to  the  commanding  officer  at 
head-quarters,  upon  Rhode  Island,  for  a  permit  to  go  on  board 
Capt.  Wallace,  to  solicit  a  restoration  of  their  effects,  wdiich 
has  been  refused. 

Wherefore,  the  petitioners  prayed  this  Assembly,  that  they 
might  be  permitted  to  go  on  board  Capt.  Walhxce's  ship,  for 
the  purpose,  aforesaid  ;  whereupon,  this  Assembly  taking  the 
premises  into  consideration, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  resolved,  that  the  afore- 
said petitioners  may  have  liberty  to  go  on  board  of  Capt.  Wal- 
lace's ship,  under  the  care  and  direction  of  the  committee  here- 
tofore authorized  and  permitted  to  go  on  board  the  King's  ships 
of  war. 

Whereas,  the  town  of  Westerly,  preferred  a  petition  to  this 
Assembly,  representing  that  the  proportion  of  the  colony  taxes, 
assessed  in  the  year  1773  ;  and  also  for  the  year  1774,  upon 
said  town,  had  not  been  duly  paid  into  the  general  treasury 
by  the  collector  appointed  to  receive  the  same  ;  and  that  in 
consequence  thereof,  the  town  treasurer  of  said  Westerly  had 
been  committed  to  jail  in  the  county  of  Kings  county,  and 
given  bond  for  the  liberty  of  the  jail  house  and  yard  ;  and 
thereupon,  left  the  jail,  and  subjected  the  town  to  pay  thirty 
per  cent,  damages  ;  and  besought  this  Assembly  that  they 
would  take  the  premises  into  consideration^  and  that  upon  the 
town's  paying  into  the  general  treasury  the  deficiency  of  both 
taxes,  with  interest,  from  the  time  they  should  have  been  col- 
lected and  paid  into  the  general  treasury,  that  they  might  be 
excused  from  paying  the  thirty  per  cent,  damages  incurred  by 
law  ;   whereupon,  this  Assembly,  duly  considering,  the  same, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  upon  the  town  of  Westerly's 
paying  into  the  general  treasury  the  amount  of  the  said  town's 
proportion  of  said  two  taxes,  together  with  the  interest  upon 
the  same,  from  the  time  limited  by  this  Assembly  to  collect  the 


460  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

said  taxes,  the  town  bo   excused  from   paying  the  thirty  per 
cent,  damnges. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  town  council  of  the  town  of 
Newport  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  allowed  to  supply  Capt.  Wal- 
lace weekly,  with  two  thousand  pounds  weight  of  beef,  and  with 
beer,  &c.,  as  usual,  under  the  direction  of  the  commanding  of- 
ficer of  the  forces  stationed  upon  Rhode  Island. 

That  he  appoint  a  proper  person  to  provide  and  deliver  said 
provisions,  &c. 

That  not  any  member  of  either  House  of  Assembly  be  ap- 
pointed, or  suffered  to  go  on  board  any  or  either  of  the  ships 
of  war,  under  the  said  Wallace's  command,  on  any  occasion, 
whatsoever. 

That  the  aforesaid  supplies  be  delivered  to  Capt.  Wallace, 
upon  his  stipulating  that  the  ferry  boats,  wood  boats  and  mar- 
ket boats,  with  the  passengers  on  board,  pass  and  repass  to  and 
from  the  town  of  Newport,  with  the  common  and  usual  neces- 
saries of  life  on  board,  unmolested. 

And  that  Messrs.  Simon  Pease,  John  Malbone  and  George 
Sears  (if  he  will  serve,)  or  otherwise  John  Mawdfley,  Esq.,  be 
a  committee  to  go  on  board  of  Capt.  Wallace's  ship  on  any  ur- 
gent occasion. 

Whereas,  this  Assembly,  upon  complaint  and  information  by 
them  received,  did  order  Col.  Joseph  Wanton  to  appear  before 
them,  to  answer  respecting  his  conduct  ;  and  the  Assembly 
having  examined  into  the  same,  there  doth  not  appear  any 
cause  for  detaining  him  ;   wherefore, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  Joseph  Wanton  be 
now  dismissed  ;   and  he  is  now  dismissed,  accordingly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  minute  men  now  in  pay, 
be  relieved  by  an  equal  number  from  the  standing  troops,  in 
this  colony  ;  and  that  a  sufficient  number  of  them  be  ordered 
forward,  to  relieve  the  minute  men,  who  are  to  be  discharged 
within  one  week,  or  sooner,  if  they  are  so  relieved. 

Whereas,  Mrs.  Deborah  Dayton,  wife  of  Benedict  Dayton, 
of  Newport,  in  the  county  of  Newport,  cordwainer,  presented 


1770.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   FLANTATIONS.  461 

to  this  Ass-erably  her  petition,  setting  forth,  that  her  said  husband, 
Benedict  Dayton,  was,  on  his  passage  from  Newport  to  Updike's 
Newtown,  on  the  2d  day  of  January  hist  past,  taken  on  board 
the  Rose  man  of  war,  and  ever  since  that  time  detained  as  a 
prisoner. 

That  application  had  divers  times  been  made  to  Capt.  "Wal- 
lace, commander  of  said  ship,  to  release  her  said  husband, 
without  effect ;  and  besought  this  Assembly  to  exchange  with 
said  Wallace  some  person  who  was  a  prisoner  within  this 
colony,  for  her  said  husband  ;  whereupon,  this  Assembly  tak- 
ing the  same  into  consideration, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
committee  authorized  to  go  on  board  Capt.  Wallace,  by  this- 
Assembly,  be  empowered  to  exchange  George  Hamilton,  the 
prisoner  now  at  Warren,  for  the  said  Benedict  Dayton. 

And  to  permit  Joseph  Farrish  to  go  on  board  the  Rose,  or 
any  other  of  the  ships  of  war  ;  provided,  that  Capt.  Wallace 
will  release  the  wounded  prisoner  belonging  to  this  colony  j 
and  in  case  Capt.  Wallace  shall  refuse,  then  to  propose  ex- 
changing the  said  Farrish  for  Capt.  John  Duncan. 

Whereas,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Stewart,  wife  of  Gilbert  Stewart, 
late  of  Newport,  in  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  snuff-maker, 
preferred  her  petition  to  this  Assembly,  setting  forth  that  her 
said  husband  is  possessed  of  a  tract  of  land  in  the  township  of 
Newport,  in  Nova  Scotia,  under  improvement,  and  upon  which 
he  hath  some  stock. 

That  he  finding  it  impossible  to  maintain  his  family  in  the  said 
town  of  Newport,  in  this  colony,  did  some  time  last  summer  re- 
move to  his  said  farm,  where  he  now  is,  and  proposes  to  remain. 

And  that,  exclusive  of  the  impracticability  of  her  supporting 
herself  and  family  in  this  colony,  which  strongly  impels  her  to 
follow  her  said  husband,  she  is  very  desirous  of  joining  him, 
which  she  is  also  bound  in  duty  to  do,  if  possible. 

And  therefore  besought  this  Assembly  to  permit  the  sloop 
Nova  Scotia  Packet,  David  Ross,  master,  to  proceed  to  the 
said  township  of  Newport,  in  Nova  Scotia,  with  herself  and 
family  ;   she  being-  willing  to  give  the  amplest  security,  that 


4.62  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

nothing  but  the  ^Yearing  apparel  and  household  furniture  of  the 
family,  and  the  necessary  provisions  for  the  voyage,  shall  be 
carried  in  said  sloop  ;  the  Assembly  taking  the  same  into  con- 
sideration,— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  this  petition  be 
"•ranted  ;  and  that  the  sloop,  aforesaid,  be  permitted  to  sail 
under  the  inspection  of  Messrs.  John  Collins  and  George  SearSy 
of  Newport,  in  this  colony,  or  either  of  them. 

Whereas,  Col.  Thomas  Church  exhibited  an  account  to  this 
Assembly,  wherein  he  had  debited  himself  to  the  colony  for  the 
amount  of  sundry  guns  which  were  turned  into  the  Continental 
store  at  Cambridge  ;   which  account  being  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be  allowed  ;  and  that 
the  amount  thereof,  being  £G13  lOs.  lawful  money,  be  paid  by 
the  said  Col.  Tiiomas  Church,  into  the  general  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Capt.  John  Warren,  and  Capt. 
Joshua  Ingraham,  be  permitted  to  go  on  board  the  Rose  man 
of  war,  or  any  other  of  the  King's  ships,  under  the  inspection 
of  the  committee  appointed  to  go  on  board  said  ships,  in  order 
to  solicit  compensation  for  damages  they  have  suslained  by 
them. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  James  Arnold,  Jr.,  be  ap- 
pointed to  build,  at  the  expense  of  the  colony,  a  watch  house, 
in  a  convenient  place,  upon  Cranston  Neck,  for  the  Avatch  ap- 
pointed upon  said  Neck  ;  and  that  the  same  be  twelve  feet  in 
length,  and  eight  in  breadth. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  one  of  the  eighteen-pound 
cannon,  in  the  battery,  at  Providence,  with  the  carriage  and 
stores  belonging  to  it,  be  sent  to  Bristol,  for  the  defence  of 
that  place  ;  and  that  the  same  be  carried  in  one  of  the  row 
gallies. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Aaron  Lopez  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly,  an 
account  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  four  half  barrels  of 
gunpowder,  delivered  for  the  use  of  the  colony,  and  one  whale- 
boat  ;   which  said  account  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;   and  that  the  amount  thereof,  being  £22  16s.,  lawful 


1776.]         AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  463 

money,  be  paid  the  said  Aaron  Lopez,  out  of  the  general 
treasury. 

It  is  A^oted  and  resolved,  that  for  the  future,  the  committees 
of  inspection,  or  any  one  member  thereof,  for  the  several  towns 
adjoining  the  sh'^res  of  this  colony,  be,  and  they  are  hereby, 
empowered  to  inspect  any  of  the  freight  boats,  wood  boats  and 
ferry  boats,  when  about  to  pass  from  one  part  of  the  colony  to 
another,  whereby  they  may  be  in  danger  of  being  brought  too 
by  any  of  the  ministerial  ships  of  war. 

And  if  any  person  shall  be  on  board  such  boat,  with  intent 
to  pass  over  the  bays,  rivers  or  harbors,  who  is  suspected  of 
being  unfriendly  to  the  common  cause  of  America,  such  com-, 
mittee,  or  any  one  member  belonging  thereto,  shall  have  power 
to  prevent  such  persons  passing  in  such  boat,  unless  they  have 
a  pass  from  His  Honor  the  Governor,  the  Deputy  Governor,  or 
the  commander  in  chief  upon  some  station  within  this  colony. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Thomas 
Freebody,  John  Collins,  George  Sears  and  William  Ellery,  bo 
a  committee  of  inspection,  for  the  purpose  aforesaid,  for  the 
town  of  Newport. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  within  one  week  from  the 
rising  of  this  Assembly,  the  minute  men  in  the  colony  be  dis- 
missed from  that  service,  and  be  embodied  in  the  militia,  as 
heretofore. 

That  on  any  future  alarm,  notice  or  warning  being  given  to 
the  militia,  they  forthwith  repair,  agreeably  to  orders  given, 
to  the  place  threatened  to  be  invaded,  in  order  to  repel  the 
€nemy. 

That  every  one  of  the  militia  appearing  properly  accoutred, 
with  a  good  fire-lock,  bayonet,  cartridge-box,  &c.,  subject  to 
the  control  of  his  commanding  officer,  shall  be  entitled  to  re- 
ceive pay. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  pay  of  the  militia, 
when  called  upon  actual  duty,  shall  be  as  follows  : 

Each  captain,  five  shillings  ;  each  lieutenant,  four  shillings  ; 
each  ensign,  two  shillings  and  sixpence  ;  each  sergeant,  two 
shillings   and  sixpence  ;    each  and  every  corporal,   drummei,'' 


464  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLANI>  1776. 

and  fifer,  two  shillings  and  threepence  ;  and  each  private  sol- 
dier, two  shillings  ;  who  shall  appear  as  aforesaid,  for  each  and 
every  day  they  shall  continue  in  service. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, Messrs.  ^Villiam  EUery,  John  Mathewson,  Henry  Mar- 
chant  and  Gideon  Mumford,  be  a  committee,  to  take  into  con- 
sideration the  present  state  of  this  colony,  and  the  necessary- 
means  to  be  pursued  for  the  defence  thereof. 

That  they  direct  the  commanding  officer  of  the  colony's  brig- 
ade where  to  station  the  troops  under  his  command. 

That  the  committee,  aforesaid,  together  with  the  commander 
in  chief  of  the  colony's  brigade,  cause  fortifications  as  soon  as 
possible  to  be  erected  upon  Rhode  Island  and  at.  Bristol,  suffi- 
cient to  command  and  keep  open  a  communication  at  Bristol 
Ferry. 

And  that  the  troops  stationed  at  Bristol,  upon  Rhode  Island, 
or  so  many  of  them  as  can  be  spared,  be  employed  in  the  said 
service. 

^Vhereas,  Mr.  Edward  Hull  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly  an 
account  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  beef,  hides  and 
tallow,  brought  from  New  Shoreham  ;  which  being  duly  ex- 
amined,— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be  allowed  ;  and  that 
the  balance  thereof,  being  £50  7^.  2J.,  lawful  money,  be  paid 
to  said  Edward  Hull,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  Nicholas  Brown  and  Company  presented 
unto  this  Assembly,  a  petition,  setting  forth  that  they  had 
heretofore  agreed  to  make  for  the  colony  sixty  pieces  of  heavy 
cannon  for  <£o5,  lawful  money,  per  ton. 

That  at  the  time  of  making  the  contract,  they  were  quite 
unacquainted  with  the  price  of  cannon  in  England,  which  they 
since  find,  by  Muller's  treatise  on  artillery,  is  £30,  per  ton. 

That  in  making  the  necessary  preparations,  and  hiring  the 
proper  workmen,  they  find  the  pay  of  the  laborers,  &c.,  to  be 
advanced  near  one-half  more  than  it  was  when  they  made  the 
^foresaid  contract. 

They  likewise  find  by  said  treatise,  that  the  lighter  cannon 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  465 

made  upon  the  new  construction,  are  much  better  than  the  old 
heavy  pieces  ;  that  the  labor  necessary  to  be  used  in  making 
the  light  cannon,  is  nearly  the  same  as  that  bestowed  upon  the 
heavy  pieces. 

That  Ambrose  Page,  Esq.,  one  of  the  gentlemen  appointed 
by  the  Assembly  to  give  the  dimensions  of  the  cannon,  &c., 
prelers  the  lighter  pieces,  as  being  best  caculated  to  answer  the 
end  proposed;  that  they  will  cost  less  by  $1,400,  than  if 
made  upon  the  plan  proposed  upon  the  original  contract ;  and 
prayed  this  Assembly  to  take  the  premises  into  consideration  ; 
wherefore — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Ambrose  Page,  John  Mathew- 
son  and  Ebenezer  Thompson,  Esqs.,  be  a  committee  to  con- 
sider of  the  contents  of  the  said  petition,  and  to  agree  with  the 
petitioners  for  casting  the  said  cannon  upon  the  best  terms  they 
can. 

Whereas,  Messrs,  Rowland  Robinson  and  Nathan  Gardner 
exhibited  unto  this  Assembly,  an  account  charged  against  the 
colony,  for  two  thousand  six  hundred  and  fifty-nine  pounds  and 
an  half  of  beef,  hides  and  tallow,  brought  from  New  Shoreham  ; 
which  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  amount  thereof,  being 
£26  14s.  lid.,  be  allowed  ;  and  that  the  aforesaid  sum  be 
paid  to  the  said  Rowland  Robinson  and  Nathan  Gardner,  out 
of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  William  Potter,  Esq.,  exhibited  unto  this  As- 
sembly, an  account  of  the  sales  of  five  hundred  and  nineteen 
sheep,  and  the  charges  thereon,  which  were  received  from  New 
Shoreham,  and  by  him,  with  the  rest  of  the  committee  ap- 
pointed, sold  to  divers  persons ;  which  account  being  duly 
examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  the  balance,  thereof,  being  £S2  Id.,  be 
paid  by  the  said  William  Potter,  into  the  general  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  bond  given  to  the  general 
treasurer  by  the  owners  of  the  sloop  Diana,  Rufus  Potter,  mas- 
ter, upon  her  sailing  on  her  last  voyage,  be  delivered  up. 

VOL.  VII.         59 


466  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Joseph  Brown,  John 
Smith,  Cromel  Chikl,  Thomas  Corey  and  Edward  Church,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  to  procure  carriages  to  be 
made  for  the  sixty  cannon  ordered  to  be  purchased  for  the 
colony,  as  soon  as  possible. 

That  the  said  committee  agree  among  themselves  what  part 
each  of  them  will  undertake  ;  and  that  the  said  Joseph  Brown 
give  the  dimensions  of,  and  directions  for,  making  the  said 
carriages. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  John  Ilyers  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  chosen  and  appointed  captain  of  the  Washington 
row-galley,  in  the  room  of  Captain  Oliver  Gardner,  who  has 
resigned. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Joseph  Brown,  Daniel 
Tillinghast  and  Thomas  Greene,  or  any  two  of  them,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  audit  all  the  ac- 
counts of  the  workmen,  employed  in  making  carriages  for  the 
cannon  brought  from  Newport  to  Providence. 

That  they  be  empowered  to  draw  upon  the  general  treasurer 
for  the  sums  they  shall  find  due  ;  and  that  report  be  made  to 
this  Assembly  at  the  next  session. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  John  Jenckes  be,  and  he 
is  hereby,  appointed  and  empowered  to  purchase,  for  the  use 
of  the  colony,  all  the  gunpowder  and  other  merchandize  im- 
ported in  the  sloop  Diana,  which  is  wanted  for  their  use  ;  and 
that  he  draw  money  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  pay  for  the 
same. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  John  Cook,  Esq,,  and  Capt. 
James  Potter  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee 
to  lease  out  the  estates  seized  for  the  use  of  the  colony,  by 
Eseck  Hopkins,  Esq.,  in  the  county  of  Newport;  William  Pot- 
ter and  Ezekiel  Gardner,  Esqs.,,  for  such  like  estates,  in  Kings 
county  ;  and  James  Angell,  Esq.,  for  estates  under  the  like 
circumstances,  in  the  county  of  Providence. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Job  Gardner,  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly  an 
account,  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  victualling  and 
supplying  the  minute  men  and  militia,  that  watched  the  shores, 


177G.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  467 

with  fire  wood  and  house-room  ;  and  the  said  account  being 
duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is^ 
allowed;  and  that  £12  45.  lOd.,  being  the  amount  thereof,  be 
paid  to  the  said  Job  Gardner,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  Ihat  the  committee  heretofore  ap- 
pointed for  removing  the  stock  and  hay  from  the  island  of  Co^ 
nanicut,  or  any  two  of  them,  do  forthwith  proceed  to  remove 
the  hay  belonging  to  Isaac  Rowland,  necessary  for  the  support 
of  his  stock,  which  hath  been  already  removed. 

That  they  also  remove  the  hay  and  stock  of  any  other  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  said  island,  who  are  willing  to  have  the  same 
removed  off. 

That  the  commanding  officer  on  said  island,  do  assist  said 
committee  with  such  a  number  of  men,  under  the  command  of 
a  commissioned  officer,  as  they  shall  think  necessary  for  said 
service  ;  and  that  said  committee  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  em- 
powered to  receive  out  of  the  general  treasury  the  sum  of  £50, 
to  be  accounted  for  by  them  when  said  business  is  completed. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  John  Jenckes  and  John 
Waterman  bcj  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to 
erect  a  powder  mill,  in  the  county  of  Providence,  at  the  charge 
of  the  colony. 

Whereas,  Brigadier  General  William  West,  hath,  since  his 
residence  at  head-quarters,  in  Middletown,  taken  up  divers 
persons,  upon  suspicion  of  their  conducting  themselves  in  a 
manner  inimical  to  the  liberties  and  privileges  for  which  we 
are  now  strenuously  contending ;  which  persons  have  since 
been  examined  before  this  House,  and  upon  a  full  hearing, 
dismissed  ;  — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  it  is  nevertheless  the  opinion 
of  this  Assembly,  that  the  said  General  West  hath  acted  therein 
as  an  officer  having  the  love  of  his  country  at  heart ;  and  that 
this  Assembly  will  ever  approve  the  conduct  of  their  military 
commanders,  in  exerting  themselves  for  the  securing  and 
bringing  to  trial  all  persons  conducting  in  a  suspicious  manner, 


468  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

as  aforesaid  ;  at  the  same  time  carefully  observing  not  to  en- 
croach upon,  infringe  or  supersede  the  civil  authority,  by  ex- 
ertions of  the  military. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Joseph  Aplin  was  brought  before  this  Assem- 
bly, to  answer  for  his  conduct ;   and  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  Joseph  Aplin  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  dismissed. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor^ 
Messrs.  John  Jenckes  and  Joshua  Babcock,  or  either  of  them, 
be  a  committee,  to  purchase,  at  the  expense  and  for  the  use  of 
the  colony,  all  the  gunpowder,  arras  and  military  stores,  that 
they  shall  be  able  to  procure,  and  think  necessary. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Benjamin  Brenton  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  dismissed  from  the  complaint  made  against  him 
to  this  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  executions,  for  the  staying 
of  which,  petitions  are  now  pending  before  this  Assembly^  be 
stayed  until  the  said  petitions  be  heard. 

God  save  the  King. 

Gen.  William  West  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island, 

Headquarters,  Middletown,  2(ith  February,  17  76. 

Honored  Sir : — A  dispute  hath  arisen  between  Col.  Richmond  and  Col.  Babcock^ 
concerning  their  rank  in  the  brigade. 

Col.  Richmond  says  he  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  first  regiment,  and  was  second 
in  command  under  Gen.  Hopkins  ;  and  that  his  rank  is  undoubtedly  before  Col. 
Babcock. 

Col.  Babcock,  on  the  contrary,  says  he  had  a  colonel's  commission  many  years 
ago,  in  the  last  war;  and  for  that  reason,  and  according  to  the  established  rules  in 
all  camps,  his  rank  is  certainly  preferable  to  that  of  Col.  Richmond. 

As  it  is  my  desire  that  every  officer  in  the  brigade  should  have  his  proper  rankj 
according  to  the  rules  of  an  army,  hope  the  General  Assembly,  will  fully  explain  and 
settle  that  matter  bejond  all  controversy,  as  I  don't  choose  to  Intermeddle  in  those 
matters,  myself 

I  have  taken  up  one  Nathaniel  Case,  of  Exeter,  for  selling  cider  to  the  ministerial 
fleet ;  and  after  examining  him,  I  dismissed  him,  upon  his  parole,  to  appear  before 
the  General  Assembly,  at  the  next  session  ;  a  copy  of  which,  and  of  his  examination, 
I  now  send  you,  enclosed ;  also,  some  further  evidence  concerning  Jos.  Aplin  and 
Benj.  Brenton ;  and  Jos.  Allen's  evidence,  of  Newport,  which  I  have  taken  this 
day,  respecting  Col.  Jos.  Wanton. 


17?6.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  4G9 

i  likewise  send  you  the  state  of  all  the  forces  stationed  on  this  island  and  James- 
town ;  together  with  an  account  of  the  warlike  stof  es  we  have  had  here,  since  I  have 
had  the  command  ;  also  the  quantity  we  have  at  present. 
I  am,  with  respect, 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

WILLIA^l  WEST, 
To  the  Honorable  Nicholas  Cooke,  Esq. 


Proceedings  rf  the  General  Assembly^  held  for  the  Colony  oj 
Rhode  Island  dnd  Providence  Plantations,  at  East  Grecn- 
luich,  on  Monday,  the  ISth  day  of  March,  1776. 

The  Hon.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Bradford,  Deputy  Governor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  there  be  immediately  raised  in 
Newport,  a  company  of  men,  not  exceeding  twenty-five,  in- 
cluding officers,  by  the  name  of  the  Watch  Company. 

That  the  following  persons  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  chosen 
to  officer  said  companyj  to  wit : 

Philip  Moss,  captain  ;  Augustus  Newman,  lieutenant ;  and 
Joseph  Crandel,  ensign. 

That  they  be  commissioned  by  His  Honor  the  Governor,  and 
directly  proceed  to  enlist  soldiers  to  fill  up  said  company. 

That  the  said  company  be  under  the  command  of  the  com- 
mander in  chief  of  the  Ehode  Island  brigade  ;  and  that  their 
pay  be,  and  hereby  is,  established  in  the  following  manner : 

The  captain,  five  shillings  ;  the  lieutenant,  four  shillings  ; 
the  ensign,  three  shillings  ;  the  non-commissioned  officers  and 
private  soldiers,  two  shillings,  for  each  and  every  day  they 
shall  be  employed  in  said  service,  by  the  colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  persons  who  have  any  just 
demands  against  the  persons  whose  estates  are  seized  for  the 
colony's  use,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  directed  to  exhibit  their 
several  claims  unto  the  secretary,  within  six  months  after  the 
rising  of  this  Assembly. 


470  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  tlie  notes  due  from  this 
colony,  carrying  interest,  be  brought  into  the  general  treasury, 
to  be  exchanged,  within  one  month  from  and  after  the  rising 
of  this  Assembly  :  and  that  the  interest  on  said  notes  cease 
after  said  month  expires. 

AVhereas,  Jabez  Champlin,  Esq.,  sheriff  of  the  county  of 
Newport,  was  ordered  and  directed  by  this  Assembly  to  take 
possession  of  the  charter,  &c.,  in  the  possession  of  Joseph 
Wanton,  Esq.,  late  Governor  of  this  colony,  and  deliver  the 
same  to  the  committee,  to  be  delivered  to  His  Honor  the  pres- 
ent Governor  ;    and  thereupon  Inade  the  following  report : 

Report  of  the  Sheriff  of  the  Count ij  of  Newport,  to  the  General 
Assembly,  relative  to  certain  Documents  in  the  possession  of 
Joseph  Wanton,  belonging  to  the  Colony. 

Newport,  Rhode  Island,  March  17,  1776. 

By  virtue  of  a  vote  of  the  Honorable  General  Assembly,  of  the  colony,  aforesaid, 
at  their  session,  held  at  East  Greenwich,  on  the  27th  day  of' February  past,  deliv- 
ered unto  me  by  Mr.  James  Cahoone,  of  Newport,  aforesaid,  merchant,  I  proceeded 
with  Daniel  W.  Hoockey  and  William  Davis,  two  of  my  deputies,  without  delay,  unto 
the  house  of  the  Honorable  Joseph  Wanton,  Esq.,  late  Governor  of  the  colony,  afore- 
said ;  and  in  his  abseme  took  and  carried  away  from  and  out  of  said  house,  a  chest 
Jn  which  were,  and  are,  deposited  the  charter  of  the  colony,  aforesaid  ;  Fone's  Book 
of  llecords,  a  large  number  of  bundles  of  papers,  seventeen  dies  tor  counterfeiting 
dollars  and  half  Johannes,  an  instrument  for  edge-milling,  and  other  implements  for 
counterfeiting ;  and  left  a  copy  of  the  same  vote  at  the  house  of  the  Honorable  Jo- 
seph Wanton,  Esq.,  aforesaid,  and  an  account  of  what  I  had  taken  from  thence. 

And  have  this  day,  in  pursuance  of  the  said  vote  or  act,  delivered  the  same  chest, 
charter,  Fone's  Book  of  Records,  bundles  of  papers,  dies  for  counterfeiting  dollars 
and  half  Johannes,  instruments  for  edge-milling,  and  other  implements  fbr  counter- 
feiting, as  aforesaid,  unto  Christopher  Lippitt,  Esq.  and  Joseph  Anthony,  gentleman, 
two  of  a  committee  appointed  by  the  Honorable  the  General  Assembly,  aforesaid,  to 
receive  the  same.  JABEZ  CHAMPLIN,  Sheriff. 

And  the  aforesaid  premises  being  duly  examined,-— 
It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  aforesaid  report  be,  and  it 
is  hereby,  accepted. 

Whereas,  the  following  memorial  was  laid  before  this  As- 
sembly, by  the  committee  appointed  to  prepare  the  same  : — 


1776.1  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  471 


Memorial  of  the   General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island  to  General 
Washington. 

The  General  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &e.,  acknowledge  with  grati- 
tude the  timely  notice  you  have  been  pleased  to  give  them,  of  the  late  movement  of  the 
ministerial  troops ;  the  necessary  orders  have,  in  consequence  thereof,  been  given  to 
the  militia  of  this  colony,  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness,  should  any  attack  or  lodg- 
ment be  made  here  by  said  troops. 

But  we  must  inform  Your  Excellency,  that  the  great  number  of  troops  sent  out  of 
this  colony,  has  considerably  lessened  our  numbers ;  that  the  troops  raised  and  sta- 
tioned within  this  colony,  hath  made  it  necessary  for  us  to  take  the  arms  out  of  the 
hands  of  a  great  part  of  the  militia,  which  has  made  them  greatly  deficient  in  arms. 
The  singular  situation  of  this  colony  will,  we  hope,  excite  Your  Excellency's  imme- 
diate attention.  Rhode  Island,  and  the  many  other  islands  in  our  bays  and  rivers, 
with  the  extensive  sea  coast,  render  it  very  difficult  to  defend  ourselves  against  the 
present  ministerial  forces. 

What  our  situation  must  be,  if  a  large  armed  force  should  make  a  landing  upon 
Rhode  Island,  or  any  other  part  of  the  colony.  Your  Excellency  may  as  easily  sug- 
gest as  we  can  describe. 

It  will,  we  are  sure,  be  Your  Excellency's  great  concern  to  defend  every  part  of 
the  continent,  as  far  as  possible. 

Should  Your  Excellency  see  fit  to  order  any  part  of  the  forces  from  the  vicinity  of 
Boston  to  any  of  the  Southern  colonies,  we  could  wish  Your  Excellency  would  order 
their  march  through  this  colony  by  the  sea  shore,  that  we  might  have  the  chance  of 
their  being  present,  should  the  colony  be  immediately  invaded  ;  and  whether  it  may 
not  be  necessary  that  a  considerable  force  should  be  immediately  stationed  here, 
until  the  intention  of  the  enemy  can  be  known,  we  submit  to  Your  Excellency. 

We  are  extremely  solicitous  for  all  the  assistance  Your  Excellency  can  afford» 
consistent  with  the  general  good,  and  doubt  not  but  the  utmost  attention  will  be 
paid  by  Your  Excellency  to  our  peculiar  distressed  and  dangerous. 

Which  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
approved ;  and  that  Ilis  Honor  the  Governor  be  requested  to 
sign  a  copy  thereof,  in  behalf  of  this  colony,  and  forward  the 
same  immediately  to  His  Excellency  General  Washington. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Henry  Marchant,  Thomas 
Greene  and  William  Ellery,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby, 
appointed  to  wait  upon  His  Excellency  General  Washington, 
with  the  memorial  of  this  Assembly. 

That  they  give  the  best  information  in  their  power,  of  the 
state  of  this  colony  to  His  Excellency,  or  in  his  absence,  to  the 
commander  in  chief  for  the  time  being,  and  use  the  most  press- 


472  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

ing  instances  for  stationing  a  body  of  troops  from  the  Conti- 
nental army  in  this  colony,  until  the  destination  of  the  army, 
which  hath  lately  been  obliged  to  evacuate  Boston,  shall  be  as- 
certained ;  and  that  they  pray  the  general  to  recommend  to 
the  Honorable  Continental  Congress  the  placing  such  a  force  in 
this  colony,  as  shall  appear  necessary  for  the  defence  thereof. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  several  officers  appointed 
to  the  companies  of  artillery,  pursuant  to  an  act  of  the  General 
Assembly,  passed  at  the  January  session  last,  establishing  ar- 
tillery companies  in  several  towns  in  this  colony,  be  commis- 
sioned by  His  Honor  the  Governor,  in  the  usual  manner  ;  and 
that  their  commissions  bear  date  at  the  time  of  their  ap- 
pointment. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Jonathan  Peck  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly 
two  accounts,  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  supplying 
the  people  who  appeared  upon  the  alarms  at  Bristol,  upon  the 
cannonading  that  town,  and  burning  the  houses  upon  Pru- 
dence ;   and  the  said  accounts  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  are, 
allowed  ;  and  that  £7  45.  id.,  lawful  money,  being  the  amount 
thereof,  be  paid  unto  the  said  Jonathan  Peck,  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  safety  be, 
and  they  are  hereby,  directed  to  allov>^  all  such  billeting  for  sol- 
diers, as  shall  appear  to  them  just  and  right,  by  proper  certifi- 
cates from  the  officer  or  officers  commanding  them. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Capt.  Robert  Elliot  and  Col. 
Jesse  Champlin,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  commit- 
tee to  proceed  to  Stonington,  to  purchase,  for  the  use  of  the 
colony,  the  powder,  arms,  flints,  blankets  and  all  warlike 
stores,  which  Messrs.  Clark  and  Nightingale  have  to  dispose 
of,  and  cause  the  same  to  be  lodged  in  such  places  as  this  As- 
sembly shall  appoint  (if  they  can  purchase  the  same),  and  that 
they  give  a  draft  upon  the  general  treasury,  for  the  payment, 
thereof. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  troops  now  quartered  at 
Mr.  George  Irish's  house,  be  immediately  removed  therefrom  ; 


177G.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  473 

that  all  the  troops  quartered  at,  and  in,  private  house ^>,  be 
also  removed,  as  soon  as  possible;  saving  those  stationed  at  the 
Dudley  House  and  Straw  Castle,  who  are  to  remain  until  fur- 
ther orders  from  this  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  write  to  Ilis  Excellency  Gen. 
Washington,  soliciting  him  for  six  seamen  taken  from  the  ene- 
my, and  now  prisoners,  to  be  exchanged  for  so  many  inhabit- 
ants of  this  colony,  who  are  detained  on  board  the  King's  ship, 
in  this  colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  two  Houses  will,  in  a  grand 
committee,  inquire  into  the  state  of  the  troops  stationed  upon 
Rhode  Island,  and  the  conduct  of  Henry  Babcock,  Esq., 
colonel-commandant  of  the  colony  brigade. 

That  Col.  Jonathan  Arnold,  James  Arnold,  Jr.,  Thomas 
Wells,  Jr.,  Cromel  Child  and  John  Jepson,  Esqs.,  or  the  ma- 
jor part  of  them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  commit- 
tee to  take  the  evidences  and  informations  before  this  Assem- 
bly, respecting  the  conduct  of  Henry  Babcock,  Esq.,  as  colonel- 
commandant  of  the  colony's  brigade  ;  and  from  thence  draw 
up  the  several  articles  laid  to  his  charge  ;  and  that  they 
make  report  to  this  Assembly  as  soon  as  may  be. 

Whereas,  Mrs.  Deborah  Dayton,  preferred  a  petition  to  this 
Assembly,  setting  forth  that  Capt.  AVallace  had  refused  to 
exchange  her  husband,  Benedict  Dayton,  for  the  wounded 
prisoner  taken  at  Prudence  ;  and  prayed  that  if  the  six  sea- 
men which  this  Assembly  have  petitioned  His  Excellency  Gen. 
Washington  for,  to  exchange  for  the  American  prisoners  on 
board  the  ministerial  fleet,  now  in  Newport  harbor,  could  not  be 
obtained,  that  one  of  the  prisoners  now  confined  in  Provi- 
dence jail,  might  be  delivered  up  inexohange  for  her  said  hus- 
band ; — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor 
be  requested  to  send  by  express  to  Gen.  Washington  his  appli- 
cation for  six  seamen  ;  that  in  ease  one  of  said  seamen  cannot 
be  had,  to  exchange  for  said  Dayton,  when  the  brigantine  on 
board  of  which  he  is,  shall  return  from  her  cruise,  then  one  of 
VOL.  vii.  60 


474  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

the  prisoners  in  Providence  jail,  shall  be  exchanged  for  him  ; 
and  that  Ilis  Honor  the  Governor  be  requested  to  direct  which 
of  said  prisoners  shall  be  exchanged. 

Whereas,  Mr.  John  Banister  represented  unto  this  Assem- 
bly, that  the  committee  which  were  heretofore  appointed  to 
examine  and  estimate  the  damages  he  had  sustained  by  means 
of  the  soldiers  being  quartered  in  his  house,  had  not  been  able 
to  attend  said  business  ;  and  prayed  that  this  Assembly  would 
take  the  premises  into  consideration,  and  appoint  such  other 
committee  in  the  town  of  Newport,  or  upon  the  island  of  Rhode 
Island,  as  will  settle  the  same  ;   wherefore — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  John  G.  Wanton,  Wil- 
liam Ellery  and  Christopher  Lippitt  be,  and  they  or  the  major 
part  of  them,  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  take  into 
consideration  the  matter  set  forth  in  said  petition,  respecting 
the  damages,  until  the  time  of  said  soldiers  being  removed  ; 
and  that  such  buildings  as  have  been  erected  on  said  Banister's 
farm,  by  the  colony,  be  removed. 

Whereas,  the  committee,  for  signing  the  lawful  money  bills 
of  credit,  ordered  by  this  Assembly,  at  their  session,  holden  in 
Providence  on  the  second  Monday  in  January  last  past,  to  be 
emitted,  made  the  following  report,  viz.  : 

Report. 

To  the  Honorable  the  General  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Rhode 
Island,  &c.,  to  be  holden  at  East  Greenwich,  in  and  for  the 
said  colony,  on  the  third  Monday  in  March,  A.  D.  1776. 
INIay  it  please  Your  Honors  : — In  pursuance  of  an  act  passed 
by  the  General  Assembly,  at  the   session  held  at  Providence, 
on   the   second   Monday  in  January   last   past,   for   emitting 
£40,000,  lawful  money,  in  bills  of  credit,  we,  the  subscribers, 
have  signed  the  said  bills,  which  are  of  the  following  denomi- 
nations to  wit : 

3,000,  of  sixty  shillings  each,  is   -  -  -£9,000 

4,000,  "  forty        '«  "    .  .  .  8,000 

6,000,  "  thirty       ^^  <c         _  _  _     g^oOO 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  475 

6,000,  of  twenty  shillings  each,  is        -  -        £6,000 


6,000,  "  ten 
6,000,  "  five 
6,000,  "  four 
7,500,  "  three 
5,000,  "  two 
6,000,  "  one 


3,000 
1,500 
1,200 
1,125 
500 
300 


6,000,  "  ninepence  "         -  .  -        225 

6,000,  "  sixpence  "  -  -  -  150 


i;4o,ooo 

Which  said  bills,  amounting  to  £40,000,  we  have  delivered 
to  the  general  treasurer,  of  whom  we  have  taken  a  receipt  in 
the  eighth  book  of  the  Colony  Records,  in  the  secretary's  office  ; 
in  which  book,  we  have  also  registered  an  exact  account  of 
signing  the  same. 

JOHN  COLE,  JOSEPH  CLARKE, 

JOHN  G.  WANTON,         JOHN  DEXTER, 
WELCOME  ARNOLD,      JAMES  CONGDON,  3d. 

The  colony  to  Joseph  Clarke,  John  Cole,  John  Dexter, 
John  G.  Wanton,  Thomas  Greene,  Welcome  Arnold 
and  James  Congdon,  3d,  _  _  .        Dr. 

For  our  services  in  signing  said   bills,  at  one-quarter 

per  cent.  .  _  -  -  _    £100 

Which  aforesaid  premises  being  duly  examined, — 
It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  aforesaid  report  be,  and 
hereby  is,  accepted  ;  that  the  aforesaid  account  be,  and  hereby 
is,  allowed  ;  and  that  the  amount  thereof,  being  £100,  lawful 
money,  be  paid  unto  the  said  Joseph  Clarke,  John  Cole,  John 
Dexter,  John  G.  Wanton,  Thomas  Greene,  Welcome  Arnold 
and  James  Congdon,  3d,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  Isaac  Cooper,  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that 
he  took  a  quantity  of  strong  beerj  which  was  in  the  possession 
of  Jabez  Champlin,  belonging  to  the  colony. 


476  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

That  he  was  therefor  justly  sentenced  by  the  Honorable  Su- 
perior Court  to  pay  to  the  colony  the  sum  of  £15  2.?.,  lawful 
money,  as  a  two-fold  value  of  said  beer. 

That  he  is  unable  to  pay  said  sum,  and  hath  a  numerous 
fiimily  to  support,  who  depend  upon  his  daily  labor ;  and 
thereupon,  besought  this  Assembly  to  remit  said  sum  ;  where- 
fore, this  Assembly,  taking  the  premises  into  consideration, — 
Do  vote  and  resolve,  that  the  prayer  of  said  petition  be 
granted  ;  and  that  upon  the  said  petioner's  paying  cost  of 
court  and  imprisonment,  he  be,  and  hereby  is,  discharged. 

Whereas,  Joseph  AVhaley,  of  South  Kingstown,  in  Kings 
county,  preferred  a  petition  unto  this  Assembly,  setting  forth, 
that  he  being  a  soldier  in  Capt.  Abial  Brown's  company  of 
minute  men,  stationed  upon  the  island  of  Jamestown,  he  was, 
on  the  morning  of  the  10th  day  of  December,  1775,  captivated 
by  Capt.  Wallace's  company,  and  sent  in  one  of  the  tenders  to 
Boston,  where  he  remained  a  prisoner  a  long  time  ;  that  he 
was  stripped  of  his  most  valuable  clothing. 

Wherefore,  he  besought  this  Assembly  to  take  the  premises 
into  consideration,  and  grant  him  an  order  for  his  wngcs,  dur- 
ing his  captivity  ;    v,hich  premises  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  upon  the  petitioner's  producing 
a  certificate  from  his  commanding  officer,  that  he  has  not  re- 
ceived any  pay  for  the  time,  aforesaid,  that  he  be,  and  hereby 
is,  allowed  wages  from  the  time  of  his  captivity,  until  the  22d 
day  of  March,  A.  D.  177C. 

Both  houses  being  resolved  into  a  grand  committee,  made 
choice  of  the  following  officers,  to  wit : 

Samuel  Thomas,  Jr.,  captain,  of  the  third  company  of  militia, 
in  the  town  of  North  Kingstown,  in  the  room  of  Joseph  Case, 
who  refuses. 

John  Brown,  Jr.,  lieutenant;  and  Joshua  Vaughan,  Jr., 
ensign,  of  the  same  company. 

Samuel  Vial,  first  lieutenant ;  Isaac  Tyler,  second  lieuten- 
ant ;   and  Joseph  Morin,  master  of  the  row-galley  Spitfire. 

Both  houses  in  a  grand  committee  proceeded  to  inquire  into 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  477 

the  conduct  of  Col.  Henry  Babcock  ;  and  having  fully  heard 
many  -witnesses  respecting  the  same,  and  duly  considered 
thereof, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said 
Henry  Babcock  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  continued  in  his  command. 

An  Act  for  purchasing  two  thousand  arms  for  the  colony,  &c. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  two  thousand  stand  of  good 
fire-arms,  with  bayonets,  iron  ramrods  and  cartouch  boxes,  be 
purchased  for  the  use  of  the  colony,  which  shall  be  stamped 
with  the  colony's  arms,  and  the  letters  C.  R.,  and  distributed 
to  each  town,  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  polls,  upon  the 
alarm  list  therein  ;  and  that  the  expense  of  procuring  and  fur-^ 
nishing  the  same,  be  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury  ;  and 
that  the  committee  for  purchasing  the  same,  or  cither  of  them, 
are  empowered  to  draw  moneys  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to 
pay  for  such  arms,  as  they  shall  receive  them  in. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
whenever  the  arms  aforesaid,  are  collected  by  the  committee, 
aforesaid,  and  ready  to  be  distributed  to  the  severa  towns,  as 
aforesaid,  each  town  shall  be  notified  thereof,  and  appoint  some 
proper  person  or  persons  to  receive  and  take  the  proper  care  of 
them,  and  see  that  they  are  constantly  in  order,  and  fit  for  ser- 
vice ;  and  at  the  time  of  receiving  such  arms,  &c.,  each  town 
shall  give  security  to  the  general  treasurer  of  the  colony,  to 
the  full  value  of  the  arms  and  accoutrements  so  delivered,  to 
return  the  same  in  good  order  to  the  colony,  when  demanded, 
or  make  good  all  deficiencies,  in  money. 

And  whereas,  several  towns  in  this  colony,  may  have  sup- 
plied, or  made  provision  to  supply,  themselves  with  their  full 
proportion  of  arms  and  accoutrements,  as  abovesaid, — 

Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  upon 
producing  the  same,  to  the  satisfaction  of  said  committee,  such 
town  or  towns,  shall  have  from  the  said  committee,  an  order 
upon  the  general  treasury  for  the  amount  of  all  such  fire-arms 
and  accoutrements,  accounting  the  value  thereof,  to  be  the  prime 


478  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

cost,  and  not  exceeding  £3  ISs.,  for   each  fire-arm^  bayonet, 
ramrod  and  cartouch  box. 

And  that  all  such  arms  shall  remain  in  the  town  so  providing 
them,  until  the  whole  number  to  be  supplied  for  the  colony's 
use,  be  completed  ;  unless  occasionally,  and  for  some  particu- 
lar emergency,  it  be  ordered  otherwise  by  the  General  Assem- 
bly, or  by  persons  authorized  by  them,  to  order  the  same. 

Provided  always,  that  when  the  arms  and  accoutrements 
shall,  in  cases  of  emergency,  and  for  the  public  service,  be  re- 
moved from  any  town  in  this  colony  to  another,  by  the  General 
Assembly,  or  persons  authorized  by  them,  as  aforesaid,  the  said 
arms  and  accoutrem.ents  shall  be  returned  to  such  town  whence 
they  shall  be  taken,  as  soon  as  may  be,  after  such  occasion  of 
their  removal  has  ceased. 

And  that  all  loss  and  damage  they  may  sustain  at  such  times 
shall  be  made  good,  and  paid  to  such  town,  out  of  the  general 
treasury. 

And  he  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  town  council  of  each  town,  shall  have  power,  and  they  are 
hereby  empowered,  to  determine  what  persons  in  their  respec- 
tive towns  shall  have  the  benefit  and  use  of  the  arms  provided, 
aforesaid,  and  be  exempted  from  providing  themselves  as  the 
law  requires. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
there  be  a  committee,  consisting  of  one  person  from  each  town 
who  shall  use  their  utmost  diligence  to  procure  arms  and  ac- 
coutrements, as  aforesaid,  for  the  respective  towns  to  which 
they  belong,  and  deliver  them  to  such  person  as  each  town  shall 
appoint  to  receive  them,  as  aforesaid,  and  receive  from  the 
general  treasurer  the  amount  of  all  arms,  &c.,  by  them  so  de- 
livered ;  and  that  the  following  persons  be  the  said  committee, 
viz.  : 

For  Newport,  Col.  Jabez  Champlin  ;  Providence,  Col.  John 
Mathewson  ;  Portsmouth,  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Esq.  ;  Warwick, 
Colonel  John  Waterman  ;  Westerly,  Joshua  Babcock,  Esq.  ; 
North  Kingstown,  John  Northup,  Esq.  ;  South  Kingstown, 
John    Potter,    Esq.  ;     East   Greenwich,    Mr.    Job   Gardner  ; 


1776,]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  479 

Jamestown,  Benjamin  Underwood,  Esq.  ;  Smitbfield,  Capt. 
Joseph  Jenckes  ;  Seituate,  General  William  West ;  Glocester, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Colwell ;  Charlestown,  Mr.  Joseph  Stanton, 
Jr.  ;  West  Greenwich,  Col.  Nathaniel  Brown ;  Coventry,  Mr, 
Ephraim  Westcott ;  Exeter,  Mr.  George  Pierce ;  Middle- 
town,  Mr.  Nicholas  Easton  ;  Bristol,  Mr.  Benjamin  Bosworth  ; 
Tiverton,  Col.  John  Cooke  ;  Little  Compton,  Mr.  Perez  Rich- 
mind  ;  Warren,  Mr.  Cromel  Child  ;  Cumberland,  Mr.  Rufus 
Bartlett  ;  Richmond,  Mr.  William  Teft ;  Cranston,  Mr.  John 
Burton,  Jr.  ;  Ilopkinton,  Mr.  John  Larkin  ;  Johnston,  Caleb 
Harris,  Esq.  ;  North  Providence,  Mr.  Joseph  Olney  ;  Barring- 
ton,  Mr.  Thomas  Allen. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
all  such  persons  as  are  by  law  obliged  to  equip  themselves  with 
a  good  fire-arm,  bayonet  and  cartouch  box,  and  who  shall  not, 
by  the  report  of  such  town  council,  be  declared  incapable  of 
providing  themselves,  as  aforesaid,  do  provide  themselves  by 
the  20th  day  of  April,  agreeably  to  law,  under  the  penalty  of 
£5,  to  be  recovered  by  bill,  plaint  or  information,  before  the 
superior  or  inferior  court  for  the  county  wherein  such  delin- 
quent resides  ;  which  fine  shall  be  lodged  in  the  town  treasury 
of  the  town  where  such  delinquent  resides,  for  the  purchasing 
of  arms,  &c.,  to  and  for  such  town. 

That  each  captain  shall  make  return  of  such  delinquents 
within  his  district,  to  his  colonel  or  commander  in  chief,  by  the 
1st  day  of  May  next,  under  the  penalty  of  £5,  to  be  recovered 
in  manner  as  above  directed,  and  of  being  dismissed  from  his, 
office  ;  which  fine  shall  be  lodged  in  the  town  treasury  of  the 
town  to  which  said  captain  belongs  ;  and  that  the  colonels  of 
the  respective  regiments  in  this  colony,  make  return  thereof, 
to  the  General  Assembly,  to  be  holden  on  the  first  Wednesday 
in  May  next. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  act  passed  at  the  last  session  of  this  Assembly,  for  provid- 
ing arms  for  the  poor  of  the  several  towns,  be,  and  the  same  is 
hereby,  repealed. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the   authority  aforesaid,  that 


480  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

the  Golonols  of  militifi,  and  commanders  of  independent  compa- 
nies within  this  colony,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  directed  to 
transmit  to  this  Assembly,  at  the  next  session,  a  true  account 
of  the  number  of  polls  in  their  respective  regiments  and  com- 
panies upon  the  alarm  list,  and  how  many  belong  to  each  par- 
ticular town. 

And  be  it  farther  enacted,  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
a  copy  of  the  foregoing  act  be  sent  by  the  secretary  to  each  of 
the  committee,  aforenamed,  wdthin  ten  days  after  the  rising  of 
this  Assembly. 

An  account  being  laid  before  this  Assembly,  by  Mr.  John 
Low.  for  his  time  and  expenses  in  removing  the  stock  from 
Hope  Island,  and  for  victuals  supplied  the  militia  when  upon 
actual  duty  ;   which  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  £o  18s.,  lawful  money,  being  the  amount 
thereof,  be  paid  unto  the  said  John  Low,  out  of  the  general 
treasury. 

An  account  being  presented  unto  this  Assembly,  by  Mr. 
John  Gladding,  for  freight  of  corn  and  beef,  from  Prudence 
Island  ;   which  being  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  £i  19d.,  lawful  money,  being  the  amount 
thereof,  be  paid  unto  the  said  John  Gladding,  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury. 

An  account  being  laid  before  this  Assembly,  by  Mr.  David 
Greene,  for  the  service  of  his  people,  in  assisting  the  men  from 
on  board  the  Washington  row  galley,  to  land  upon  Jamestown, 
&c.  ;   which  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  fifteen  shillings,  lawful  money,  b^eing  the 
amount  thereof,  be  paid  unto  the  said  David  Greene,  out  of  the 
general  treasury. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  481 

An  Act  for  encoiu-aging  the  fixing  out,  and  authorizing  armed 
vessels,  to  defend  the  sea-coast  of  America  ;  and  for  erecting 
a  court  to  try  and  condemn  all  vessels  that  shall  be  found  in- 
festing the  same. 

Whereas,  the  present  administration  of  Great  Britain,  being 
divested  of  justice  and  humanity,  and  being  strangers  to  that 
magnanimity  and  sacred  regard  for  liberty,  which  inspired  their 
venerable  predecessors,  have  endeavored,  through  a  series  of 
years,  to  establish  a  system  of  despotism  over  the  American 
colonies  ;  and  by  their  venal  and  corrupt  measures,  have  so  ex- 
tended their  wicked  influence  over  the  British  Parliament,  that 
by  a  prostituted  majority,  it  is  now  become  a  mere  political  en- 
gine of  slavery. 

And  whereas,  the  military  tools  of  these  our  unnatural  ene- 
mies, while  restrained  by  the  united  forces  of  the  American 
colonies,  from  proceeding  in  the  sanguinary  career  of  devasta- 
tion and  slaughter,  are  continually  infesting  the  sea-coasts  of 
America,  wich  armed  vessels  ;  and  are  daily  endeavoring  to 
distress  the  inhabitants,  by  burning  their  towns,  destroying 
their  dwellings  and  substance,  piratically  plundering  live  stock, 
and  making  captures  of  provision,  and  other  vessels,  being  the 
property  of  the  inhabitants. 

And  whereas,  His  Majesty  King  Charles  the  Second,  in  and 
by  the  charter  of  this  colony,  among  other  things,  granted  : 
"  That  it  shall,  and  may,  be  lawful  to,  and  for,  all  and  every 
commander,  Governor  and  military  officers  appointed  by  the 
Governor,  or  in  his  absence,  the  Deputy  Governor  and  assist- 
ants, and  the  major  part  of  the  freemen  of  said  colony,  present 
at  any  General  Assembly,  nominated  and  appointed  according 
to  the  tenor  of  his  or  their  respective  commissions  and  direc- 
tions, to  assemble,  exercise  in  arms,  martial  array  ;  and  put  in 
warlike  posture,  the  inhabitants  of  said  colony,  for  their  special 
defence  and  safety  ;  and  to  lead  and  conduct  the  said  inhabit- 
ants ;  and  to  encounter,  expulse,  expel  and  resist,  by  force  of 
arms,  as  well  by  sea  as  by  land  ;  and  also  to  kill,  slay  and  de- 
stroy by  all  fitting  ways,  enterprizes  and  means,  whatsoever, 
all  and  every  such  person  and  persons,  as  shall  at  any  time  at- 
VOL.  VII.  61 


482  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

tempt  or  enterprize  the  destruction,  detriment  or  annoyance  of 
the  inhabitants  of  said  colony  ;  and  to  take  or  surprise,  by  all 
ways  and  means,  whatsoever,  all  and  every  such  person  and 
persons,  with  their  ship  or  ships,  armor,  ammunition,  or  other 
goods  of  such  persons  as  shall  in  hostile  manner  invade  or  at- 
tempt the  defeating  the  said  colony  or  plantation,  or  the  hurt 
of  the  inhabitants  thereof" 

And  whereas,  the  Continental  Congress  of  America,  have  re- 
solved :  "  That  each  colony,  at  their  own  expense,  make  such 
provision,  by  armed  vessels,  or  otherwise,  as  their  respective 
Assemblies,  conventions  or  committees  of  safety,  shall  judge 
expedient  and  suitable  to  their  circumstances  and  situations, 
for  the  protection  of  their  harbors  and  navigation  on  the  sea- 
coasts,  against  all  unlawful  invasions,  attacks  and  depredations, 
from  cutters  and  ships  of  war." 

And  as  it  is  the  duty  and  interest  of  this  colony  to  exert  it- 
self, as  well  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  supplies  from  the  ene- 
my, as  for  those  mentioned  in  the  paragraphs  in  the  charter, 
and  resolve,  afore  recited  ;  therefore,  for  the  more  effectually 
carrying  into  execution  the  aforesaid  purposes, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  all  armed  and  other  vessels, 
which  shall  be  brought  into  this  colony,  and  have  been  found 
making  unlawful  invasions,  attacks  or  depredations,  on  the  sea- 
coasts  or  navigation  of  any  part  of  America  ;  or  improved  in 
supplying  the  fleet  and  army  which  have  been,  or  shall  at  any 
time  hereafter  be,  employed  against  the  United  Colonies,  or 
employed  by  the  said  enemy  in  any  respect  whatsoever ;  and 
also,  all  vessels  whose  masters  or  supercargoes  shall  have  had 
designs  of  carrying  supplies  of  any  kind  to  the  enemy,  or  that 
shall  be  returning  from  the  enemy,  after  having  carried  such 
supplies,  and  shall  be  convicted  thereof,  as  herein  provided, 
such  vessel  or  vessels,  with  their  appurtenances  and  cargoes, 
shall  be  deemed  forfeited,  and  shall  be  disposed  of  as  is  by  this 
act  herein  after  directed. 

x\nd  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  Governor,  or  in  his  ab- 
sence, the  Deputy  Governor  of  this  colony,  for  the  time  being, 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  483 

be,  and  they  are  hereby,  fully  empowered  and  directed  to  com- 
mission with  letters  of  marque  and  reprisal,  if  requested,  any 
person  or  persons,  within  this  colony,  who  shall,  at  his  or  their 
own  expense,  fix  out  and  equip  for  the  defence  of  America,  any 
vessel  ;  as  also,  any  person  who  shall  by  the  owner  of  such 
vessel  be  recommended  therefor. 

And  that  all  such  persons,  so^  commissioned,  as  aforesaid, 
shall  have  full  power,  with  such  other  persons  as  they  shall  en- 
gas^e  to  their  assistance,  to  sail  on  the  seas,  attack,  take  and 
bring  into  any  port  in  this  colony,  or  any  other  of  the  United 
Colonies,  in  America,  all  vessels  offending  or  employed  by  the 
enemy,  as  aforesaid  ;  and  also,  to  re-take,  and  bring  in,  as 
aforesaid,  any  vessel  or  vessels  that  may  be  taken  from  any 
person  or  persons,  by  said  enemy. 

Provided  always,  and  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  master 
or  owner  of  such  vessel,  shall,  at  the  time  he  receives  such 
commission,  enter  into  bond,  with  one  sufficient  surety,  at  least, 
for  the  faithful  discharge  of  his  office,  and  observing  the  law  of 
this  colony,  relating  to  armed  vessels  ;  which  bond  shall  be  in 
the  following  form,  to  wit : 

Form  of  Bond  to  be  given  to  the  Colony. 

Know  all  men  by  these  presents,  that  we,  A.  B.  and  C.  D., 

of ,  &c.,  are  holden  and  stand  firmly  bound  and  obliged 

unto  J.  C,  of ,  &c.,  general  treasurer  of  said  colony, 

in  the  full  and  just  sum  of  £2,000,  lawful  money,  to  be  paid 
unto  the  said  general  treasurer,  or  to  his  successors  in  said  of- 
fice ;  to  the  true  payment,  whereof,  we  bind  ourselves,  our  re- 
spective heirs,  executors  and  administrators,  jointly  and  sev- 
erally, firmly  by  these  presents.  Sealed  with  our  seals,  the 
day  of ,  A.  D.  17 — . 

The  condition  of  the  afore-written  obligation  is  such,  that, 
whereas,  the  said  A.  B.  hath,  on  the  day  of  the  date  hereof, 
received  a  commission  to  command  an  armed  vessel  called  the 
,  of  the  burthen  of  about ~ —  tons,  to  make  re- 
prisals of  all  armed  and  other  vessels,  that  shfill  be  found  gup- 


484  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

plying  the  enemy,  or  acting  counter  to  a  law  of  this  colony,  en- 
titled "  An  act  for  encouraging  the  fitting  out  armed  vessels  to 
defend  the  sea-coasts  of  America,  and  for  erecting  a  court  to 
try  and  condemn  all  vessels  that  shall  be  found  infesting  the 
same."  If,  therefore,  the  said  A.  B.,  do  and  shall,  in  and  by 
all  things,  well  and  truly  observe  and  fulfil  such  instructions  as 
he  shall  receive  from  the  .Governor,  or  in  his  absence,  the 
Deputy  Governor  of  this  colony,  and  shall  in  all  respects  con- 
form himself  to  the  directions  given  by  the  aforesaid  act  of  the 
General  Assembly,  then  the  afore-written  obligation  to  be  void  ; 
otherwise,  to  remain  in  full  force. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  there  shall  be  erected  and 
constantly  held  in  this  colony,  a  court  of  justice,  by  and  before 
such  able  and  discreet  person  as  shall  be  annually  appointed 
and  commissioned  by  order  of  this  General  Assembly,  for  that 
purpose  ;  whose  business  it  shall  be,  to  take  cognizance  of, 
and  to  try  any  capture  or  captures  of  any  vessel  or  vessels, 
that  may  or  shall  be  taken  by  any  person  or  persons  whomso- 
ever, and  brought  into  said  colony  ;  who  shall  be  sworn  to  the 
faithful  execution  of  his  office. 

And  the  judge,  so  commissioned  to  hold  said  court,  as 
aforesaid,  shall  have  power  at  all  times,  to  issue  his  warrant 
or  warrants,  to  the  town  sergeant,  constable  or  constables, 
of  any  town  or  towns  within  either  of  the  counties  in  this 
colony,  into  which  said  captures  shall  be  brought ;  in  which 
county,  the  judge,  aforesaid,  is  hereby  directed  to  hold  the 
court,  to  warn  a  meeting  of  the  inhabitants  of  their  said  towns, 
respectively,  and  to  draw  out  of  the  box,  in  such  manner  as  is 
provided  by  the  laws  of  this  colony,  for  returning  jurors  to 
serve  in  the  inferior  courts  of  common  pleas,  twelve  good  and 
lawful  men,  for  jurors. 

And  the  said  town  sergeant  or  constables,  shall  immediately, 
as  soon  as  may  be,  give  notice  in  writing  to  such  persons  so 
drawn,  of  the  time  and  place  which  in  the  said  warrant  shall  be 
set  for  their  appearance  ;  and  shall  return  his  said  warranty 
with  his  doings  thereon  ;  and  the  names  of  the  jurors  drawn 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  486 

and  notified,  as  aforesaid,  to  the  judge,  at  or  before  the  time 
set  therein  for  the  appearance  of  said  jurors 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  if  any  town  sergeant  or  con- 
stable shall  neglect  or  refuse  to  obey  the  warrant  of  the  judge 
for  returning  said  jurors,  as  aforesaid,  he  shall  pay  such  fine 
as  the  judge  shall  order,  not  exceeding  the  sum  of  £10,  lawful 
money. 

And  if  any  juror  so  drawm,  and  having  notice,  as  aforesaid, 
shall  not  appear  at  the  time  and  place  directed  in  said  warrant, 
or  shall  refuse,  without  reasonable  excuse,  to  serve  on  such 
jury,  he  shall  pay  such  fine  as  the  judge  shall  order,  not  ex- 
ceeding the  sum  of  forty  shillings,  lawful  money  ;  but  before 
such  fine  shall  be  awarded,  the  said  judge  shall  summon  such 
juryman  to  appear  before  him,  to  show^  forth  the  reasons  of  his 
neglect ;  and  if  such  reasons  shall  not  bo  satisfactory  to  the 
said  judge,  then  he  shall  issue  his  warrant  of  distress  for  such 
fine,  in  manner  as  is  directed  for  recovery  of  fines  of  jurors  who 
shall  neglect  or  refuse  to  serve  in  the  inferior  courts  of  common 
pleas  ;  which  fines  so  recovered,  shall  be  paid  into  the  general 
treasury  of  this  colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
when  any  person  or  persons  shall  take  and  bring  into  any  port 
in  this  colony  any  vessel  or  vessels,  that  have  been  offending  or 
employed  by  the  enemy,  as  aforesaid,  such  person  or  persons, 
so  taking  and  bringing  in  such  vessel  or  vessels,  shall  immedi- 
ately make  out  a  bill  in  writing  ;  therein  giving  a  full  and 
particular  account  of  the  time  and  manner  of  the  caption  of 
such  vessel  or  vessels,  and  the  employment  the  said  vessel  or 
vessels  were  in,  when  so  taken  ;  and  of  the  persons  who  were 
aiding  and  assisting  in  taking  the  same  ;  and  a  schedule  of  the 
cargo  or  cargoes  on  board,  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge,  at  the 
time  of  caption  ;  and  shall  deliver  the  same  to  the  said  judge 
where  such  vessel  is  brought,  with  all  the  papers  that  may  be 
found  on  board  such  vessel  or  vessels,  to  the  intent  that  the  jury 
may  have  the  benefit  of  the  evidence  therefrom  arising. 

And  the  judge,  to  whom  said  bill  is  delivered,  shall  imme- 
diately issue  his  warrant  or  warrants,  as  aforesaid,  to  any  towu 


486  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  1776. 

sergeant,  constable  or  constables,  witbin  the  county  where  such 
court  is  to  be  holden,  commanding  them,  or  either  of  them,  in 
manner  as  aforesaid,  to  return  twelve  good  and  lawful  men  to 
try  the  truth  of  any  facts  alleged  in  such  bill ;  and  if  there 
shall  not  be  enough  to  complete  a  pannel  of  twelve,  or  if  there 
shall  be  a  legal  challenge  to  any  of  them,  so  that  there  shall 
not  be  a  pannel  to  try  such  a  cause,  then  in  such  case,  it  shall 
be  lawful  for  said  judge  to  order  the  sheriff,  or  other  proper 
officer,  attending  such  court,  to  fill  up  the  jury  with  other  good 
and  lawful  men,  present ;  and  for  want  thereof,  to  issue  forth 
a  writ  of  venire  facias  to  the  sheriff  or  his  deputy,  command- 
ing them  to  return  so  many  good  and  lawful  men  of  said 
county,  as  shall  be  wanting  to  fill  up  the  pannel ;  which  jury 
shall  be  sworn  to  return  a  true  verdict  upon  said  bill,  according 
to  law  and  evidence. 

And  if  it  shall  appear  to  the  said  judge,  by  said  verdict, 
that  such  vessel  or  vessels  had  been  employed  or  offending,  as 
aforesaid,  he  shall  condemn  the  said  vessel  or  vessels,  and  car- 
go or  cargoes,  and  appurtenances,  and  order  them  to  be  sold  at 
public  vendue  ;  and  shall  order  the  charge  of  trial  and  con- 
demnation to  be  paid  out  of  the  money  such  vessel  or  vessels, 
and  cargo  or  cargoes,  shall  sell  for,  to  the  clerk  of  said  court, 
to  be  distributed  to  the  several  officers  of  said  court  to  whom 
the  same  shall  belong  ;  and  shall  order  the  residue  thereof,  to 
be  delivered  to  the  captors,  their  agents  or  attornies,  for  the 
use  and  benefit  of  such  captois,  and  others  concerned  therein. 

And  if  two  or  more  vessels,  the  commanders  whereof  shall 
be  properly  commissioned,  shall  jointly  take  such  vessel  or  ves- 
sels, the  money  such  vessel  or  vessels,  cargo  or  cargoes  and  ap- 
purtenances, shall  sell  for,  after  payment  of  charges,  as  afore- 
said, shall  be  equally  divided  between  the  captors,  in  propor- 
tion to  their  number  of  men  and  guns. 

And  the  said  judge,  before  whom  any  such  trial  and  con- 
demnation, as  is  aforementioned,  may  be,  shall  be  authorized 
to  make  out  his  precept,  under  his  hand  and  seal,  to  the  sheriff 
or  his  deputy,  within  the  said  county,  to  sell  such  vessel, 
and  appurtenances  and  cargo,  and  pay  thereout  the  charges  of 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  487 

trial  and  condemnation  ;  and  to  pay  his  own  fees,  Avhich  shall 
be  one-half  per  cent,  upon  the  value  of  every  vessel,  cargo  and 
appurtenances,  condemned,  provided  the  amount  thereof,  do 
not  exceed  £1,000  ;  but  where  the  value  and  sale  of  any 
vessel,  cargo  and  appurtenances  shall  exceed  £1,000,  then  the 
said  sheriff  shall  have  one-half  per  cent,  for  the  first  £1,000, 
and  one-quarter  per  cent,  for  all  sums  over  ;  and  the  residue 
and  remainder,  the  said  sheriff  shall  deliver  to  the  captors  and 
persons  concerned,  as  aforesaid. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  when  any  such  bill,  as  afore- 
said, shall  be  delivered  to  such  judge,  he  shall  cause  notifica- 
tion, thereof,  and  the  name  (if  known,)  and  description  of  the 
vessel,  so  brought  in,  with  the  day  set  for  the  trial,  thereon,  to 
be  advertised  in  the  Providence  Gazette  and  Newport  Mercury, 
fifteen  days  before  the  time  set  for  the  trial,  that  the  owner  of 
such  vessel,  or  any  person  concerned,  may  appear,  and  show 
cause,  if  any  they  have,  why  such  vessel,  with  her  cargo  and 
appurtenances,  should  not  be  condemned  and  sold,  as  aforesaid. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  process  and  proceeding 
upon  any  vessel  that  shall  be  re-taken  from  the  enemy,  by  any 
person  or  persons,  shall  be  in  the  same  manner  as  is  herein 
provided  for  other  vessels  ;  and  if,  by  verdict  of  the  jury,  it 
shall  appear  to  the  judge  that  such  vessel  was  taken  by  the 
enemy,  and  was  re-taken  by  such  person  or  persons,  before 
condemnation  by  the  enemy  thereon  had,  the  said  judge  shall 
order  such  vessel,  with  her  cargo  and  appurtenances,  lo  be 
sold  in  manner,  as  aforesaid  ;  and  shall  order  not  more  than 
one-third,  nor  less  than  one-quarter,  of  what  said  vessel,  her 
appurtenances  and  cargo,  shall  sell  for  (after  paying  charges  of 
trial  and  sale),  to  be  delivered  to  the  captors,  as  is  before  pro- 
vided for  other  vessels ;  and  the  residue  to  be  delivered  to  the 
owner  or  owners  of  such  vessel. 

And  if  such  vessel  so  re-taken,  shall  have  been  condemned 
by  the  enemy,  then  the  money,  she  and  her  cargo  and  appur- 
tenances may  sell  for,  shall  be  delivered  to  the  captors,  as  is 
above  provided  for  vessels  belonging  to  said  enemy. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 


488  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

the  attorney  general  shall  be  advocate  of  said  court ;  and  that 
the  judge  of  said  court  shall  appoint  an  able  clerk,  who  shall 
keep  a  true  and  fair  record  of  all  the  proceedings  of  said  court, 
and  shall  be  duly  sworn  to  act  in  said  office,  with  truth  and 
fidelity  j  and  his  attestation  shall  be  received  as  evidence  in 
all  courts  of  law. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  the 
said  judge  shall  have  for  the  condemnation  of  every  vessel,  cargo 
and  appurtenances,  by  him  condemned,  £6,  lawful  money,  and 
other  fees  as  stated  by  the  table  regulating  the  fees  of  the  court 
of  admiralty  in  this  colony. 

Provided  further,  that  if  agreeably  to  this  act,  the  said  judge 
shall  hold  his  court  out  of  the  county  where  he  shall  reside, 
his  expenses  necessarily  accruing  on  that  account,  shall  be 
allowed. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  fees  of  the  advocate, 
clerk  and  the  sheriff,  not  before  specified  in  this  act,  shall  be 
the  same  as  have  been  heretofore  allowed  by  law  to  the  advo- 
cate, the  register  and  marshal,  of  the  court  of  vice  admiralty  in 
this  colony  ;  that  the  jurors  be  allowed  six  shillings,  per  day,, 
each,  for  their  attendance  upon  said  court ;  and  that  the  town 
sergeants,  constables  and  other  officers  of  said  court,  be  allowed 
the  same  fees  as  are  by  law  allowed  to  such  officers  in  similar 
cases. 

Whereas,  Major  Edward  Spalding,  captain  of  the  artillery 
company,  in  the  colony's  brigade,  prayed  leave  to  resign  his^ 
commission,  as  captain,  as  aforesaid,  for  certain  reasons  men- 
tioned in  his  petition  presented  to  this  Assembly  ;  and  the 
same  being  duly  inquired  into, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  Edward  Spalding's  re- 
signation of  his  said  commission  be,  and  hereby  is,  accepted  ; 
and  as  it  appears  the  said  Edward  Spalding  hath  behaved  and 
conducted  himself  well,  and  as  a  good  officer,  he  is  hereby  dis- 
missed with  honor. 

Whereas,  many  of  the  freemen  of  sundry  towns  in  this  colo- 
ny, have,  to  avoid  the  cruel  insults  and  dangers  threatened  by 
the  arbitrary  tools  of  ministerial  vengeance,  been  obliged  to  re- 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  489 

move  themselves  and  families  to  other  towns,  in  this  and 
the  neighboring  colonies,  for  safety  ;  and  as  the  said  freemen, 
cannot,  by  such  removal,  be  justly  deemed  incapable  of  giving 
their  voices  and  votes  in  the  election  of  general  and  town  offi- 
cers, in  such  towns  to  which  they  respectively  belonged  ;  to 
prevent  any  dispute  arising  in  this  matter, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  that  it  shall,  and 
may,  be  lawful  for  the  absentees  on  the  account,  aforesaid, 
from  any  town  in  this  colony,  who  were,  and  are,  freeholders 
and  freemen,  to  repair  to  the  respective  towns  from  whence 
they  removed,  upon  the  days  by  law  appointed  for  the  choice 
of  the  respective  officers,  aforesaid,  and  exercise  and  enjoy 
every  right  and  privilege  in  their  election,  as  fully  and  amply 
as  though  they  resided  in  their  respective  towns. 

Resolved,  that  the  afuregoing  act  continue  in  force  until  the 
causes  which  occasioned  the  necessity  thereof,  be  removed  ; 
and  that  the  same  be  published  in  the  Providence  Gazette 
and  Newport  Mercury,  immediately  after  the  rising  of  this 
Assembly. 

An  account  being  laid  before  this  Assembly,  by  Mr.  Silas 
Niles,  for  supplying  the  militia  and  others,  who  went  for  the 
defence  of  Point  Judith,  when  Capt.  Wallace's  people  landed 
there  ;   which  said  account  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  £3  17s.  11^.,  thereof,  be,  and 
hereby  is,  allowed  ;  and  that  the  sum,  aforesaid,  be  paid  unto 
the  said  Silas  Niles,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

An  account  being  laid  before  this  Assembly,  by  Mr.  John 
Allen,  for  freighting  stock  from  Patience,  and  carrying  pas- 
sengers to  and  from  said  island  ;  which  said  account  being  duly 
examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  £2  8s.,  thereof,  be,  and  here- 
by is,  allowed  ;  and  that  the  sum,  aforesaid,  be  paid  unto  the 
said  John  Allen,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  Mr,  Cromel  Child  presented  unto  this  Assembly, 
an  account,  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  removing 
the  stock  from  Prudence  Island,  and  for  divers  bills,  by  him 

VOL.  VII.         62 


490  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

paid  to  people  employed  in  that  service,  &c.,  which  said  ac- 
count being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  £34  II5.  Ad.,  lawful  money, 
being  the  balance  thereof,  be  allowed  ;  and  that  the  sum, 
aforesaid,  be  paid  unto  the  said  Crorael  Child,  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Nathaniel  Martin,  exhibited  unto  this  Assem- 
bly, an  account,  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  freight 
of  hay,  sheep,  grain,  &c.,  from  Prudence  Island  ;  which  said 
account  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  £23  2d.,  thereof,  be,  and 
hereby  is,  allowed  ;  and  that  the  sum,  aforesaid,  be  paid  unto 
the  said  Nathaniel  Martin,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  this  Assembly,  at  their  session,  held  in  October 
last,  appointed  a  committee  to  affix  the  price  of  carting  upon 
Rhode  Island,  &c.  ;  which  said  committee  not  having  pro- 
ceeded on  said  business, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  that  part  of  said  act 
appointing  said  committee,  be,  and  hereby  is,  repealed  ;  that 
Thomas  Freebody,  Christopher  Lippitt  and  John  Barker,  Esqs., 
be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  hereby  appointed 
a  committee,  to  affix  the  price  of  carting,  immediately  ;  and 
that  all  other  parts  and  clauses  of  said  act  remain  in  full  force 
and  virtue. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Jonathan  Arnold,  Jo- 
seph Anthony  and  Henry  Ward,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  draw  up  instructions  for  the  future 
conduct  of  Col.  Henry  Babcock  ;  and  that  they  lay  the  same 
before  this  Assembly,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

Whereas,  this  Assembly  have  received  information,  that  a 
committee,  appointed  by  the  Honorable  the  General  Court  of 
the  colony  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  have  signified  that  the 
said  colony,  considering  that  the  erecting  suitable  fortifications 
at  Bristol  Ferry,  will  be  very  advantageous  to  the  inhabitants 
of  that  colony,  are  willing  to  join  with  this  colony  in  the 
same, — 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  49l 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Hon.  William 
Bradford,  Esq.,  and  Simeon  Potter,  Esq.,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  confer  with  the  said  Gen- 
eral Court  upon  that  subject  ;  and  also  respecting  fortifying 
Rowland's  Ferry,  and  to  agree  with  the  said  court  on  the  part 
of  this  colony,  for  the  erecting  such  fortifications  at  those 
places,  as  shall  appear  necessary ;  and  that  they  be  empow- 
ered, in  conjunction  with  such  committee  as  may  be  appointed 
by  said  General  Court,  to  take  the  necessary  measures  for 
erecting  the  same,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Cromel  Child  be,  and  he 
is  hereby,  empowered  to  draw  out  of  the  general  treasury  the 
sum  of  £30,  lawful  money,  towards  paying  for  gun  carriages 
by  him  making  for  the  colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  John  Potter,  Esq.,  be,  and  he 
is  hereby,  appointed  to  procure  carriages  for  three  cannon  now 
at  South  Kingstown  ;   and  that  the  wheels  be  shod  with  iron. 

Whereas,  Mr.  William  Barton,  captain-lieutenant  of  Col. 
Richmond's  company,  in  the  colony's  brigade,  begged  leave  to 
resign  his  command,  as  aforesaid,  and  sent  his  commission  to 
His  Honor  the  Governor ;  which  being  duly  considered  by  this 
Assembly, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  William  Barton  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  permitted  to  resign  his  command,  as  afore- 
said ;  that  this  Assembly  being  convinced  that  Capt.  Barton 
hath  behaved  well,  and  as  a  good  officer,  he  is  hereby  dis- 
charged with  honor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  vessels  which  were  hired 
in  the  county  of  Newport,  to  proceed  on  a  voyage,  in  order  to 
procure  salt  for  the  colony,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  dis- 
charged. 

That  the  committee  who  were  appointed  by  this  Assembly 
to  fit  them  out,  pay  the  hire  of  said  vessels,  and  discharge  all 
the  persons  belonging  thereto  ;  and  that  said  committee  pay  off 
all  the  mariners  who  have  not  received  their  month's  pay,  and 
deliver  the  cargoes  of  said  vessels  to  the  commissary  at  head- 
quarters, on  Rhode  Island. 


492  RECORDS    OP    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1776, 

Whereas,  the  committee  appointed  to  take  into  consideration 
the  state  of  tliis  colony,  and  the  measures  necessary  for  the  de- 
fence thereof ;  and  to  consider  in  what  places  it  w  ill  be  best  to 
station  the  troops  now  in  the  service  of  the  colony,  made  the 
following  report  to  this  Assembly  : 

Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  bi/  the  General  Asacinblp,  relu' 
tive  to  the  Military  Defences  of  the  Colony. 

We,  tlie  subscribers,  being  appointed  as  a  committee,  to  take  into  consideration 
the  state  of  this  colony,  and  the  measures  necessary  for  the  defence  thereof;  and  to 
consider  at  what  places  it  Avill  be  best  to  station  the  troops  now  in  the  service  of  the 
colony  ;  and,  in  conjunction  with  the  commander  in  chief  of  the  colony's  brigade,  cause 
fortifications  to  be  erected  on  Rhode  Island  and  at  Bristol,  sufficient  to  command  and 
keep  open  a  communication  at  Bristol  Ferry,  as  soon  as  possible  ;  having  taken  into 
consideration  the  above  matters,  do  advise  : 

That  one  company,  be  placed  at  Point  Judith ;  one  company,  at  Boston  Xeck, 
between  Narrow  River  and  the  South  Ferry ;  one  company,  at  Quanset  Point,  in 
North  Kingstown  ;  one  company,  at  Pojack  Point,  in  North  Kingstown,  and  Poto- 
womut  Neck,  in  Warwick ;  one  company,  at  Warwick  Neck  ;  half  a  company,  at 
Pawtuxet,  in  Cranston ;  one  company,  at  Barringtou  ;  two  companies,  at  Bristol ; 
one  company,  at  Bristol  Ferry,  on  Rhode  Island  side  ;  and  one-third  of  said  compa- 
ny, on  Tiverton  side ;  one  company,  in  Tiverton  and  Little  Compton,  near  Fogland 
Ferry  ;  four  companies  and  an  half,  on  the  island  of  Jamestown  ;  and  the  femaindef 
of  the  troops,  being  seven  companies,  together  also  with  the  artillery  company,  at 
headquarters,  on  Rhode  Island. 

The  above  arrangement  and  disposition,  subject  to  temporaiy  removals  and  alter- 
ations by  the  commanding  officer  of  said  forces,  as  urgent  occasions  may  require. 

And  we  do  recommend  to  said  commanding  officer,  that  he  shift  the  companies 
from  one  quarter  to  another,  so  that  all  the  companies  may  at  certain  times,  be  at 
headquarters,  on  Rhode  Island,  that  he  may  thereby  have  a  proper  inspection  into 
the  state  of  each  company  ;  at  the  same  time  avoiding  as  much  as  may  be,  the  sta- 
tioning of  any  company  where  they  were  principally  raised. 

And  we  also  advise,  that  Bristol  Ferry  be  fortified,  by  erecting  such  works  as  the 
commanding  officer  shall  think  proper,  upon  those  places  upon  Rhode  Island  side, 
and  on  that  place  upon  Bi  istol  side,  advised  to  by  Col.  Putnam. 

And  we  refer  the  commanding  officer  to  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor,  who 
was  with  Col.  Putnam  when  he  viewed  the  ground,  for  the  particular  spots  of 
ground  ;  and  we  further  advise  the  same  to  be  executed  as  soon  as  may  be,  and  in 
the  best  manner  he  is  able,  with  the  forces  that  he  can  spare  for  that  service. 

We  do  alsu  recommend  to  the  said  commanding  othcer,  to  erect  a  battery  or  fort 
upon  Tonomy  Hill,  on  Rhode  Island,  as  soon  as  may  be,  according  to  his  best  skill 
and  judgment.  WILLIAM  BRADFORD,    '      WILLIAM  ELLERY, 

JOHN  MATHEWSON,  GIDEON  MUMFORD. 

HENRY  MARCHANT, 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  493 

Which  said  report  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
accepted  ;  and  that  the  forces  be  stationed  agreeably  thereto, 
with  the  following  alterations,  that  is  to  say  : 

That  the  company  ordered  to  be  stationed  in  Tiverton  and 
Little  Compton,  near  Fogland  Ferry,  be  stationed  in  the  said 
towns,  in  such  divisions  and  places  as  Col.  Thomas  Church  and 
Lieut.  Col.  John  Cooke  shall  think  proper  ;  that  the  company 
ordered  to  be  stationed  at  Quanset,  be  stationed  at  Wickford  ; 
that  the  company  stationed  at  the  South  Ferry,  in  South  Kings- 
town, be  so  distributed  as  to  guard  as  fir  as  the  north  end  of 
Boston  Neck  ;  and  that  Capt.  Job  Pierce's  company's  station 
be  in  Bristol  ;  any  thing  in  the  foregoing  report  contained  to 
the  contrary,  notwithstanding. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  John  Mathewson  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  appointed  to  wait  upon  His  Excellency  General 
Washington,  or  in  his  absence,  upon  the  commander  in  chief  at 
headquarters,  in  Cambridge,  and  make  application  for  forty 
pieces  of  cannon,  from  nine  to  twenty-four  pounders  (if  so 
many  can  be  procured),  for  the  protection  and  defence  of  this 
colony ;  that  he  procure  the  same  to  be  brought  into  the 
colony  immediately,  to  be  under  the  direction  of  Ilis  Honor  the 
Governor. 

And  that  the  said  Col.  Mathewson  be,  and  he  is  hereby, 
empowered  to  draw  money  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  pay 
for  the  expenses  in  bringing  the  same. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the 
Governor  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  write  to  the  com- 
mander in  chief,  aforesaid,  upon  the  subject. 

Whereas,  Messrs,  Silas  Casey  and  Peter  Bonamy,  preferred 
their  petition  to  this  Assembly,  representing  that  they  have  a 
sloop  with  a  large  quantity  of.oil  and  gurry,  at  Gaspee,  in  the 
province  of  Canada  ;  and  besought  this  Assembly  that  they 
would  grant  a  permit  for  said  sloop  to  come  into  the  colony 
with  said  oil  and  gurry,  and  return  back  to  said  Gaspee,  with 
a  load  of  empty  oil  casks,  and  with  provisions  only  sufficient 


494 


RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND 


[1776. 


for  the  hands  on  board  said  sloop  ;  which  being  duly  con- 
sidered,— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  prayer  of  said  petition  be, 
and  hereby  is,  granted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  ,£20,000,  be  imme- 
diately struck  off,  in  bills  of  the  same  form  and  tenor  with 
those  ordered  to  be  emitted  by  this  Assembly,  at  their  session 
holden  in  January  last  past. 

That  they  be  signed  and  lodged  in  the  general  treasury,  by 
the  following  persons,  viz.  : 

Messrs.  John  G.  Wanton,  John  Dexter,  John  Cole,  Joseph 
Clarke,  Welcome  Arnold,  Thomas  Greene,  James  Congdon, 
3d,  and  William  EUery ;  three  of  whom,  shall  sign  all  bills  of 
five  shillings,  and  upwards  ;  and  two,  all  bills  under  five  shil- 
lings ;  and  that  the  bills  be  of  the  following  denominations,  to 
wit : 

1,600,  of  sixty  shillings  each, 

2,000,  "  forty 


3,000,  "  thirty 
3,000,  of  twenty     ' 
3,000,  "  ten 
3,000,  "  five 
3,000,  "  four 
3,000,  "  three 
2,100,  "  two 
2,000,  "  one 
2,400,  "  ninepence 


28,100 


-  d£4,800 
4,000 

-  4,500 
3,000 

-  1,500 

750 
600 
450 
210 
100 
90 

£20,000 


And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  lawful 
money  bills  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  made  a  lawful  tender  for 
paying  and  discharging  all  debts  and  demands,  whatsoever  ; 
and  that  the  said  bills  be  redeemed  within  six  years  from  the 
date  thereof. 

It  is  also  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  committee 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  495 

be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury  one-quarter  per 
cent,  for  their  trouble  ;  that  they  procure  paper  for  the  same, 
at  the  charge  of  the  colony. 

That  Mr.  John  Carter  be  employed  to  print  said  bills  at  one 
shiUing  and  fourpence  for  every  hundred  bills  so  printed  ;  and 
that  Mr.  David  Wilkinson  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  appointed  to 
superintend  the  press. 

Whereas,  in  our  present  troubles,  the  government  is  fre- 
quently necessitated  to  quarter  troops  in  private  houses,  where- 
by waste  and  destruction  is  often  made  ;  and  it  is  often  uncer- 
tain who  are  the  perpetrators  of  the  mischiefs  that  have 
ensued  ;  and  great  loss  has  arisen  to  the  government,  from  the 
uncertainty  of  knowing  who  were  the  authors  of  the  depre- 
dations that  have  been  made  ;  for  remedy  whereof,  for  the 
future, — 

Be  it  enacted,  that  when  any  number  of  men,  more  or  less, 
in  any  particular  house,  where  the  troops  shall  be  quartered  or 
billeted,  and  any  waste  or  loss  shall  ensue  by  means  of  said 
troops,  if  it  is  uncertain  which  of  the  individuals  did  the  mis- 
chief, that  the  principal  in  command  of  them,  shall  be  liable 
for  payment  of  the  damage  sustained  by  said  householder,  and 
a  dividend  be  made  amongst  the  corps,  in  proportion  to  their 
pay,  and  the  same  be  stopped  from  their  proportional  part  of 
their  pay. 

Provided  also,  that  said  householder  prefer  an  account  of  his 
loss,  within  two  days,  under  oath,  to  such  commanding  officer, 
from  the  time  of  leaving  such  house. 

And  that  hereafter,  no  account  of  this  kind  be  preferred  to 
the  General  Assembly  ;  and  that  no  future  allowances  shall  be 
made  out  of  the  public  treasury  ;  any  law,  custom  or  usage,  to 
the  contrary  hereof,  notwithstanding. 

And  ihat  a  copy  of  this  act  be  inserted  in  the  Newport  and 
Providence  newspapers  ;  and  a  copy  immediately  be  sent  to 
headquarters. 

Whereas,  Col.  Thomas  Church  laid  before  this  Assembly,  an 
account,  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  hay-screws, 


496  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1776. 

boxes  and  iron-work,  burnt  and  destroyed  by  Wallace,  upon 
Prudence  Island  ;   which  said  account  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  £7  lOs.,  lawful  money,  thereof, 
be,  and  hereby  is,  allowed  ;  and  that  the  sum,  aforesaid,  be 
paid  unto  the  said  Thomas  Church,  out  of  the  g-eneral  treasury. 

Whereas,  Mr.  John  Jenckes  preferred  to  this  Assembly  his 
petition,  setting  forth,  that  he  had  at  Surinam  seventy-one 
hogsheads  of  tobacco,  and  ten  thousand  guilders,  in  protested 
bills  of  exchange  ;  and  prayed  leave  of  this  Assembly  that  he 
might  have  liberty  to  send  a  vessel  to  Surinam,  in  order  to  get 
his  property,  and  to  bring  in  return  therefor,  military  stores  ; 
which  said  petition,  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
granted  ;  that  the  vessel  be  fitted  out  under  the  inspection  of  His 
Honor  the  Governor,  agreeably  to  the  custom  heretofore  ob- 
served ;  and  that  the  petitioner  lay  out  the  nett  proceeds  of 
the  cargo  he  shall  send  out,  in  warlike  stores,  and  give  bond, 
as  usual. 

Whereas,  the  town  of  South  Kingstown,  hath  been  supplied 
with  the  number  of  field  pieces  allotted  them  by  this  Assem- 
bly ;   wherefore — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  one  of  the  field  pieces  formerly 
voted  by  this  Assembly,  for  said  town  of  South  Kingstown,  be, 
and  it  is  hereby,  ordered  to  be  sent  to,  and  for  the  use  of,  the 
town  of  North  Kingstown. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  five  hundred  pounds  weight  of 
gunpowder  be  delivered  out  for  the  county  of  Bristol,  in  the 
following  proportion,  to  wit : 

Two  hundred  weight,  for  the  town  of  Bristol ;  one  hundred 
and  fifty  weight,  for  the  town  of  Warren  ;  and  one  hundred 
and  fifty  weight,  for  the  town  of  Barrington  ;  that  two  hundred 
pounds  weight,  be  also  delivered  out  for  the  town  of  Cranston  ; 
that  the  town  treasurer  of  each  respective  town  receive  said 
powder  to,  and  for,  the  use  of  such  town  ;  and  that  they  be 
accountable  for  the  same,  to  the  colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  commanding  officer  in 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS,  497 

chief  of  the  colony's  brigade  upon  Rhode  Island,  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  ordered  to  deliver  one  hundred  pounds  weight  of  gun- 
powder to  each  of  the  towns  of  Portsmouth,  Tiverton  and  Little 
Compton  ;  and  that  the  town  treasurer  of  each  of  said  towns 
receive  the  same,  and  be  accountable  therefor,  to  the  colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  remaining  ton  of  gunpow=- 
der  which  the  colony  purchased  of  Messrs.  Clarke  and  Night-^ 
ingale,  now  at  Providence  (after  the  two  tons  shall  be  sent  to 
Newport),  be,  and  it  is  hereby,  ordered  to  be  distributed  in  the 
following  towns,  to  wit : 

Three  hundred  weight  in  each  of  the  towns  of  Westerly, 
Charlestown,  South  Kingstown,  North  Kingstown,  East  Green- 
wich and  Warwick  ;  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  weight,  to  Hop=- 
kinton,  to  re-place  the  powder  which  said  towns  lent  to  West^ 
erly,  and  was  sent  upon  Block  Island  ;  and  the  remaining  fifty 
pounds  weight,  to  Richmond. 

That  the  town  treasurer  of  each  respective  town,  take  care 
of  the  same  ;  and  that  said  powder  be  distributed  in  the  sev- 
eral towns  according  to  the  direction  of  the  town  meetings. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  several  town  trea- 
surers who  shall  receive  the  powder,  aforesaid,  account  there- 
for, to  this  Assembly,  when  called  upon. 

And  that  each  town,  aforesaid,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  or- 
dered to  send  to  Providence,  a  suitable  person  to  receive  their 
respective  proportion  of  powder,  as  aforesaid,  and  lodge  the 
same  in  each  of  their  town  treasuries,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  safety 
bcj  and  they  are  hereby,  directed  to  procure  a  sufficient  quan- 
tity of  shot  for  the  field-pieces  in  the  several  towns  in  this 
colony  ;  and  also  lead  and  flints  necessary  for  the  use  of  the 
said  towns. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  when  any  of  the  Continental 
troops  shall  march  through  this  colony,  that  the  committee  of 
safety  in  the  several  counties,  upon  receiving  information 
thereof,  from  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be,  and  they  are  here- 
by, ordered  to  provide  such  troops  with  all  necessaries,  during 
the  time  they  shall  continue  within  this  colony. 

VOL.  vit.         63 


498  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  session  of  this  Assembly, 
to  be  holden  the  first  Wednesday  in  May  next,  for  the  general 
election  of  officers  in,  and  throughout  this  colony,  be,  and  it  is 
hereby,  ordered  to  be  holden  at  Providence. 

Whereas,  the  committee  appointed  to  draw  up  a  set  of  in- 
structions and  rules  for  Henry  Babcock,  Esq.,  commander  of  the 
colony's  brigade,  to  observe  and  follow,  presented  the  following 
to  this  Assembly,  to  wit : 

Whereas,  this  General  Assembly,  having  taken  into  consid- 
eration the  conduct  of  Col.  Henry  Babcock,  commander  of  the 
brigade  formed  by  this  Assembly  at  their  session  holden  in 
January  last ;  and  heard  divers  witnesses  respecting  the  same  ; 
and  upon  full  inquiry  and  consideration,  thought  proper  to  con-^ 
tinue  the  said  Henry  Babcock  in  his  command. 

Yet  nevertheless,  from  the  evidence  before  this  Assembly,  it 
appearing  to  be  highly  expedient  for  restoring  peace  to  the 
brigade,  and  for  the  public  good,  to  give  the  said  Henry  Bab- 
cock some  instructions  and  directions  for  his  government ; — 

It  is  therefore  resolved,  that  the  following  instructions  and 
directions  be  given  to  the  said  Henry  Babcock,  which  he  is 
hereby  required  to  observe  : 

Instructions  of  the  General  Assembly^  to  Col.  Henry  Babcock. 

1.  That  he  do  not  undertake  any  expedition,  or  other  mat- 
ter of  importance,  without  the  advice  and  concurrence  of  the 
major  part  of  the  field  officers  of  the  said  brigade,  upon  Rhode 
Island,  while  the  headquarters  are  fixed  upon  that  island  ;  and 
in  other  cases,  such  field  officers  as  can  conveniently  be  sum- 
moned. 

2.  That  he  do  not  send  any  flag  of  truce  to  the  enemy,  or 
expresses  out  of  the  colony,  without  advice  and  concurrence,  as 
aforesaid. 

3.  That  he  quarter  the  troops  upon  Rhode  Island,  with  the 
same  advice  and  concurrence. 

4.  That  he  do  not  impress  any  horses  or  teams,  but  in 
cases  of  real  necessity  for  the  service. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  499 

5.  That  he  do  continue  with  the  troops  at  headquarters,  as 
constantly  as  the  nature  of  the  service  will  permit. 

6.  That  in  the  command  of  the  said  brigade,  and  in  his 
conduct  towards  the  oHicers  and  soldiers  thereof,  he  conform 
himself  strictly  to  the  regulations  and  articles  established  by 
this  General  Assembly,  for  the  government  of  the  said  brigade. 

We,  being  a  committee  to  prepare  instructions  to  be  given 
Henry  Babcock,  Esq.,  commander  of  the  colony  brigade,  pre-> 
sent  the  above.  JONATHAN  ARNOLD, 

JOSEPH  ANTHONY, 
HENRY  WARD. 

Whereupon,  this  Assembly  taking  the  premises  into  consid- 
eration, and  duly  examining  the  same, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  that  the  above  report  be,  and  hereby 
is,  accepted  ;  and  that  the  aforesaid  instructions  and  directions 
be,  and  they  are  hereby,  ordered  and  directed  to  be  observed 
by  Col.  Henry  Babcock. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  several  captain-lieutenants 
in  the  colony  brigade,  under  the  command  of  Col.  Babcock,  have, 
and  they  hereby  have,  the  rank  and  title  of  captains  ;  it  having 
been  the  intention  of  this  Assembly  to  give  them  the  same, 
heretofore. 

That  they  receive  commissions  and  rank  as  captains,  from  the 
time  they  received  their  commissions  as  captain-lieutenants  ; 
and  that  the  office  of  captain-lieutenants  in  said  brigade,  cease. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Major  John  Cooke  be,  and  he 
is  hereby,  appointed  to  sell  at  public  vendue  all  such  effects  as 
lately  belonged  to  Mr.  George  Rome,  now  at  headquarters,  ex- 
cepting only  such  as  are  necessary  for  the  barracks. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  John  Northup,  Esq.,  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  added  to  the  committee  appointed  to  lease  out 
the  farm  lately  belonging  to  Mr.  George  Rome,  in  North  Kings- 
town. 

That  the  stock,  thereon,  which  did  belong  to  said  Rome,  be 


500  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND         [1776. 

also  let  out  with  the  said  farm  ;  and  that  Mr.  Stephen  Boyer, 
the  present  tenant,  be  removed  off  therefrom. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  commander  in  chief  of  the 
colony's  brigade,  upon  Rhode  Island,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  di- 
rected to  appoint  a  careful,  discreet  person,  as  a  boat-master, 
to  have  the  care  of,  and  collect  all  the  boats  and  oars  which 
are  in  the  colony's  service. 

That  all  the  said  boats  which  are  unfit  for  service,  be  imme- 
diately repaired,  and  rendered  useful. 

That  said  boats  and  oars  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  ordered  to 
be  marked  with  the  colony  arms,  and  their  number  returned  to 
the  said  commander  in  chief 

That  the  said  boat-master  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  directed  to 
make  a  weekly  return  of  the  state  of  the  boats  and  oars,  with 
their  several  stations,  to  the  brigade-major. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  it  be,  and  hereby 
is,  recommended  to  the  said  commander  in  chief,  and  commis- 
sary of  the  forces,  to  furnish  the  said  boat-master  with  all  ne- 
cessary assistance,  in  collecting  and  repairing  said  boats  and  oars. 

That  the  return  of  the  number  of  each,  be  made  to  Messrs. 
Thomas  Freebody,  John  Smith,  John  Cooke,  John  Northup, 
Stephen  Mumford  aad  Cromel  Child. 

That  they  furnish  said  boats  with  oars  (if  wanted),  so  as  to 
have  sixty  boats,  complete  with  oars  ;  and  that  said  boats  and 
oars  be  sent  to  said  commander  in  chief,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

Both  Houses  being  resolved  into  a  grand  committee,  made 
choice  of  the  following  officers,  for  the  colony's  brigade,  now 
stationed  upon  Rhode  Island  : 

Officers  chosen  for  the  Colony's  Brigade. 

Robert  Elliott,  captain  of  the  Train  of  Artillery,  in  the  room 
of  Mr.  Spalding,  who  hath  resigned. 

John  Larcher,  Jr.,  lieutenant  fire-worker  of  said  train. 

Abimelech  Riggs,  captain  of  the  colonel's  company,  in  the 
first  regiment,  in  the  room  of  Capt.  Barton,  resigned. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  501 

Squire  Fisk,  lieutenant ;  and  Richard  Marvin^  ensign  of  the 
same  company; 

John  Foster,  Esq.,  judge  of  the  court  erected  for  the  trial  of 
maritime  causes. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  the 
Deputy  Governor,  and  members  of  the  General  Council,  the  ma- 
jor part  of  whom,  to  be  a  quorum,  together  with  such  of  the  depu- 
ties belonging  to  the  respective  towns  in  this  colony,  as  may  at^ 
tend,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  act  and 
transact  such  business  as  the  exigency  of  public  affairs  during 
the  recess  of  the  General  Assembly  may  require  ;  and  to  ad- 
vise His  Honor  therein  ;  and  that  all  orders  by  them  made  and 
issued  ;  and  all  other  their  transactions,  be  laid  before  the  next 
session  of  the  General  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  executions,  for  the  staying 
of  which,  petitions  are  pending  before  this  Assembly,  be,  and 
the  same  are  hereby,  stayed  until  such  petitions  be  heard. 

God  save  the  King. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Gen.  Washington. 

Providence,  January  25th,  1776. 

Sir : — I  have  cbnsultcd  the  general  committee  upon  the  subject  ot  your  letter  of 
the  16  th  instant. 

For  many  years  past,  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  surrounded  on  the  land  side 
by  Connecticut  and  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  thought  themselves  in  a  perfect  state  of 
security,  and  entirely  neglected  military  discipHne  ;  and  disposed  of  their  arms  so 
generally,  that  at  the  breaking  out  of  the  present  war,  the  colony  was  in  a  manner 
disarmed. 

We  have  taken  every  method  in  our  power,  by  purchasing,  by  employing  manu- 
facturers, and  by  importation,  to  procure  a  sufficient  quantity,  but  are  still  so  defi- 
cient, that  the  same  arms  which  have  been  rated  at  $6  and  $8,  at  Cambridge,  are 
readily  bought  here  at  $10  and  Si 2.  We  shall  scarcely  be  able  to  find  arms  for 
the  troops  we  have  ordered  to  be  raised  for  our  immediate  defence.  Besides  which, 
the  peculiar  situation  of  the  colony  requires  that  every  man  in  it  should  be 
provided. 

And  the  Assembly  have  accordingly  ordered  that  every  man  should  be  furnished 
by  the  15th  day  of  April  next,  under  severe  penalties.  In  these  circumstances,  Your 
Excellency  cannot  expert  any  supplies  of  arms  from  this  colony. 

I  am,  &c.,  NICHOLAS  COOKE. 

To  His  Excellency  General  Washington. 


§02  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776". 


The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Stephen  Hopkins  and  Samuel 
Ward,  Delegates  of  the  Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  to  the  Con-- 
iinental  Congress. 

Providence,  February  21st,  1776. 
Gentlemen  : — The  resolve  of  Congress,  for  procuring  gold  and  silver,  is  come  to 
band.     I  shall  lay  it  before  the  General  Assembly  next  week. 

But  in  the  mean  time,  I  think  it  necessajy  to  acquaint  you,  that  this  colony  hath 
been  so  exhausted  of  hard  morley,  by  the  supplies  for  Col.  Arnold,  and  the  great 
'quantities  of  provisions  and  available  stores  that  have  been  purchased,  that  the  Con- 
gress can  have  no  dependance  tipon  receiving  any  from  this  colony. 
I  am,  with  great  esteem  and  regard,  gentlemen, 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 
To  the  Honorable  S.  Hopkins  and  S.  Ward,  Esqs. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Stephen  Hopkins  and  Samuel 
Ward,  Delegates  of  the  Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  to  the  Con- 
tinental Congress. 

Providence,  March  5th,  177(). 

Gentlemen : — The  General  Assembly  have  aj^pointed  a  large  committee  to  pro- 
eure  gold  and  silver  coin,  for  the  service  of  the  army  in  Canada,  and  directed  them 
to  pay  the  sums  they  shall  receive,  into  the  general  treasury  within  one  month. 
There  are  several  gentlemen  in  this  colony  who  have  considerable  sums  due  to  them 
in  Canada.  It  is  projiosed  ta  take  draughts  from  them ;  and  upon  the  money  being 
paid  in  Canada,  to  pay  the  drawers  here. 

But  as  the  payment  will  be  very  uncertain,  I  do  not  think  any  dependance  should 
be  placed  upon  this  mode  of  supply.  I  shall  be  glad  of  your  sentiments  upon  the 
matter,  which  if  you  write  by  the  next  post  after  this  comes  to  hand,  will  be  received 
here  timelj'-. 

The  General  Assembly  have  appointed  three  of  the  inhabitants  of  New  Shoreham, 
a  committtee  to  determine  what  stock  is  absolutely  necessary  lor  the  subsistence  of 
the  inhabitants,  and  to  remove  the  remainder.  They  have  also  directed  all  the  arms 
to  be  taken  from  the  island. 

Col.  West,  who  hath  acted  as  commander  of  the  forces  upon  Rhode  Island,  re- 
signed his  commission ;  and  the  command  hath  devolved  upon  Col.  Babcock.  The 
office  of  brigadier  general,  is  still  vacant. 

We  meet  with  great  difficulty  in  procuring  arms  for  the  brigade.  Numbers  of 
men  are  waiting  only  for  that  article,  to  proceed  to  Rhode  Island.  Besides  which, 
there  is  a  great  deficiency  in  the  militia ;  near  one  half  of  whom,  are  destitute,  and 
which  I  very  much  fear,  cannot  be  made  up. 

Please  to  let  me  know  whether  fifteen  hundred  can  be  pi'ocured  in  Philadelphia, 
and  at  what  price  ;  or  whether  they  will  be  supplied  by  Congress. 

Wc  have  but  very  little  more  than  ten  tons  of  powder  in  the  colony.     The  As- 


177'6.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  50.^ 

senfoly  have  appointed  a  committee  to  purcliasy  arms  and  ammunition  in  case  any 
sha;ll  arrive. 

Last  Saturday  niglit,  General  Washington  began  to  bombard  Boston,  from  Lech- 
mere's  Point.  We  threw  about  a  bomb  an  Iiour,  and  tlie  enemy  returned'  four  op 
five  for  one.  The  greatest  preparations  are  made  for  taking  possession  of  Dorchester 
Point,  which  we  imagine  must  bring  on  a  brisk  action. 

But  I  suppose  you  have  more  particular  accounts  directly  from  C^ambridge,  tha^tt 
it  is  in  our  power  to  give  you.  The  General  Assembly  stands  adjourned  to  the  last 
Monday  in  this  month,  at  East  Greenwich. 

This  letter  Avas  designed  to  have  been  sent  by  the  post ;  but  his  going  yesterday 
out  of  his  course,  hath  prevented  my  writing  by  him. 

I  am,  with  great  esteem  and  regard,  gentlemen. 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 

To  the  Honorable  S.  Hopkins  and  S.  Ward,  Esqs. 


Gen.  Washington  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Cambridge,  March  17th,  1776. 

Sir : — I  have  the  pleasure  to  inform  you,  that  this  morning  the  ministerial  troops 
evacuated  the  town  of  Boston,  without  destroying  it,  and  that  we  are  now  in  full 
possession ;  upon  which  event,  I  beg  leave  to  congratulate  you,  and  sincerely  wish 
(if  the  ministry  persevere  in  the  same  unconstitutional  and  despotic  measures,  which 
have  too  long  marked  their  conduct,)  that  our  opposition  and  resistance  in  every 
<iuarter,  may  be  crowned  with  the  success  they  have  been  here. 

Where  their  destination  is,  or  what  plans  they  have  in  view,  is  altogether  un- 
known ;  most  probably  the  next  attempt  will  be  against  New  York,  or  some  more 
southern  colony. 

However,  I  should  think  (though  I  do  not  believe  they  have  any  design  against 
JJhode  Island,)  that  it  would  be  advisable  to  keep  a  strict  look  out ;  and  submit  it  to 
you,  whether  it  may  not  be  proper,  against  the  tjme  you  apprehend  they  might  ar-^ 
rive,  to  call  in  a  number  of  the  militia,  and  have  them  posted  in  proper  places.  I 
do  not  mean  to  direct  the  measure  ;  but  only  mention  it,  for  your  consideration  ;  to 
me,  it  appears  worthy  of  attention. 

I  am,  &c.,  GEORGE  WASHINGTON. 

To  the  Honorable  Governor  Cooke. 

-  B.     March  19.     The  fleet  is  still  in  King  ajid  Nantasket  Eoads. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Gen.  Washington. 

Providence,  March  18th,  177G. 

Sir : — I  am  favored  with  yours,  of  the  8th  and  14th  inst.,*  to  which  I  have  paid 
the  greatest  attention. 

The  several  regiments  of  militia  are  ordered  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  to 
march  in  case  the  enemy  should  land  in  this  colony  ;  and  the   General  Assembly  is 

*  These  letters  are  not  among  the  files  in  the  Secretary's  office. 


504  EECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OP    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

called  to  moet  this  day.  As  a  jiart  of  the  army  in  Boston,  supposing  them  to  be 
destined  to  the  southward,  might,  with  but  little  loss  of  time,  land  upon  and  destroy 
Rhode  Island,  and  cut  off  the  troops  there,  without  some  effectual  measures  are 
taken  to  oppose  them,  I  thought  these  steps,  which  it  were  all  in  my  power  to  take, 
necessary. 

I  also  beg  leave  to  suggest  to  Your  Excellency,  the  propriety  of  ordering  a  part 
of  the  forces  destined  for  New  York,  to  march  through  this  colony.  The  route  will 
not  be  much  further,  and  they  will  be  at  hand  to  repel  any  attack  of  the  enemy. 

I  shall  give  Your  Excellency  the  earliest  intelligence  of  every  motion  of  the  ene- 
my, that  shall  come  to  my  knowledge. 

I  am,  with  great  truth  and  esteem,  sir, 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 
To  His  Excellency  General  Washington. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Gen.  Washington. 

Providence,  March  19th,  177G. 

To  His  Excellency  General  ^yashington : — The  General  Assembly  of  the  colony 
of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,  acknowledge  with  gratitude  the  timely  notice  you  have  been 
pleased  to  give  them  of  the  late  movement  of  the  ministerial  troops. 

The  necessary  orders  have,  in  consequence  thereof,  been  given  to  the  militia  of 
this  colony,  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness,  should  any  attack  or  lodgment  be  made 
here,  by  said  troops. 

But  we  must  inform  Your  Excellency,  that  the  great  number  of  ti-oops  sent  out 
of  this  colony,  have  considerably  thinned  our  immbers  ;  that  the  troops  raised  and 
stationed  within  this  colony,  have  necessitated  the  colony  to  take  the  arms  out  of  the 
hands  of  a  great  part  of  the  militia,  which  lias  made  us  greatly  deficient  in  arms. 

The  singular  situation  of  this  colony,  will,  we  hope,  excite  Your  Excelleny's  im- 
mediate attention.  Rhode  Island  and  the  many  other  islands  in  our  bays  and  rivers, 
with  the  extensive  sea-coast,  renders  it  very  difHcult  to  defend  ourselves  against  the 
present  ministerial  forces.  What  our  situation  must  be,  if  a  large  armed  force 
should  make  a  landing  upon  Rhode  Island,  or  any  other  part  of  the  colony,  Your  Ex- 
cellency may  as  easily  suggest  as  we  can  describe.  It  will,  we  are  sure,  be  Your 
Excellency's  great  concern,  to  defend  every  part  of  the  continent  as  far  as  possible. 
Should  Your  Excellency  see  fit  to  order  any  part  of  the  forces  from  the  vicinity  of 
Boston,  to  any  of  the  southern  colonies,  we  Avould  wish  Your  Excellency  would  order 
their  march  thi-ough  this  colony  by  the  sea-shore,  that  we  might  have  the  chance  of 
their  being  present  should  the  colony  be  immediately  invaded ;  and  [to  consider] 
whether  it  may  not  be  necessary  that  a  considerable  force  should  be  inmiediately 
stationed  here,  till  the  intention  of  the  enemy  can  be  known,  we  also  submit  to  Your 
Excellency. 

We  are  extremely  solicitous  for  all  the  assistance  Your  Excellency  can  afford  us,, 
consistent  with  the  general  good ;  and  doubt  not  but  the  utmost  attention  Avill  be 
paid  by  Your  Excellency  to  our  peculiarly  distressed  and  dangerous  situation. 

We  are,  &c„  NICHOLAS  COOKE. 

To  General  Washington. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  505 


Gen.  Washington  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Cambridge,  March  21st,  177C. 

Sir: — Your  favors  of  the  18th  and  19th  instant,  I  received,  and  am  sorry  to 
hear  that  your  miUtia  are  so  deficient  in  arms.  I  fear  the  misfortune  is  too  common  ; 
nor  do  I  know  how  it  will  be  remedied.  In  this  army,  although  I  have  pursued 
every  mode  I  could  devise,  for  procuring  them,  there  is  still  a  great  deficiency ;  and 
a  considerable  number  of  men  wthout  any  in  their  hands. 

The  peculiar  situation  of  Rhode  Island,  and  the  extensive  sea-coast,  had  not  es- 
caped my  mind.  I  well  know  the  enemy  have  it  in  their  power  to  do  it  considera- 
ble damage,  unless  there  is  a  sufficient  force  to  repel  their  attempts. 

But  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  general  officers  here,  that  their  destination  is  against 
New  York ;  the  importance  of  which  (as  it  secures  the  free  and  only  communication 
between  the  Northern  and  Southern  colonies,  which  will  be  entirely  cut  off'  by  their 
possessing  it,  and  give  them  the  command  of  Hudson's  River,  and  an  easy  pass  into 
Canada) ,  makes  it  absolutely  and  indispensably  necessary  for  the  whole  of  this  army, 
which  is  but  inconsiderable,  except  that  jjart  of  it  which  will  be  left  here  to  secure 
the  stores,  barracks,  and  other  public  property,  to  be  marched  from  its  defence  with 
all  possible  expedition.  It  is  an  object  that  should  command  our  first  attention,  and 
if  lost,  will  be  of  the  most  fatal  consequence  to  us  in  the  jiresent  unhappy  and 
interesting  struggle. 

Lest  any  attempt  should  be  made  against  you,  I  shall  give  orders  to  the  officers 
commanding  brigades,  if  they  have  intelligence  of  an  invasion  upon  their  march,  that 
they  forthwith  return  to  your  succor.  I  shall  also  order  the  officer  who  will  be  left 
here,  to  do  the  same  with  the  troops  under  his  command,  whenever  occasion  may 
rec|uire  it. 

Agreeably  to  the  request  made  by  you,  and  your  Honorable  General  Assembly,  I 
shall,  with  cheerfulness  and  pleasure,  direct  some  of  the  last  divisions  that  go  from 
hence,  to  pursue  the  route  you  wish,  jf  they  can  be  accommodated  with  covering  and 
provision  ;  and  shall  be  ever  ready  and  happy  to  render  Rhode  Island,  or  any  other 
place,  any  services  in  ray  power,  that  may  be  compatible  with  the  general  good. 
I  am,  sir,  with  sentiments  of  the  highest  regard. 

Your  and  their  most  obedient  servant, 

GEORGE  WASHINGTON. 

To  Governor  Cooke. 


The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island,  to  General  Washington. 

East  Greenwich,  March  22d,  1776. 

Sir : — At  the  request  of  the  General  Assembly,  now  sitting  here,  I  make  applica- 
tion to  Your  Excellency  for  six  seamen,  taken  from  the  enemy,  and  now  your  pris- 
oners, to  be  exchanged  for  six  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  who  were  taken,  and  are 
detained  by  Capt.  Wallace. 

Pour  of  these  men  have  families,  who  are  greatly  distressed.  I  send  tliis  by  ex- 
press, by  reason  of  the  danger  of  Capt.  Wallace  being  removed  from  this  station, 
and  carrying  these  unfortunate  people  with  l}in>  ;  or  if  that  should  not  be  the  case, 
of  his  sending  them  to  Britain,  to  the  utter  ruin  of  them  and  their  families.     "VVe 

VOL.  vii.         64 


606  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1776, 

have  but  two  prisoners  in  this  colony  ;  both  oflicers,  and  active,  enterprising  men, 
whom  we  should  be  extremely  unwilling  to  give  up. 

I  beg  the  favor  of  Your  Excellency  to  give  this  matter  the  quickest  dispatch,  and 
to  deliver  the  seamen  to  Mr.  Burr,  the  bearer,  to  be  immediately  brought  into  the 
colony,  I  am,  Avith  great  truth  and  respect,  sir, 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 
To  General  Washington. 

Gen.  Washington  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Mand. 

Headquarters,  Cambridge,  March  27th,  177G. 
Sir  : — I  take  the  earhest  opportunity  to  acquaint  you,  that  the  men-of-war,  and 
transports  with  the  ministerial  troops,  sailed  this  afternoon,  from  Nantasket  harbor. 

In  consequence  of  this  movement,  I  have  ordered  a  brigade  to  mai'ch  to-morrow 
morning  for  New  York,  and  shall  follow  with  the  remainder  of  the  army,  as  soon  as 
I  can  receive  certain  information  of  the  fleet  being  clear  otF  the  coast,  and  that  we 
are  In  no  further  danger  of  their  returning  to  attack  us  at  a  disadvantage. 

I  shall  leave  a  few  regiments  at  Boston,  to  protect  the  Continental  stores,  and  to 
assist  in  fortifying  the  town  and  harbor,  agreeably  to  the  directions  that  may  be 
given  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony. 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  sir, 

Your  obedient,  humble  servant, 

GEORGE  WASHINGTON. 
To  Governor  Cooke. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Gen.  Washington. 

Providence,  March  31st,  177G.    ■» 
5  o'clock,  P.  M.  I 

Sir  : — I  am  to  inform  Your  Excellency  that  I  have  this  moment  an  exjiress  froni 
Newport,  informing  me  that  a  ship-of-war  hath  arrived  in  the  harbor  of  Newport^ 
and  that  twenty-seven  ships,  undoubtedly  having  the  ministerial  troops  on  board,  are 
within  Seaconnet  Point, 

Upon  this  most  alarming  occasion,  when  we  have  not  more  than  four  hundred 
soldiers  upon  Rhode  Island,  and  not  above  seven  or  eight  hundred  men  in  the  whole 
colony  (besides  the  militia,  not  more  than  half  armed),  I  must  use  the  most  pressing 
instances  with  Your  Excellency,  to  forward  sufliclent  succors  to  the  colony,  with  all 
possible  dispatch. 

I  am  about  issuing  the  necessary  orders  for  calling  the  whole  militia  together,  and 
taking  other  proper  measures. 

I  am,  Your  Excellency's  most  obedient  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 
To  Ills  Excellency  General  Washington,    ^ 
Headquarters,  Cambridge.  i 


17 7G.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  507 


The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island,  to  General  Washington. 

Providence,  April  1st,  177G. 

Sir  : — I  yesterday  wrote  Your  Excellency  that  I  had  information,  by  express  from 
Newport,  that  a  large  part  of  the  ministerial  fleet  and  army  were  near  that  harbor- 
Since  which,  by  the  intelligence  I  have  further  received,  I  am  inclined  to  believe, 
+hat  the  fleet  was  not  seen,  as  was  reported.  The  alarm  was  given  upon  the  follow- 
ing occasion  : 

Three  of  the  soldiers  being  upon  a  rising  ground,  near  the  town,  were  j^ositive 
they  saw  a  fleet  within  Seaconnet  Point,  and  counted  distinctly  twenty-one  sail- 
Immediately  upon  this,  the  sherifl"  of  the  county  of  Newjwrt  dispatched  an  express 
with  the  information. 

One  of  the  ensigns  also  says,  that  three  large  ships  were  seen  off  the  light  house 
from  Conannicut,  yesterday,  at  11  o'clock,  A.  M. 

After  having  taken  all  the  measures  that  appeared  necessary,  to  collect  a  suflicient 
force,  to  oppose  the  enemy,  I  sent  a  person  in  whom  I  could  confide,  to  Newport, 
who  has  just  returned,  and  informed  me  that  it  seems  to  be  the  general  opinion  that 
no  fleet  was  descried ;  but  that  the  persons  were  deceived  by  the  weather,  which 
was  very  thick  and  foggy,  and  has  so  continued  ever  since.  I  think  it  my  duty  to 
acquaint  Your  Excellency  of  this,  by  my  son,  who  goes  express ;  and — 
Am,  with  great  esteem  and  respect,  sir. 

Your  Excellency's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 

To  His  Excellency  General  Washington. 

John  Hancock,  President  of  the  Continental  Congress,  to  the 
General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island. 

Philadelphia,  April  12th,  1776. 

Gentlemen : — While  the  British  ministry  are  talcing  every  step,  that  cruelty  and 
revenge  can  dictate,  for  the  destruction  of  American  liberty,  it  is  incumbent  on  these 
United  Colonies  to  exert  their  utmost  efforts  to  defeat  them. 

Happily  for  our  country,  their  mihtary  operations  have  not  been  attended  with  the 
success  which  they  sanguinely  expected.  This  circumstance,  however,  far  from  abating 
their  rage,  has  had  the  eff"ect  constantly  produced  by  disappointed  passions.  It  has 
roused  them  to  make  new  exertions  of  power  against  us ;  and  we  now  behold  Ameri- 
can property,  by  a  late  act  of  Parliament,  made  legal  plunder.  Such  a  strain  of 
rapine  and  violence,  can  be  equalled  only  by  the  spirit  with  which  it  is  likely  to  be 
executed. 

Having  authorized  the  seizure  of  vessels  belonging  to  these  colonies,  wherever 
found  upon  the  high  seas,  there  is  too  much  reason  to  ai^prehend  the  execution  of 
the  edict  (which  we  may  expect  in  its  greatest  extent),  will,  for  a  time,  prove  a 
severe  clog  to  the  trade  of  America. 

Under  these  circumstances,  the  Congress,  in  hojjes  of  checking,  in  some  degree, 
an  evil  which  they  cannot,  at  jjresent,  remove ;  and  acting  upon  the  same  principles 
of  self-preservation  and  retaliation  which  they  have  hitherto  adopted,  have  been  in- 
duced to  come  into  sundry  resolutions  relative  to  the  fitting  out  letters  of  marque 


508  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

and  reprisal.  The  trade  of  America  is  an  object  of  so  much  consequence,  and  the 
protection  of  it  so  necessary,  that  I  make  no  doubt  of  your  giving  all  the  encourage- 
ment in  your  power,  to  any  measures  that  may  be  deemed  expedient,  for  its  security 
and  existence. 

I  herewith  transmit  bonds,  commissions  and  instructions,  which  the  Congress  has 
thouglit  proper  to  request  the  several  Assemblies,  conventions  and  committees  of 
safety^  td  make  use  of  on  the  occasion. 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  gentlemen. 

Your  most  obedient  and  very  humble  servant, 

JOHN  HANCOCK,  President, 
'to  the  Honorable  General  Assembh',  of  Ehode  Island. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Gen.  Washington. 

Providence,  April  23d,  1776. 

Sir  :— I  did  myself  the  honoi*,  in  my  letter  of  January  21st,  to  enclose  to  Your 
Excellency,  a  copy  of  a  memorial  fi-om  the  General  Assembly  to  the  Honorable 
Continental  Congress,  to  which  I  beg  leave  to  refer  you  ;  and  when  I  had  the  plea- 
sure of  seeing  you  here,  I  laid  before  you  very  fully  the  distressed  situation  of  the 
colony,  and  the  enormous  expenses  we  were  necessarily  put  to,  in  defending  such  an 
extensive  line  of  sea^coast,  which  I  thought  you  were  very  well  convinced  it  was  im- 
possible for  the  colony  to  support. 

I  prevailed  upon  Col.  Knox,  who  passed  through  this  town  on  his  way  to  Nor- 
wich, to  take  a  view  of  Newport,  and  to  direct  such  works  to  be  thrown  up  as 
he  should  think  necessary  for  the  defence  of  the  place.  He  is  clearly  of  opinion 
that  the  town  of  Newport  may  be  secured ;  and  hath  left  some  directions,  which  I 
have  ordered  to  be  carried  into  execution.  They  have  begun  the  Avorks,  and  I  be- 
lieve will  this  day  complete  a  battery  which  commands  the  north  entrance  of  the 
harbor. 

To-morrow  they  begin  the  fortifications  upon  Fort  Island  ;  and  if  it  be  in  our 
power  to  complete  the  works,  I  have  no  doubt  it  will  put  a  total  end  to  toryism  in 
this  colony. 

As  Colonel  Knox's  stay  was  very  short,  his  plans  are  not  particular  nor  exact.  If 
it  were  possible  for  Your  Excellency  to  spare  from  your  army  some  person  ac- 
quainted with  fortifications,  to  assist,  were  it  only  for  a.  few  days,  you  would  do  us  a 
particular  favor,  and  a  most  essential  service  to  the  common  cause. 

Col.  Babcock  hath  given  such  incontestable  proofs  of  insanity,  that  his  officers  were 
obhged  to  put  him  under  an  arrest,  and  send  him  under  a  guard,  to  Providence 
The  general  committee  have  continued  the  arrest,  and  referred  the  matter  until  next 
week,  when  the  Assembly  meets  ;  who  will  certainly  dismiss  him. 

I  beg  the  favor  of  Your  Excellency  to  represent  the  state  of  the  colony  to  Con- 
gress, and  to  recommend  to  them  the  taking  our  brigade  (which  is  enlisted  to  serve 
in  any  of  the  United  Colonies,)  into  Continental  pay  ;  and  to  establish  a  force  here, 
for  the  defence  of  the  colony. 

I  am,  with  great  truth  and  esteem,  sir, 

Your  Excellency's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 

To  His  Excellency  General  Washington. 


1V7G.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  509 


Gen.  Washington  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

New  York,  April  28tli,  1776. 

Sir : — I  received  your  favor  of  the  23tl  instant.  The  reason  why  I  did  not  hith- 
erto rejiresent  the  state  of  your  colony  to  Congress,  was  in  expectation  of  your  for- 
warding unto  me  a  sketch  of  it  in  writing. 

I  shall  take  the  first  opportunity  of  doing  it ;  and  if  my  recommendation  thereof, 
hath  any  weight  with  that  august  body,  it  will  give  me  much  pleasure  to  render  ser- 
vice to  your  colon}'. 

I  am  very  glad  that  Col.  Knox  has  taken  a  view  of  Newport,  and  hope  the  direc- 
tions he  has  left,  will  be  attended  with  all  the  good  consequences  you  mention. 

We  have  no  engineer  that  can  possibly  be  spared  from  hence  ;  indeed,  we  are 
very  deficient  in  that  department.  The  state  of  this  place  is  such,  that  had  we  any 
Inore  than  we  have,  there  would  be  full  emjiloyment  for  them. 

Colonel  Babcock's  misfortune  is  truly  pitiable.  The  incontestable  proofs  which 
he  has  given  at  Cambridge,  and  since,  of  a  distempered  hiind,  must,  to  every  one 
acquainted  with  them,  show  how  unfit  he  must  be  to  command  the  forces  of  your 
colony.  I  am,  with  very  great  regard,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

GEORGE  AVASIIINGTON. 

To  Governor  Cooke. 

P.  S.     The  only  engineer  we  had  to  spare,  is  sent  off"  to  Canada; 

Johji  Hancock^   President  of  the   Continental   Congress,  to  the 
Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Philadelphia,  April  30th,  1776. 

Sir : — In  order  to  give  success  to  the  expedition  into  Canada,  nothing  is  so  much 
wanted  at  this  juncture,  as  a  supply  of  specie.  General  Schuyler  says  it  is  abso- 
lutely necessary ;  and  the  Congress  have  i-eceived  from  him  the  most  pressing  letters 
on  that  head. 

Should  the  army  be  compelled  to  evdcuate  Canada,  it  is  impossible  to  say  what 
will  be  the  consequences,  or  Avhere  the  mischief  Avill  end.  It  becomes  us,  thei-efore, 
as  we  regard  our  country  and  its  best  interests,  to  exert  every  nerve  to  guard  against 
s'6  fatal  an  event.  For  this  purpose,  and  as  a  step  of  the  utmost  importance,  I  am 
commanded  by  Congress  earnestly  to  request  you,  to  take  the  most  speedy  and  effec- 
tual measures  to  collect  as  much  hard  money  as  possible,  and  to  send  the  same  to 
General  Schuyler.  Whatever  sum  you  may  collect  for  this  use,  you  will  please  to 
draw  on  me  for  the  amount,  and  the  bills  shall  be  honored. 

The  unprepared  state  of  the  colonies  on  the  commencement  of  the  Avar,  and  the 
almost  total  want  of  every  thing  necessary  to  carry  it  on,  are  the  true  sources  from 
Avhence  all  our  difficulties  have  proceeded.  The  fact,  however,  furnishes  a  most 
striking  proof  of  the  weakness  or  wickedness  of  those,  who  charge  them  with  an 
original  intention  of  withdrawing  from  the  government  of  Great  Britain,  and  erecting 
an  independent  empire.  Had  such  a  scheme  been  formed,  the  most  warlike  prepara- 
tions would  have  been  necesssary  to  effect  it. 


510  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  1776. 

From  the  tlistingiiislied  ardor  and  zeal  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  in  the 
American  cause,  I  am  persuaded  you  will  pay  all  the  attention  to  this  request  of 
Congress,  which  the  importance  of  it  demands. 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient  and  very  humble  servant, 

JOHN  HANCOCK,  President. 
To  the  Honorable  Nfcholas  Cooke,  Esq.,    ") 
Governor  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island.    > 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the 
first  Wednesday  of  May^  1776. 

The  Hon.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Bradford,  Deputy  Governor. 

The  following  officers,  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged  : 

The  Hon.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Bradford,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  John  Collins,  Mr.  James  Arnold, 

Maj.  Gen.  Simeon  Potter,  Mr.  Jonathan  Randall, 

Mr.  Ambrose  Page,  Mr.  Peter  Phillips, 

Mr.  John  Sayles,  Jr.,  Mr.  William  Potter, 

Mr.  John  Jepson,  Mr.  Thomas  Church, 

DEPUTIES. 

Newport.  Providence. 

Mr.  John  Wanton,  Col.  Jonathan  Arnold, 

Mr,  Samuel  Fowler,  Mr.  John  Brown, 

Mr.  George  Sears,  Mr.  John  Smith, 

Mr.  Gideon  Wanton,  Col.  Amos  Atwell. 
Mr.  Thomas  Freebody, 
Col.  Joseph  Belcher. 


1776.] 


AND   TROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


511 


DEPUTIES. 


Portsmouth. 
Mr.  Metcalfe  Bowler, 
Mr.  John  Coddington, 
Mr.  John  Thurston. 

Warwick. 
Mr.  William  Greene, 
Mr.  Jacob  Greene, 
Mr.  Charles  Holden,  Jr., 
Col.  John  Waterman. 

Westertij. 
Maj.  Gen.  Joshua  Babcock, 
Col.  Joseph  Noyes. 

North  Kingstown. 
Mr.  John  Northup, 
Mr.  Sylvester  Gardner. 

South  Kingstown. 
Capt.  Samuel  Seager, 
Mr.  Samuel  Babcock. 
East  Greenvnch. 
Mr.  Job  Comstock, 
Mr.  Thomas  Shippee. 

Jamestown. 
Capt.  Samuel  Carr, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Underwood. 

SmithfieJd. 
Mr.  Daniel  Mo  wry,  Jr., 
Capt.  Andrew  Waterman. 

Scituate. 
Col.  William  West, 
Mr.  Christopher  Potter. 

Glocester. 
Mr.  Richard  Steere, 
Col.  Chad  Brown. 

Charlestoion. 
Capt.  Joseph  Stanton,  Jr., 
Mr.  Jonathan  Hazard. 


West  Greenwich- 
Mr.  Thomas  Tillinghast, 
Mr.  Judiah  Ay  1  worth. 

Coventry. 
Mr,  Ephraim  Westcott, 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Fenner. 

Exeter. 
Mr.  George  Pierce. 
Middletown. 
Mr.  Joshua  Barker, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Easton. 

Bristol. 
Mr.  Shearjashub  Bourn, 
Col.  Nathaniel  Pearce. 

Tiverton. ' 
Mr.  Gideon  Almy, 
Col.  John  Cooke. 

Little  Compton. 
Capt.  Thomas  Brownell, 
Mr.  Daniel  Wilbur. 

Warren. 
Mr.  Cromwell  Child, 
Col.  Sylvester  Child. 

Cumberland. 
Mr.  John  Dexter, 
Capt.  Elisha  Waterman. 

Richmond. 
Mr.  Samuel  Tefft, 
Major  Richard  Bailey. 

Cranston. 
Mr.  Andrew  Harris, 
Mr.  Zuriel  Waterman. 

Johnston. 
Mr.  John  Fenner, 
Mr.  Peleg  Williams, 


512  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE  ISLAND  [1776, 


DEPUTIES. 

North  Providence.  Hopkinton. 

Major  Thomas  Oliiey,  Mr.  John  Larkin, 

Mr.  Jonathan  Jenckes,  Jr.         Mr.  Thomas  Wells. 

Barrington. 
Mr.  Edward  Bosworth, 
Capt.  Thomas  Allen. 

The  Hon.  Metcalfe  Bowler,  speaker  ;  Josias  Lyndon,  clerk. 

Mr.  Henry  Ward,  secretary. 

Mr.  Henry  Marchant,  attorney  general. 

Mr.  Joseph  Clarke,  general  treasurer. 

SHERIFFS    OF    THE    SEVERAL    COUNTIES. 

Newport  county — Mr.  Jabez  Champlin.  Providence  county 
— Mr.  Paul  Tew.  Kings  county — Mr.  Beriah  Brown.  Bris- 
tol county — Mr.  Richard  Smith.  Kent  county — Mr.  Henry 
Rice, 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  John  Smith,  Amos 
Atwell,  Joseph  Belcher,  Jonathan  Jenckes,  Jr.,  Ephraim  West- 
cott,  George  Sears  and  Andrew  Waterman,  be  appointed  to 
procure,  immediately,  for  the  use  of  the  colony's  brigade,  as 
many  iron  or  shod  shovels,  and  iron  scoop  shovels,  as  can  be 
got,  not  exceeding  one  hundred  and  fifty  in  the  whole  ;  that 
they  procure  to  be  made  as  soon  as  possible,  for  the  same  use, 
fifty  good  spades  ;  that  they  be  delivered  to  the  said  John 
Smith,  and  sent  to  Newport  this  week  ;  that  the  spades  and 
shovels  be  well  steeled,  and  be  not  purchased  at  a  higher  rate 
than  nine  shillings  ;  and  that  the  committee  be  empowered  to 
draw  a  sufficient  sum  of  money  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  Mrs.  Martha  Sweet,  the  wife  of  Sylvester  Sweet, 
by  petition,  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  her  husband, 
inspired  with  a  zeal  for  the  liberties  of  his  country,  enlisted  in 
the  service   of  the  colony,  in  Capt.  Westcott's  company,  and 


177G.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  513 

had  the  misfortune  to  be  taken  prisoner  by  the  ministerial  fleet, 
under  the  command  of  Gapt.  Wallace,  in  the  late  attack  on 
Jamestown,  in  December  last,  and  sent  to  Boston  ;  and  that 
she  is  now  in  a  poor  state  of  health,  and  unable  to  support  her- 
self ;  and  thereupon,  prayed  that  this  Assembly  would  con- 
sider her  poor  and  deplorable  circumstances,  and  order  her 
husband's  wages  to  be  paid  to  her. 

And  the  premises  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of 
safety  pay  to  the  said  Martha  Sweet,  two  months  of  her  hus- 
band's wages. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  regiment  of  the  county  of 
Newport  be  divided  into  two  regiments. 

That  the  first  regiment  contain  all  the  companies  of  militia 
in  the  towns  of  Newport,  Portsmouth,  New  Shoreham,  James- 
town and  Middletown. 

And  that  the  second  regiment  contain  the  companies  of  mili- 
tia in  Tiverton  and  Little  Compton. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  company  of 
militia  in  Little  Compton,  be  divided  into  two  companies,  by  a 
line  beginning  at  Perez  Richmond's  house,  and  running 
easterly^  as  the  highway  runs,  until  it  comes  to  the  Rounds  of 
Dartmouth. 

And  that  the  company  to  the  southward  of  said  line,  be  the 
first  company. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  first  company  of  militia  in 
Providence,  be  divided  into  two  companies,  by  a  line  beginning 
at  the  water,  and  running  through  Meeting  Street,  until  it 
comes  to  the  upper  ferry. 

And  that  the  company  southward  of  said  street,  be  the  first ; 
and  that  to  the  northward,  the  third  company. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  second  company  of  militia, 
in  the  town  of  Providence  be  divided  into  two  companies,  by  a 
line  beginning  at  the  lane  southward  of  the  house  of  Samuel 
Nightingale,  Esq.  ;  and  from  thence,  running  by  School  House 
Lane,  until  it  comes  to  Westminster  Street,  and  across  said 
.street. 

VOL.  vii.         65 


614  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OP    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

And  that  the  east  part,  make  the  second  ;  and  the  west  part, 
the  fourth  company. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  commanding  officer  of  the 
colony's  brigade,  be  directed  to  employ  a  sufficient  number  of 
men,  to  erect  a  fort  at  Beaver  Tail,  upon  Conannlcut,  to  con- 
tain six  or  eight  heavy  cannon,  under  the  direction  of  the  Hon- 
orable Eseck  Hopkins,  Esq.,  commander  in  chief  of  the  Conti- 
nental navy. 

Both  Houses  being  resolved  into  a  grand  committee,  pro- 
ceeded upon  the  election,  and  chose  the  following  officers,  to 
wit: 

Officers  chosen  for  the  Colony  s  Brigade. 

Joshua  Babcock,  Esq.,  major  general  of  the  militia. 

George  Irish,  Esq.,  colonel  of  the  first  regiment  of  militia,  in 
the  county  of  Newport. 

Jabez  Bowen,  Esq.,  colonel  of  the  first  regiment  of  militia, 
in  the  county  of  Providence. 

Joseph  Noyes,  Esq.,  colonel  of  the  first  regiment  of  militia, 
in  the  county  of  Kings  county. 

Nathaniel  Martin,  Esq.,  colonel  of  the  regiment  of  militia,  in 
the  county  of  Bristol. 

John  Waterman,  Esq.,  colonel  of  the  first  regiment  of  mili- 
tia, in  the  county  of  Kent. 

John  Cooke,  Esq.,  colonel  of  the  second  regiment  of  militia, 
in  the  county  of  Newport. 

Chad  Brown,  Esq.,  colonel  of  the  second  regiment  of  militia, 
in  the  county  of  Providence. 

Kobert  Brown,  Esq.,  colonel  of  the  second  regiment  of  mili- 
tia, in  the  county  of  Kings  county. 

Nathaniel  Brown,  Esq.,  colonel  of  the  second  regiment  of 
militia,  in  the  county  of  Kent. 

William  West,  Esq.,  colonel  of  the  third  regiment  of  militia, 
in  the  county  of  Providence. 

George  Sears,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  of  the  first  regiment 
of  militia,  in  the  county  of  Newport. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  615 

Amos  Atwell,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  of  the  first  regiment, 
in  the  county  of  Providence, 

Jesse  Champlin,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  of  the  first  regiment 
of  militia,  in  the  county  of  Kings  county. 

Thomas  Gray,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  of  the  regiment  of 
militia,  in  the  county  of  Bristol. 

John  Low,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  of  the  first  regiment,  in 
the  county  of  Kent. 

David  Hilyard,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  of  the  second  regi- 
meut  of  militia,  in  the  county  of  Newport. 

Elisha  Mowrey,  Jr.,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  of  the  second 
regiment  of  militia,  in  the  county  of  Providence. 

•  George  Pierce,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  of  the  regiment  of 
militia,  in  the  county  of  Kings  county. 

Archibald  Kasson,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  of  the  second  regi* 
ment  of  militia,  in  the  county  of  Kent. 

John  Colwell,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  of  the  third  regiment 
of  militia,  in  the  county  of  Providence. 

Job  Almy,  2d,  Esq.,  major  of  the  first  regiment  of  militia, 
in  the  county  of  Newport. 

Ebenezer  Thompson,  Esq.,  major  of  the  first  regiment  of  mi- 
litia, in  the  county  of  Providence. 

Jesse  Maxson,  Esq.,  major  of  the  first  regiment  of  militia, 
in  the  county  of  Kings  county. 

Benjamin  Bosworth,  Esq.,  major  of  the  regiment  of  militia, 
in  the  county  of  Bristol. 

Thomas  Tillinghast,  Esq.,  major  of  the  first  regiment  of  mi- 
litia, in  the  county  of  Kent. 

Pardon  Gray,  Esq.,  major  of  the  second  regiment  of  militia, 
in  the  county  of  Newport. 

John  Fiske,  Esq.,  major  of  the  second  regiment  of  militia, 
in  the  county  of  Providence. 

Charles  Dyer,  Esq.,  major  of  the  second  regiment  of  militia, 
in  the  county  of  Kings  county. 

Yelverton  Waite,  Esq.,  major  of  the  second  regiment  of  mi- 
litia, in  the  county  of  Kent. 


516  Records  of  the  colony  of  rhode  island       [1776. 

Joseph  Knight,  Esq.,  major  of  the  third  regiment  of  militia, 
in  the  county  of  Providence. 

Officers  to  command  the  several  trained  bands,  or  companies  of 
militia,  ivithin  the  colon tj. 

Providence.  First  company — Jonathan  Russsell,  captain  ; 
David  Lawrence,  lieutenant ;   Martin  Seamans,  ensign. 

Second  company — James  Burrill,  captain  ;  Wm.  Rhodes, 
lieutenant ;   Nathan  Warner,  ensign. 

Third  company — John  Demount,  captain  ;  James  Wheaton^ 
son  of  Ephraim,  lieutenant  ;   Martin  Thurber,  ensign. 

Fourth  company — James  Snow,  captain ;  Zephaniah  Brown, 
lieutenant ;   David  Bacon,  ensign. 

Portsmouth.  First  company — David  Giflford,  captain  ;  Thos. 
Earle,  lieutenant;    Cooke  Wilcox,  ensign. 

Warwick.  First  company — Job  Randall,  captain  ;  James 
Arnold,  5th  lieutenant ;   William  Lippitt,  ensign. 

Second  company — Reuben  Wightman,  captain ;  Squire 
Milward,  lieutenant ;   James  Gerrald,  ensign. 

Third  company — Thos.  Rice,  son  of  Thos.,  captain  ;  An- 
thony Holden,  son  of  Charles,  lieutenant  ;  Stutely  Stafford, 
Jr.,  ensign. 

Westerly.  First  company — Joseph  Pendleton,  captain ; 
Joshua  Pendleton,  lieutenant ;   Ephraim  Pendleton,  ensign. 

Second  company — John  Gavett,  captain ;  Stephen  Saunders, 
lieutenant ;   William  Bliven,  ensign. 

New  Shoreham  company — John  Sands,  captain  ;  Samuel 
Rathbun,  Jr.,  lieutenant  ;   William  Littlefiold,  ensign. 

North  Kingstown.  First  company — Thomas  Clarke,  cap- 
tain ;   John  Manchester,  lieutenant ;   Charles  Dyer,  ensign. 

Second  company — WilUam  Taylor,  captain  ;  John  Cole,  Jr., 
lieutenant ;   Sylvester  Sweet,  ensign. 

Third  company — Sam'l  Thomas,  Jr.,  captain  ;  John  Brown, 
Jr.,  lieutenant ;  Joshua  Vaughan,  ensign. 

South  Kingstown.  First  company — Samuel  Seagers,  cap- 
tain ;   Gideon  Babcock,  lieutenant ;  Jonathan  Card,  ensign. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  517 

Second  company — Abial  Brown,  captain  ;  J.imes  Parker, 
lieutenant;   Barber  Peckham,  ensign. 

Third  company — Ray  Sands,  captain  ;  Samuel  Potter,  lieu- 
tenant ;   Daniel  Williams,  ensign. 

Smithfield.  First  company — Thomas  Jenckes,  captain ; 
Samuel  Day,  lieutenant ;   George  Streeter,  ensign. 

Second  company — David  Eddy,  captain  ;  Ebenezer  Trask, 
lieutenant ;   Simeon  Ballou,  ensign. 

Third  company — Nehemiah  Smith,  captain  ;  James  Smith, 
lieutenant  ;   Jesse  Smith,  ensign. 

Scituate.  First  company — Peleg  Fiske,  captain  ;  Nathan 
Relph,  lieutenant  ;   Jonathan  Knight,  Jr.,  ensign. 

Second  company — Simeon  Herrenden,  captain ;  George 
Dorrance,  lieutenant  ;   Reuben  Read,  ensign. 

Third  company — James  Williams,  captain  ;  Joseph  Davis, 
lieutenant ;   Caleb  Potter,  ensign. 

Fourth  company — Jeremiah  Davis,  captain  ;  Isaac  Hopkins, 
lieutenant ;   Oziel  Smith,  ensign. 

Sixth  company — Stephen  Sheldon,  captain  ;  James  Wells, 
lieutenant;   William  Howard,  ensign. 

Glocester.  First  company — Benajah  Whipple,  captain  ; 
Simon  Smith,  lieutenant ;  John  Eddy,  ensign. 

Second  company — Samuel  Mayes,  captain  ;  Ezekiel  Petti- 
place,  lieutenant ;   Daniel  Mathewson,  ensign. 

Third  company — Abraham  Winsor,  captain  ;  Stephen  Pain, 
lieutenant  ;   Richard  Lewis,  ensign. 

Fourth  company — Stephen  Winsor,  captain  ;  Aaron  Arnold, 
lieutenant ;  Isaac  Ross,  ensign. 

Charlestown.  First  company — Thomas  Sheffield,  captain  ; 
Jonathan  Macomber,  lieutenant  ;   Caleb  Crandall,  ensign. 

Second  company — Amos  Greene,  Jr,,  captain  ;  Beriah 
Lewis,  lieutenant ;   Daniel  Stafford,  ensign. 

Coventry.  First  company — Benedict  Colvill,  captain ;  Rob- 
ert Cooke,  lieutenant ;   William  Collins,  ensign. 

Second  company- — William  Roy,  captain  ;  William  Burling- 
hara,  lieutenant  ;   Nicholas  Whitford,  ensign. 


518  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

Third  company — Benj.  Greene,  captain  ;  Laagford  Weaver, 
lieutenant  ;   Jonathan  Nichols,  Jr.,  ensign. 

Fourth  company — Joseph  Whipple,  captain  ;  Joseph  Kin- 
yon,  lieutenant  ;   Asa  Bennett,  ensign. 

Middletown  company — Thomas  Peckham^  captain ;  John 
Vars,  lieutenant  ;   Thomas  Coggeshall,  Jr.,  ensign. 

Bristol  company — Jeremiah  Ingraham,  captain  ;  Stephen 
Smith,  lieutenant  ;   Hezekiah  Munro,  ensign. 

Tiverton.  First  company — Isaac  Cooke,  captain ;  Philip 
Corey,  lieutenant  ;   Philip  Manchester,  ensign. 

Second  company — Benjamin  Durfee,  captain  ;  Ebenezer 
Slocum,  lieutenant ;   Daniel  Deval,  Jr.,  ensign. 

Little  Compton.  First  company — Gideon  Simmons,  cap- 
tain ;   Ephraim  Simmons,  lieutenant ;    William  Bailey,  ensign. 

Second  company — George  Simmons,  captain  ;  David  Cooke, 
lieutenant  ;   Fobes  Little,  Jr.,  ensign. 

Warren  company — Ezra  Ormsbee,  captain  ;  Smith  Bowen, 
lieutenant  ;   x\mos  Haile,  ensign. 

Cumberland.  First  company — Enoch  Wetherhead,  captain  ; 
Benjamin  Wilkinson,  lieutenant  ;   Joseph  Razey,  Jr.,  ensign. 

Richmond.  First  company — Simeon  Chirke,  Jr.,  captain; 
Thos.  James,  lieutenant  ;   Smiting  Potter,  ensign. 

Second  company — Jonathan  Maxson,  captain  ;  John  Clarke, 
lieutenant  ;   Jeremiah  Tefft,  ensign. 

Cranston.  First  company — Anthony  Potter,  captain  ;  Jo- 
siah  Potter,  lieutenant  ;   Gideon  Westcott,  ensign. 

Second  company — Frederick  Williams,  captain  ;  Nathaniel 
Carpenter,  lieutenant ;  John  Harris,  Jr.,  ensign. 

Third  company — Edward  Knight,  captain  ;  William  Field, 
2d,  lieutenant  ;   Joseph  Potter,  ensign. 

Hopkinton.  First  company — Barker  Wells,  captain  ;  Oliver 
Babcock,  Jr.,  lieutenant;   Elnathan  Wells,  ensign. 

Second  company — George  Thurston,  Jr.,  captain  ;  Matthew 
Randall,  lieutenant ;   Randall  Wells,  ensign. 

Johnston.  First  company — Richard  Fenner,  Jr.,  captain  ; 
Daniel  Sprague,  Jr.,  lieutenant;  James  Fenner,  ensign. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  519 

Second  company — Emmor  Olney,  captain  ;  Daniel  Angell, 
lieutenant ;   Laban  Waterman,  ensign. 

North  Providence  company— Eleazer  Jenckes,  captain ; 
Samuel  Olney,  lieutenant  ;   Jesse  Angell,  ensign. 

Barrington  company — Thomas  Allen,  captain  ;  Vial  Allen, 
lieutenant ;   Daniel  Kinnicutt,  ensign. 

Committee  of  Safety, 

For  the  county  of  Newport — Metcalfe  Bowler,  Esq.,  and 
Col.  John  Cooke. 

For  the  county  of  Providence — Mr.  John  Smith  and  Daniel 
Tillinghast,  Esq. 

For  the  county  of  Kings  county — John  Northup,  Esq.  and 
Mr.  Joseph  Stanton,  Jr. 

For  the  county  of  Bristol — Hon.  William  Bradford,  Esq. 

For  the  county  of  Kent — Stephen  Mumford,  Esq. 

James  Clarke,  ensign  of  the  eighth  company,  in  the  second 
regiment  of  the  colony's  brigade. 

William  Barton,  Esq.,  major  of  brigade,  for  the  county  of 
Providence. 

An  Act  establishing  an  independent  company,  by  the  name  of 

Smithfield  and  Cumberland  Rangers. 

[The  charter  is  printed  at  length  in  the  Schedule.] 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  this  colony  will  send  two  dele- 
gates to  represent  the  colony  in  the  Continental  Congress. 

Both  Houses  being  resolved  into  a  grand  committee,  chose 
the  Honorable  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  the  first  delegate,  to 
represent  the  colony  in  Congress. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  John  Collins,  Esq.,  Messrs. 
Jonathan  Arnold,  John  G.  Wanton,  Henry  Ward,  Richard 
Steere  and  Shearjashub  Bourn,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  take  the  letter  from  the  Honorable 


520  RECORDS    OP    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1776. 

Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  to  the  Governor,  into  consideration, 
and  to  prepare  instructions  to  the  delegates,  to  represent  this 
colony  in  Congress  ;  and  to  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  as, 
soon  as  may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  such  of  the  prisoners  of  war, 
now  in  the  jail  in  Providence,  as  the  Honorable  Eseck  Hop- 
kins, Esq.,  shall  think  proper,  be  confined  to  close  jail. 

In  Council  was  read  the  return  of  the  officers  chosen  to  com- 
mand the  company  of  Light  Infantry,  for  the  county  of  Provi- 
dence, which  is  as  follows,  to  wit : 

John  Mathewson,  captain  ;  Jonathan  Ellis,  first  lieutena.nt ; 
Daniel  Jackson,  second  lieutenant ;  Benjamin  Tallman,  ensign  ; 
which  being  considered  by  the  Council — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  officers  be,  and  they 
are  hereby,  approved. 

In  Council,  was  read  the  return  of  the  officers  chosen  to 
command  the  company  of  Pawtuxet  Rangers,  in  the  towns  of 
Warwick  and  Cranston,  which  is  as  follows,  to  wit  : 

Benjamin  Arnold,  captain  ;  Oliver  Arnold,  first  lieutenant; 
Sylvester  Rhodes,  second  lieutenant  ;  James  Sheldon,  ensign  ; 
which  being  considered  by  the  Council — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  officers  be,  and  they 
are  hereby,  approved. 

In  Council,  was  read  the  return  of  the  officers  chosen  to 
command  the  company  of  Light  Infantry,  in  the  town  of  Glo- 
cester,  and  is  as  follows,  to  wit : 

Timothy  Wilmarth,  Jr.,  captain  ;  David  Richmond,  first 
lieutenant ;  Martin  Smith,  second  lieutenant ;  Caleb  Sheldon,, 
ensign  ;   which  being  considered  by  the  Council — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  officers  be,  and  here- 
by are,  approved. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  William  Potter,  John  Northup 
and  Peter  Phillips,  Esqs.,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby,  appointed  to  let  out,  in  behalf  of  the  colony, 
all  the  real  estates  ordered  heretofore  by  the  General  Assem- 
bly of  this  colony  to  be  taken  into  possession,  in  the  county  of 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  621 

Kings  county,  by  the  high  sheriff  of  said  county,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  inimical  principles  their  former  proprietors  en- 
tertained to  America. 

And  that  the  said  committee  be  empowered  to  let  the  estate 
in  possession  of  Stephen  Boyer,  lying  in  North  Kingstown,  in 
said  county,  formerly  tenant  to  George  Rome,  to  the  said  Ste- 
phen Boyer,  or  any  other  person  ;  he  having  given  satisfaction 
to  the  committee  of  inspection  of  said  North  Kingstown,  as  to 
his  future  conduct. 

That  said  committee  be  also  empowered  to  let  such  part  of 
the  stock  on  the  farm,  late  of  said  George  Rome,  to  the  said 
Stephen  Boyer  ;  and  to  sell  and  dispose  of  such  part  thereof, 
as  they  shall  think  proper  ;  and  to  account  therefor,  to  this 
colony,  whenever  required ;  and  that  they  make  report  thereof, 
to  this  Assembly,  at  the  next  session. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  commanding  officer  of  the 
forces  on  Rhode  Island  be  directed  immediately  to  remove  the 
troops  from  the  Ferry  House  on  the  Point,  belonging  to  Mr. 
Benjamin  EUery,  in  order  that  the  ferry  may  be  kept  open,  as 
usual. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  act  passed  at  the  session 
held  in  January  last,  appointing  watches  to  be  kept  in  the  sev- 
eral towns  bordering  upon  the  sea,  be  suspended  during  the 
absence  of  the  ministerial  fleet. 

That  for  the  future,  a  watch  be  kept  only  at  Point  Judith 
Point,  Seaconnet  Point,  at  Westerly,  Charlestown,  at  the 
South  Ferry,  in  South  Kingstown,  as  heretofore  ;  and  at  North 
Kingstown. 

That  the  colonels  of  militia,  in  the  several  towns,  where  said 
watches  have  been  kept,  lay  before  this  Assembly,  at  the  next 
session,  an  exact  account  of  all  the  expenses  that  have  accrued 
since  the  first  appointment  of  said  watches. 

That  a  copy  of  this  act  be  transmitted  to  each  of  the  said 
colonels,  within  ten  days  after  the  rising  of  this  Assembly. 

And  that  the  respective  members  of  the  General  Assembly, 
in  the  several  towns  of  the  colony,  where  a  watch  hath  been 
kept,  inform  the  colonels  immediately  to  stop  said  watch, 

VOL.  VII.  66 


522  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

An  Act  repealing  an  act,  entitled  "  An  act  for  the  more  ef- 
fectually securing  to  His  Majesty,  the  allegiance  of  his  sub- 
jects, in  this  his  colony  and  dominion  of  Rhode  Island  and 
Providence  Plantations  ;"  and  altering  the  forms  of  com- 
missions, of  all  writs  and  processes  in  the  courts,  and  of  the 
oaths  prescribed  by  law.* 

Whereas,  in  all  states,  existing  by  compact,  protection  and 
allegiance  are  reciprocal ;  the  latter  being  only  due  in  conse- 
quence of  the  former. 

And  whereas,  George  the  Third,  King  of  Great  Britain,  for- 
getting his  dignity,  regardless  of  the  compact  most  solemnly 
entered  into,  ratified  and  confirmed  to  the  inhabitants  of  this 
colony,  by  his  illustrious  ancestors  ;  and  till  of  late,  fully  re- 
cognized by  him  ;  and  entirely  departing  from  the  duties  and 
character  of  a  good  king,  instead  of  protecting,  is  endeavoring 
to  destroy  the  good  people  of  this  colony,  and  of  all  the  United 
Colonies,  by  sending  fleets  and  armies  to  America,  to  confiscate 
our  property,  and  spread  fire,  sword  and  desolation,  throughout 
our  country,  in  order  to  compel  us  to  submit  to  the  most  de- 
basing and  detestable  tyranny  ;  whereby,  we  are  obliged,  by 
necessity,  and  it  becomes  our  highest  duty,  to  use  every  means, 
with  which  God  and  nature  have  furnished  us,  in  support  of 
our  invaluable  rights  and  privileges ;  to  oppose  that  power 
which  is  exerted  only  for  our  destruction. 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  an  act  entitled  "  An 
act  for  the  more  effectual  securing  to  His  Majesty  the  allegi- 
ance of  his  subjects,  in  this  his  colony  and  dominion  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,"  be,  and  the  same  is  here- 
by, repealed. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  in  all  commissions  for 
offices,  civil  and  military  ;  and  in  all  writs  and  processes  in  law, 
whether  original,  judicial  or  executory,  civil  or  criminal,  where- 
ever  the  name  and  authority  of  the  said  King  is  made  use  of, 

*  The  official  journals  of  the  senate,  show  that  this  act,  repealing  the   act  of  allegiance 
with  Great  Britain,  was  passed  on  the  4th  May,  1776, 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  523 

the  same  shall  be  omitted  ;  and  in  the  room  thereof,  the  name 
and  authority  of  the  Governor  and  Company  of  this  colony, 
shall  be  substituted,  in  the  following  words,  to  wit :  "  The 
Governor  and  Company  of  the  English  Colony  of  Rhode  Island 
and  Providence  Plantations." 

That  all  such  commissions,  writs  and  processes,  shall  be 
otherwise  of  the  same  form  and  tenure  as  they  heretofore  were. 

That  the  courts  of  law  be  no  longer  entitled,  nor  considered, 
as  the  King's  courts. 

And  that  no  instrument  in  writing,  of  any  nature  or  kind, 
whether  public  or  private,  shall,  in  the  date  thereof,  mention 
the  year  of  the  said  King's  reign. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  that  nothing  in  this  act  contained, 
shall  render  void  or  vitiate  any  commission,  writ,  process  or  in^ 
strument,  heretofore  made  or  executed,  on  account  of  the  name 
and  authority  of  the  said  King  being  therein  inserted. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  oaths  or  engagements  to  be  administered  to  the  officers  ap- 
pointed in  this  colony,  shall  be  as  follows,  to  wit : 

General  Officers. 

"You,  ,  being  by  the  free  vote  of  the  freemen  of  this 

colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence   Plantations,  elected 

unto  the  place  of -,  do   solemnly  engage  to  be   true   and 

faithful  unto  this  said  colony  ;  and  in  your  said  office  equal 
justice  to  do  unto  all  persons,  poor  and  rich,  within  this  juris- 
diction, to  the  utmost  of  your  skill  and  ability,  without  par- 
tiality, according  to  the  laws  established,  or  that  may  be  es- 
tablished by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  as  well  in 
matters  military  as  civil ;  and  this  engagement  you  make  and 
give  upon  the  peril  of  the  penalty  of  perjury." 

Deputies. 

"  You, ,  being  chosen  to  the  place  of  a  deputy,  to  sit 

in  the  General  Assembly,  do  solemnly  engage,  that  you  will  be 


524  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

true  and  faithful  to  this  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence 
Plantations  ;  and  that  you  will  do  equal  right  and  justice  to  all 
persons  who  shall  appeal  unto  you,  for  your  judgment  in  their 
respective  cases,  according  to  the  laws  established,  or  that  may 
be  established  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  said  colony  ; 
and  this  engagement  you  make  and  give  upon  the  peril  of  the 
penalty  of  perjury." 

Judges  of  the  Superior  Court. 

"  You,  ,  being  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony, 

ckosen  to  the  place  of  a  justice  of  the  superior  court  of  judica- 
ture, court  of  assize  and  general  jail  delivery,  in  and  through- 
out the  colony,  do  solemnly  engage  to  be  true  and  faithful  to 
this  said  colony,  and  to  execute  the  office  unto  which  you  are 
chosen,  as  aforesaid,  with  fidelity,  to  the  best  of  your  skill  and 
knowledge,  according  to  the  laws  established,  or  that  may  be 
established  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  said  colony  ;  and 
this  engagement  you  make  and  give  upon  the  peril  of  the  pen- 
alty of  perjury." 

[Public  notaries,  clerks  of  the  superior  and  inferior  courts, 
justices  of  the  inferior  courts,  and  sheriffs,  to  take  the  same 
oath  as  the  justices  of  the  superior  court,  mutatis  mutandis.] 

Grand  Jurors. 

"  You,  A.  B.,  being  of  the  grand  inquest,  on  the  behalf  of  the 
Governor  and  Company  of  the  English  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and 
Providence  Plantations,  do  hereby  promise  and  engage  to  make 
a  true  return  to  this  court  of  all  such  bills  as  shall  be  presented 
to  you,  or  such  breakers  of  law  as  shall  come  to  your  know- 
ledge ;  and  this  engagment  you  make  and  give  upon  the  peril 
of  the  penalty  of  perjury." 

Petit  Jurors  in  Civil  Causes. 

"You,  A.  B.,  being  of  this  jury  of  trials,  shall  well  and 
truly  try  the  issue  of  this  case,  and  all  cases  that  shall  be  com- 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  526 

mitted  unto  you  from  this  court,  betweeu  the  parties,  plaintiff 
and  defendant,  according  to  law  and  evidence  ;  and  to  keep 
together  until  you  agree  of  a  verdict  in  the  case  or  cases  com- 
mitted to  you,  and  make  true  return  of  a  verdict  or  verdicts 
unto  this  court  ;  and  to  keep  your  own  and  fellows'  secrets  ; 
and  this  engagement  you  make  and  give  upon  the  peril  of  the 
penalty  of  perjury." 

Petit  Jurors  in  Criminal  Causes. 

"You,  A.  B.,  being  of  this  jury  of  trials,  shall  well  and 
truly  try,  and  true  deliverance  make,  between  the  Governor 
and  Company  of  the  English  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Provi- 
dence Plantations,  and  the  prisoner  at  the  bar,  according  to  law 
and  evidence  ;  and  to  keep  together  until  you  are  agreed  of  a 
verdict  or  verdicts,  in  the  case  or  cases  that  shall  be  committed 
to  you,  from  this  court,  and  to  keep  your  own  and  fellows' 
secrets  ;  and  this  engagement  you  make  and  give  upon  the 
peril  of  the  penalty  of  perjury." 

Town  Officers. 

"You,  A.  B.,  do  hereby  solemnly  engage  to  be  true  and 
faithful  unto  this  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plan- 
tations ;  and  that  you  will  well  and  truly,  according  to  the 
laws  established,  or  that  may  be  established  by  the  General  As- 
sembly of  said  colony,  execute  the  office  of  ,  for  the  en- 
suing year,  or  until  another  be  engaged  in  your  room,  or  you 
be  legally  discharged  therefrom  ;  and  this  engagement  you 
make  and  give  upon  the  peril  of  the  penalty  of  perjury." 

Militanj  Commissioned  Officers. 

"  You,  A.  B.,  being,  by  the  General  Assembly,  chosen  and 

elected  unto  the  place  and  office  of ,  do  solemnly  swear  to 

be  true  and  faithful  unto  this  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Provi- 
dence Plantations,  and  to  the  authority  therein  established  by 


626  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776, 

the  General  Assembly  ;  and  you  do  also  further  engage  ^vell 
and  truly  to  execute  the  office  of ,  to  which  you  are  elect- 
ed, according  to  your  commission  ;  and  to  perform  and  observe 
all  the  laws  made  and  provided  for  the  support  and  well  order- 
ing the  militia,  without  partiality  ;  and  that  you  will  observe 
and  follow  such  orders  and  instructions  as  you  shall  from  time 
to  time  receive  from  your  superiors.     So  help  you  God." 

Clerk  of  a  Company  of  Militia. 

"You,  A.  B.,  do  solemnly  swear  well  and  truly  to  perform 
and  execute  the  office  of  clerk  of  the  company,  or  trained  band, 
under  the  command  of  C.  D.,  to  the  utmost  of  your  skill  and 
ability,  without  partiality,  according  to  the  laws  of  this  colony, 
which  relate  to  your  office.     So  help  you  God." 

Instructions  from  the  General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island,  to  Ste- 
phen Hopkins  and  William  Ellery,  Delegates  from  the  Colony 
to  the  Continental  Congress. 

The  Governor  and  Company  of  the  English  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence 
Plantations,  in  General  Assembly  convened,  to  Stephen  Hopkinst  and  William 
Ellei  y.  Esquires,  greeting : 

Whereas,  this  Assembly,  reposing  special  trust  and  confidence  in  your  abilities  and 
integrity,  have  appointed  you,  the  said  Stephen  Hopkins  and  William  EUery,  dele- 
gates, to  represent  this  colony  in  general  Congress  ;  you  are  therefore  hereby  era- 
powered  to  join  with  the  delegates  of  the  other  United  Colonies,  in  Congress,  at 
Philadelphia,  as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be,  or  at  such  time  and  place  as  shall  be 
agreed  upon  by  the  major  part  of  the  delegates  from  the  said  colonies. 

You  are  also  authorized  and  empowered  to  consult  and  advise  with  the  delegates  of  the 
said  colonies,  in  Congress,  upon  the  most  proper  measures  for  promoting  and  confirm- 
ing the  strictest  union  and  confederation  between  the  said  United  Colonies,  for  exerting 
their  whole  strength  and  force  to  annoy  the  common  enemy,  and  to  secure  to  the  said 
colonies  their  rights  and  liberties,  both  civil  and  religious ;  whether  by  entering  into 
treaties  with  any  prince,  state,  or  potentate ;  or  by  such  other  prudent  and  effectual 
ways  and  means  as  shall  be  devised  and  agreed  upon. 

And  in  conjunction  with  the  delegates  from  the  said  United  Colonies,  or  the  ma- 
jor part  of  them,  to  enter  into  and  adopt  all  such  measures ;  taking  the  greatest  care 
to  secure  to  this  colony,  in  the  strongest  and  most  perfect  manner,  its  present  estab- 
lished form,  and  all  the  powers  of  government,  so  far  as  relate  to  its  internal  police 
and  conduct  of  our  own  affairs,  civil  and  religious. 

You  are  also  instructed  and  dire'ited  to  exert  your  utmost  abihties  in  carrying  on 
this  just  and  necessary  war,  in  which  we  ai-e  engaged  against  cruel  and  unnatural 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  527 

enemies,  in  the  most  vigorous  manner,  until  peace  shall  be  restored  to  the  said  colo- 
nies, and  their  rights  and  liberties  secured  upon  a  solid  and  permanent  basis. 

You  are  also  empowered  to  join  with  the  major  part  of  the  delegates  of  the  said 
United  Colonies,  in  adjourning  from  time  to  time,  and  to  such  place  or  places,  as 
shall  be  thought  proper,  for  and  during  one  year. 

You  have  it  in  express  charge,  to  make  immediate  application  to  Congress,  to  put 
the  colony  brigade  upon  the  Continental  establishment,  and  to  defray  the  expenses 
of  it  from  the  first  enlistment  of  the  troops,  as  that  number  is  indispensably  necessary 
for  the  defence  of  the  colony,  which  is  utterly  miable  to  support  them. 

And  as  it  may  happen,  that  from  sickness,  or  other  necessary  causes,  one  of 
you  may  be  absent  from  Congress,  in  all  such  cases,  the  other  is  hereby  as  fully 
empowered  to  represent  the  colony,  as  though  both  were  present  and  agreed  in 
sentiment. 


The  committee  appointed  for  that  purpose,  having  reported 
the  foregoing  instructions  to  the  delegates  to  represent  this 
colony  in  Congress  ;   which  being  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  are, 
approved.* 

*  Stephen  Hopkins  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Philadelphia,  loth  May,  1776. 

Sir  :— Your  favor  of  the  7th  of  May,  I  have  received,  and  the  papers  enclosed  in  it.  I  ob- 
serve that  you  have  avoided  giving  me  a  direct  answer  to  my  queries  concerning  depend- 
ence or  independence  ;  however,  the  copy  of  the  act  of  Assembly,  which  you  Lave  sent  me, 
together  with  our  instructions,  leave  me  little  room  to  doubt  what  is  the  opinion  of  the  colo- 
ny I  came  from. 

I  suppose  that  it  will  not  be  long  before  the  Congress  will  throw  off  all  connection  as 
well  in  name  as  in  substance,  with  Great  Britain  ;  as  one  thing  after  another,  seem  gradu- 
ally to  lead  them  to  such  a  step  ;  they  having,  within  a  few  days,  passed  a  resolve  earnestly 
to  recommend  to  all  the  colonies  who  at  present  are  not  under  a  perfect  foim  of  government, 
to  take  up  and  form  such,  each  colony  for  themselves  ;  which  I  make  no  doubt  most  of  them 
will  very  soon  do. 

I  have  now  the  pleasure  to  inform  you,  that  Congress  on  Saturday  last,  passed  a  resolve 
for  taking  into  Continental  pay,  the  two  Rhode  Island  battalions ;  which  resolve,  I  here- 
with enclose. 

A  letter  from  General  "Washington  to  Congress,  warmly  recommsnding  it  to  them  to  take 
this  step  respecting  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  had  great  influence  in  procuring  it  to  be 
done.  I  could  therefore  wish  the  colony  in  a  handsome  manner,  to  acknowledge  this  favor, 
and  to  return  thanks  to  the  General,  for  his  good  ofiBces  in  their  behalf. 

The  affair  which  you  mention,  respecting  Block  Island,  I  shall  take  the  first  opportunity 
to  lay  before  Congress,  and  obtain  their  directions  concerning  it. 

I  am  very  glad  you  have  given  me  a  colleague ;  and  am  well  pleased  with  the  gentleman 
whom  you  have  appointed. 

I  am  very  glad  to  hear  that  the  colony  appeared  so  very  unanimous  in  the  late  election : 
congratulate  you  in  your  choice  to  the  office  of  government,  and  wish  that  every  part  of  the 
colony  would  forget  and  totally  banish  every  kind  of  jealousy  and  discord  from  amongst 
them.  This  is  a  time  when  the  very  great  danger  that  all  America  is  exposed  to,  should 
make  every  body  sensible  that  the  most  firm  union  in  all  its  parts,  should  be  carefully 
studied  and  effected. 


528  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  standing  committee  inquire 
what  arms  are  in  possession  of  the  colony,  belonging  to  particu- 
lar persons  ;  and  to  call  upon  Peter  Philips,  Esq.,  Col.  Cliurch, 
Col.  Varnum  and  Col.  Hitchcock,  to  render  an  account  to  the 
Assembly  what  arms  they  have  received,  and  of  whom. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  each  field  officer  within  this 
colony,  upon  duty,  upon  any  alarm,  shall  be  allowed  as  fol- 
lows, to  wit : 

Each  colonel,  eight  shillings  ;  each  lieutenant  colonel, 
seven  shillings  ;    and  each  major,  six  shillings  per  day. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  for  the  future,  the  troops  of 
the  Rhode  Island  brigade  be  paid  off  monthly. 

Whereas,  John  Cole,  Esq.,  in  behalf  of  the  minister,  church 
wardens  and  congregation,  of  the  Episcopal  Church,  in  Provi- 
dence, preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assem- 
bly, that  John  Whipple,  late  of  said  Providence,  gentleman, 
deceased,  did  give  and  grant  unto  the  minister,  church  war- 
dens and  congregation  of  said  church,  a  certain  lot  of  land, 
lying  on  the  north  side  of  said  church  ;  and  to  the  eastward  of 
Mr.  Nathaniel  Wheaton's  and  William  Smith's  lands,  to  them 
and  their  successors  forever,  as  a  burying  place  ;  that  the  said 
Wheaton  and  Smith  are  owners  of  a  lot  of  land  lying  to  the 
eastward  and  southward  of  said  church,  which  they  are  desirous 
and  willing  to  exchange  for  the  same  quantity  of  land  out  of 
the  lot  given  by  said  John  Whipple,  which  will  lay  the  land 
belonging  to  the  church  much  more  convenient  and  commo- 
dious for  the  purpose  of  a  burying  place,  than  it  is  at  present ; 
and  thereupon  prayed  this  Assembly  to  enable  some  persons  to 
give  and  receive  deeds  in  exchange  of  said  lots  of  land,  for 
the  purpose,  aforesaid  ;   on  consideration  whereof — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General   A.ssembly,  and  by  the  au- 

I  herewith  send  you  commissions  for  all  the  officers  in  your  two  regiments,  which  I  hope 
you  will  cause  to  be  tilled  up,  so  as  to  give  the  greatest  satisfaction. 

As  the  field  otficers  will  be  appointed,  or  at  least  approved  by  Congress,  I  could  wish  that 
you  will  transmit  to  me  the  names  of  such  gentlemen  as  you  may  think  most  capable  to 
fill  those  offices.  I  am,  with  great  respect. 

Yours,  and  the  colony's  very  humble  servant, 

STEP.  HOPKINS. 
To  Nicholas  Cooke,  Esq. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  529 

thority  thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  foregoing  petition  be 
granted  ;  and  that  the  church  wardens  of  said  church,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby  empowered  to  give  and  receive  deeds  for  the 
exchange  of  the  lands,  aforesaid  ;  and  that  the  deeds  by  them 
given  and  received,  shall  be  good  and  valid,  to  all  intents  and 
purposes,  vdiatever. 

Whereas,  the  Honorable  Samuel  Ward,  Esq.,  late  a  delegate 
for  this  colony,  in  the  Continental  Congress,  hath  lately  de- 
ceased in  the  city  of  Philadelphia  ;  in  testimony  of  the  respect 
due  to  his  memory,  and  in  grateful  remembrance  of  his  public 
services, — 

Resolved,  that  his  executors  or  administrators  are  desired, 
as  soon  as  may  be,  to  exhibit  to  this  Assembly,  aii  account  of 
his  funeral  expenses,  for  payment.* 


*  Samuel  Ward,  was  born  at  Newport,  Rhode  Island,  on  the  27th  May,  1715.  He  was  the 
second  son  of  Richard  Ward,  who  was  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  in  1741  and  1742,  and 
the  grandson  of  Thomas  Ward,  who  came  to  this  country  during  the  time  of  Charles  II., 
and  who  died  in  Rhode  Island  in  1689,  a  highly  esteemed  and  respectable  citizen. 

Samuel,  the  subject  of  this  sketch,  completed  his  education  at  Harvard  College,  where 
he  graduated  in  1733.  His  educatioij  was  of  a  veiy  practical  character;  and  under  the 
tutelage  of  his  father  (who  was  at  the  head  of  a  large  commercial  and  agricultural  interest 
at  Newport),  he  acquired  an  extensive  knowledge  of  the  duties  of  a  merchant  and  a  farmer. 
At  an  early  period  of  his  life,  he  married  Anne  Ray,  the  daughter  of  a  respectable  farmer 
of  Block  Island,  and  an  elder  sister  of  Catharine  Ray,  of  Block  Island,  who  is  mentioned  in 
the  life  of  Dr.  Franklin,  as  one  of  his  most  valued  and  intelligent  correspondents.  After  his 
marriage,  Mr.  Ward  settled  down  on  a  farm  at  Westerly,  devoting  himself  to  the  im» 
provement  of  his  estate,  and  the  prosecution  of  hi^  commercial  pursuits. 

His  first  appearance  in  public  life,  was  in  1756,  when  he  represented  the  town  of  Wes- 
terly, in  the  General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island.  He  remained  in  the  Assemblj%  until  1759 
and  was  known  as  one  of  the  most  active  and  intelligent  n'en,  in  that  body. 

During  the  French  war,  which  took  place  about  that  time,  Mr.  Wai'd  represented  Rhode 
Island  at  a  convention,  which  was  held  at  Hartford,  to  consult  with  Lord  Loudoun,  the 
commander  of  the  British  forces,  as  to  the  best  course  to  be  pursued  by  the  colonies  and 
the  parent  country,  in  the  vigorous  prosecution  of  the  war.  The  report  of  the  commis- 
sioners of  Rhode  Island,  which  was  presented  by  Mr.  Ward,  was  approved  by  the  Assem- 
bly, and  the  suggestions  it  contained,  carried  into  execution. 

The  careful  reader  of  the  colonial  history  of  the  United  States,  and  particularly  that  of  the 
State  of  Rhode  Island,  is  familiar  with  the  paper  money  controversj'  which  raged  throughout 
the  colonies  during  the  greater  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  anterior  to  the  Revolution. 
A  newspaper  article  is  not  the  place  for  an  elaboration  of  the  merits  and  demerits  of  this 
controversy.  While  Mr.  Ward  was  a  member  of  the  Assembly,  it  raged  to  a  fearful  extent. 
Stephen  Hopkins,  subsequently  a  signer  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  ran  as  candi- 
date for  Governor,  in  1757,  as  an  opponent  of  the  paper  system,  after  having  served  as  Gov- 
ernor, the  year  preceding. 

During  the  canvass,  he  published  an  address  to  the  citizens  of  Rhode  Island,  intimating 
that  during  his  term  of  office,  the  Legislature  had  pursued  a  course  of  policy  hostile  to  the 

VOL.  vu.         67 


530  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1776. 

And  it  is  farther  resolved,  that  the  delegates  for  this  colony, 
for  the  time  being,  be  instructed  to  erect  a  decent  tomb 
stone,  or  monument  of  marble,  with  such  inscription  as  they 
shall  think  suitable,  over  the  place  where  his  body  hath  been 
deposited,  at  the  expense  of  this  colony. 

success  of  his  administration.  ]\Ir.  Ward  cefeudcd  the  Assembly,  and  attacked  the  admin- 
istration of  Governor  Hopkins  with  severity.  The  Governor  brounht  a  suit  against  Mr. 
Ward,  for  slander,  iu  the  courts  of  the  State,  retaining  the  celebrated  James  Otis,  as  his 
counsel. 

This  suit  was  never  prosecuted,  and  led  to  a  further  exasperation  of  feeling  among  the 
partisans  of  Hopkins  and  Ward.  The  feeling  continued  for  several  years;  and,  in  1762,  Mr. 
Ward  was  elected  Governor,  after  a  most  animating  and  exciting  canvass.  He  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Mr.  Hopkins,  in  1763  ;  but  was  again  elected  in  1765,  and  continued  in  office 
until  1767. 

We  pass  over  hurriedly,  the  incidents  of  the  colonial  history,  and  the  prominent  part 
taken  by  Governor  Ward  in  the  strifes  and  struggles  of  the  colonial  politics.  We  find  our- 
selves on  the  threshold  of  more  important  and  memorable  events. 

We  find  the  "stamp  act  excitement  "  (that  prologue  to  the  great  drama  of  the  Revolu- 
tion), extending  into  Rhode  Island.  We  find  the  Assembly  appointing  delegates  to  the 
Colonial  Congress,  which  was  to  meet  at  New  York;  and  find  Henry  Ward  (a  j'ounger 
brother  of  the  Governor,)  among  the  number.  We  find  Governor  Ward  at  an  early  day 
taking  a  decided  stand  against  the  preliminary  encroachments  of  the  ministry.  We  find 
him  a  private  citizen  in  1773,  writing  a  letter  to  his  fellow  citizens  of  Westerly,  proposing 
and  advocating  a  united  opposition  to  all  attempts  at  introducing  taxed  tea  into  Newport, 
by  the  British.  We  find  him,  in  1774,  the  chairman  of  a  town  committee,  at  Westerh',  in- 
troducing a  series  of  resolutions  breathing  forth  a  spirit  of  patriotic  devotion  to  the  threat- 
ened rights  of  the  people  of  the  colonies;  and  eventually,  we  find  him  appointed,  in  con- 
junction with  his  old  antagonist,  Stephen  Hopkins,  a  delegate  from  the  colony  of  Rhode 
Island,  to  the  Continental  Congress,  which  met  at  Philadelphia,  in  Carpenter's  Hall,  on  the 
5th  of  September,  1774. 

The  drama  of  revolution  and  war  opened  with  all  its  horrors  of  bloodshed  and  devasta- 
tion, and  all  its  glorious  scenes  of  devotion  to  the  rights  of  man,  and  determination  to  ob- 
tain liberty,  at  any  and  every  cost.  Samuel  Ward,  of  Rhode  Island,  performed  a  prominent 
part  in  these  scenes,  and  performed  it  well.  Speaking  of  his  own  position  and  his  feelings, 
in  a  letter  to  his  brother,  written  in  1775,  he  says  : 

"  I  have  traced  the  progress  of  this  unnatural  war,  through  burning  towns,  devastation 
of  the  country,  and  every  subsequent  evil.  I  have  realized,  with  regard  to  myself,  the 
bullet,  the  bayonet  and  the  haltar  ;  and,  compared  with  the  immense  object  I  haye  in  view, 
they  are  all  less  than  nothing.  No  man  living,  perhaps,  is  more  fond  of  his  children  thau 
I  am,  and  I  am  not  so  old  as  to  be  tired  of  life  ;  and  yet,  as  far  as  I  can  now  judge,  the  ten- 
derest  connections  and  the  most  important  private  concerns  are  very  minute  objects. 
Heaven  save  my  country,  I  was  going  to  say,  is  my  first,  my  last,  and  almost  my  only 
prayer." 

Eloquent  words,  sincerely  written  !  Governor  Ward  knew  their  meaning  ;  knew  the 
times  upon  which  he  had  fallen,  and  knew  how  to  meet  approaching  emergency.  He  took 
an  active  part  in  the  movements  of  the  Rhode  Island  patriots,  and  earnestlj' co-operated  with 
John  Adams,  in  his  efiorts  to  place  the  military  system  upon  a  proper  looting.  His  son, 
Samuel  Ward,  had  but  recently  come  from  college,  and  entered  the  colonial  army  with  the 
commission  of  captain. 

While  the  Congress  was  in  committee  of  the  whole  on  the  consideration  cf  the  state  of 
America,  Mr.  Ward  occupied  the  chair. 

He  was  chairman  of  the  committee  of  the  whole,  which   originated  a  resolution,  "that  a 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  531 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  John  Jenckes  and  Mr. 
John  Waterman  be  a  committee  to  purchase  a  proper  place, 
and  erect  a  powder  mill  thereon,  at  the  charge  of  the  colony, 
as  soon  as  possible  ;  and  that  they  draw  out  of  the  general 
treasury  c£150,  lawful  money,  for  that  purpose. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  John  Cole,  Esq.,  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  elected  to  the  office  of  advocate  of  the  court  erected  for 
the  trial  of  maritime  causes  within  this  colony,  for  the  year 
ensuino". 

o 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  John  Cooke  be  employed 
to  purchase  four  oxen,  for  the  service  of  this  colony,  on  Conan- 
nicut ;  and  that  they  be  used  by  Col.  Hoxsie,  to  plough  as 
much  of  the  land  on  said  island,  in  the  possession  of  the  colony, 
as  he  shall  think  necessary  for  planting  potatoes  for  the  troops 
in  the  service  of  the  colony,  unless  said  oxen  be  otherwise  era- 
ployed. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Friday,  the  17th  day  of  May 
inst.,  be  observed  as  a  day  of  fasting,  and  public   humiliation 


general  be  appointed  to  command  all  the  Continental  forces  raised,  or  to  be  raised,  for  the 
defence  of  American  liberty."  This  resolution  was  passed.  After  which,  "the  Congress 
then  proceeded  to  the  choice  of  a  general,  by  ballot ;  and  George  Washington,  Esq.,  was 
unanimously  elected."  He  was  a  devoted  admirer  of  Gen.  Washington,  and  a  sincere  ad. 
vocate  of  his  election.  A  few  weeks  after  the  appointment,  he  wrote  to  Gen.  Washington, 
thus : 

•'  I  most  cheerfully  entei-ed  upon  a  solemn  engagement,  upon  your  appointment,  to  sup- 
port you  with  my  life  and  my  fortune;  and  I  shall  most  religiously,  and  with  the  highest 
pleasure,  endeavor  to  discharge  that  duty." 

We  find  Governor  Ward  a  most  active  member  of  Congress,  and  untiring  in  his  efforts 
to  organize  and  advance  the  preparations  for  defence  om  the  part  of  the  colonists.  He  was 
warmly  in  favor  of  pronouncing  a  declaration  of  independence ;  and,  although  he  did  not 
live  to  sign  the  Declaration,  yet  he  was  one  of  the  most  active  and  determined  among  those 
who  consummated  it. 

He  wrote  to  his  son  Samuel,  who  had  been  taken  prisoner  at  Quebec,  under  the  lamented 
Montgomery,  words  of  encouragement,  approval  and  fatherly  advice ;  and,  as  a  member  of 
Congress,  did  every  thing  possible  for  the  advancement  of  the  cause,  and  the  successful  de- 
fence of  colonial  liberty. 

Death  came  upon  him  suddenly  in  the  noonday  of  his  usefulness.  We  find  him  presiding  in 
the  committee  of  the  whole  on  the  13th  of  March;  the  last  time  he  is  mentioned  by  the  journals 
of  Congress,  as  participating  in  its  proceedings.  He  was  present,  as  a  member,  on  March 
14,  and  March  15  ;  but  from  thenceforward,  his  seat  was  vacant  forever.  On  the  26th  of 
March,  1770,  he  died  of  small  pox,  in  the  fifty-first  year  of  his  age.  The  Pennsylvania  Ga- 
zette, March  27,  1770,  now  before  us,  thus  announces  his  death : 

"  Died,  yesterday  morning,  the  Honorable  Samuel  Ward,  Esq.,  late  member  of  the  Con- 
tinental Congress  ;  his  remains  will  be  interred  this  afternoon,  in  the  Baptist  Church. 

The  procession  will  begin  at  3  o'clock,  this  afternoon,  at  Mrs.  House's,  in  Lodge  Alley, 
where  the  friends  of  the  deceased  are  desired  to  attend.    The  body  will  be  carried  to  Arch 


632  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OP    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

and  prayer,  in  and  throughout  the  colony,  agreeably  to  are- 
solve  of  the  Continental  Congress  ;  that  all  servile  labor  be  for- 
bidden on  that  day  ;  and  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  issue 
his  proclamations,  accordingly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  commanding  officer  in  each 
company  of  the  Rhode  Island  brigade  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  di- 
rected to  prevent  the  soldiers  from  doing  any  damage  to  the 
inhabitants  of  this  colony,  by  travelling  over  their  ploughed 
land,  or  by  any  other  ways  or  means,  whatsoever. 

That  the  commanding  officer  of  said  brigade  be  also  ordered 
to  clear  all  the  best  houses  in  Newport  of  the  troops  ;  and  that 
the  commanding  officer  of  said  brigade  be  empowered  and  di- 
rected to  station  the  troops  in  such  convenient  empty  houses  in 
Newport,  as  will  be  least  liable  to  suffer  damage  from  the  sol- 
diers, and  least  expensive  to  the  colony. 

And  it  is  further  resolved,  that  this  act  extend  to  the  town  of 
Jamestown. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Isaac  Ross  Bliven  be  a  sur-- 


street  Church,  where  a  sermon  on  the  occasion,  will  be  delivered  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Stillman. 
The  ladies  will  be  admitted  into  the  galleries  at  3  o'clock." 

In  the  letters  of  John  Adams,  we  find  the  following  allusion  to  the  death  of  Governor 
Ward: 

"  His  funeral  was  attended  with  the  same  solemnities  as  Mr.  Randolph's.  Mr.  Stillman 
being  the  Ana-Baptist  minister  here,  of  which  persuasion  was  the  Governor,  was  desired  by 
Congress,  to  preach  a  sermon,  which  he  did,  with  great  applause." 

Many  years  subsequent  to  this,  John  Adams,  writing  to  a  grandson  of  Governor  Ward, 
thus  spoke  of  him : 

"He  was  a  gentleman,  in  his  manners;  benevolent  and  amiable  in  his  disposition  ;  and 
as  decided,  ardent  and  uniform  in  his  patriotism,  as  any  member  of  that  Congress.  When 
he  was  seized  with  the  small  pox,  he  said  that  if  bis  vote  and  voice  were  necessary  to  sup- 
port the  cause  of  his  country,  he  should  live  ;  if  not,  he  should  die.  He  died,  and  the  cause 
of  his  country  was  supported  ;  but  it  lost  one  of  its  most  sincere  and  punctual  advocates." 

The  remains  of  Governor  Ward  were  exhumed  and  removed  to  Rhode  Island,  in  1860. 
The  slab  over  his  grave,  contains  the  following  inscription,  written  by  John  Jay: 

"  In  memory  of  the  Honorable  Samuel  Ward,  formerly  Governor  of  the  colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations ;  afterwards  delegated  from  that  colony  to  the  General  Con- 
gress ;  in  which  station,  he  died,  at  Philadelphia,  of  the  small  pox,  March  26th,  1T76,  in  the 
fifty -first  year  of  his  age.  His  great  abilities,  his  unshaken  integrity,  his  ardor  in  the  cause 
of  freedom,  his  fidelitj^  in  the  oflices  he  filled,  induced  the  State  of  Rhode  Island  and  Provi- 
dence Plantations  to  erect  this  grateful  testimony  of  their  respect." — Providence  Press, 
March  19, 1860. 

A  fuller  memoir  of  Governor  Ward,  from  the  pen  of  Charles  Denison,  Esq.,  of  Westerly, 
was  published  in  the  "  Narragansett  Weekly,"  Westerly,  beginning  July  21,  1859,  and  con- 
tinued through  several  numbers  of  the  paper.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  writer  may  print 
it  in  a  better  form  for  preservation. 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  533 

geon's  mate,  to  the  brigade  raised  by  this  colony  ;  and  that  he 
be  commissionated  upon  condition  that  he  resigns  his  commis- 
sion,as  an  ensign. 

Whereas,  the  committee,  for  signing  the  money,  presented 
unto  this  Assembly,  the  following  report  and  account,  to  wit : 

Report  of  the  Committee. 

In  pursuance  of  an  act  passed  by  the  General  Assembly,  at 
the  session,  held  at  East  Greenwich,  on  the  third  Monday  in 
March  last  past,  for  emitting  £20,000,  lawful  money,  in  bills 
of  credit ;  we,  the  subscribers,  have  signed  the  said  bills, 
which  are  of  the  following  denominations,  to  wit : 

1,600  bills,  of  sixty  shillings  each,  is         -  -  ^£4,800 

4,000 

"         -  -  -     4,500 

3,000 

"         -  -  -     1,500 

750 
"         -  -  -        600 

450 
"         -  -  -        210 

100 
"         -  -  -  90 


2,000,  " 

forty 

3,000,  " 

thirty 

3,000,  '^ 

twenty 

3,000,  " 

ten 

3,000,  " 

five 

3,000,  " 

four 

3,000,  " 

three 

2,100,  " 

two 

2,000,  " 

one 

2,400,  "  n 

inepence 

.£20,000 


Which  said  bills,  amounting  to  £20,000,  lawful  money,  we 
have  delivered  to  the  general  treasurer,  of  whom  we  have  taken 
a  receipt,  in  the  eighth  book  of  the  Colony  Records,  in  the 
Secretary's  office. 

In  which  book,  we  also  registered  an  exact  account  of  the 
order  of  signing  the  same. 

JOHN  COLE,  WELCOME  ARNOLD, 

JOSEPH  CLARKE,     JOHN  DEXTER, 
JOHN  G.  WANTON,    WILLIAM  ELLERY. 
THOMAS  GREENE, 


534  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

It  is  voted  anil  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  §1,600,  be  paid  to 
Samuel  Aborn,  Esq.,  out  of  the  general  treasury;  being  the 
value  of  the  sloop  Sally,  chai'tered  for  the  service  of  the  colony, 
and  taken  by  the  enemy. 

Whereas,  John  Cole,  Joseph  Clarke  and  John  Dexter,  Esqs., 
and  Mr,  John  G.  Wanton,  presented  unto  this  Assembly  the 
following  report  and  account,  to  wit : 

Report  of  the  Committee. 

In  pursuance  of  an  act  passed  by  the  General  Assembly,  at 
the  session  held  at  Providence,  on  Tuesday,  the  31st  day  of 
October  last  past,  for  emitting  £20,000,  lawful  money,  in  bills 
of  credit ;  we,  the  subscribers,  have  signed  the  said  bills,  which 
-are  of  the  following  denominations,  to  wit : 

1,500  bills,  of  forty  shillings  each,  is  -  -  £3,000 

4,500 

"    -      -     -  4,000 

2,500 

-  1,500 

1,200 

•'    -     -     -  1,200 

1,000 

"    -     .-     -   GOO 

500 


3,000 

thirty 

4,000 

twenty 

5,000 

ten 

6,000 

five 

8,000 

three 

12,000 

two 

20,000 

one 

16,000 

ninepence 

20,000 

sixpence 

£20,000 


Which  said  bills,  amounting  to  £20,000,  we  have  delivered 
to  the  general  treasurer,  of  whom  we  have  taken  a  receipt  in 
the  eighth  book  of  the  Colony  Records,  in  the  secretary's  of- 
fice ;  in  which  book,  we  have  also  registered  an  exact  account 
of  the  order  of  signing  the  same. 

JOHN  COLE,  JOHN  DEXTER, 

JOSEPH  CLARKE,      JOHN  G.  WANTON. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  militia  of  this  colony  l>e, 
and  they  are  hereby,  excused  from  training  for  three   months, 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  535 

next  after  the  rising  of  this  Assembly  ;   nncl  that  they  continue 
to  exercise  monthly,  after  that  period. 

An  Act  in  addition  to,  and  amendment  of,  an  act  made  and 
passed  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  the  session  held  at  East 
Greenwich,  on  the  18th  day  of  March,  A.  D.  1776,  enti- 
tled, "  An  act  for  encouraging  the  fitting  out  and  authorizing 
armed  vessels  to  defend  the  sea  coast  of  America  :  and  for 
erecting  a  court  to  try  and  condemn  all  vessels  that  shall  be 
found  infesting  the  same." 

Whereas,  since  the  said  act  was  made  and  passed,  the  Con- 
tinental Congress,  on  the  23d  day  of  March,  A.  D.  1776, 
permitting  the  inhabitants  of  the  colonies  to  fit  out  armed 
vessels,  to  cruise  on  the  enemies  of  the  United  Colonies,  have 
resolved, — 

Resolves  of  the  Continental  Congress,  relative  to  the  fitting  out  of 
armed  vessels  by  the  United  Colonies. 

That  all  ships  and  other  vessels,  their  tackle,  apparel  and  furniture ;  and  all 
goods,  wares  and  merchandize,  belonging  to  any  inhabitant  or  inhabitants  of  Great 
Britain,  taken  on  the  high  seas,  or  between  high  and  low  water  marks,  by  any  armed 
vessels,  fitted  out  by  any  private  person  or  persons,  and  to  whom  commissions  shall  be 
granted,  and  being  libelled  and  prosecuted  in  the  court  erected  for  the  trial  of  mari- 
time affairs,  in  any  of  these  colonies,  shall  be  deemed  and  adjudged  to  be  lawful  prize. 

And  after  deducting  and  paying  the  wages  of  the  seamen  and  mariners  on  board 
of  such  captures,  as  are  merchant  ships  and  vessels,  shall  be  entitled  to,  according 
to  the  tei'ms  of  their  contracts,  until  the  time  of  the  adjudication,  shall  be  condemned 
to,  and  for  the  use  of,  the  owner  or  owners,  and  the  officers,  marines  and  mariners 
of  such  armed  vessel,  according  to  such  rules  and  proportions  as  they  shall 
agree  on. 

Provided,  that  this  resolve  shall  not  extend,  or  be  construed  to  extend,  to  any  ves- 
sel bringing  settlers,  arms,  ammunition,  or  warlike  stores,  to"  and  for  the  use  of  the 
.United  American  Colonies,  or  to  any  of  the  inhabitants  thereof,  who  are  friends  to 
the  American  cause,  or  to  such  Avarlike  stores,  or  to  the  efiects  of  such  settlers. 

That  all  ships  or  vessels,  with  their  tackle,  apparel  and  furniture,  goods,  wares 
and  merchandize,  belonging  to  any  inhabitant  of  Great  Britain,  as  aforesaid,  which 
shall  be  taken  by  any  vessel  or  vessels  of  war  of  the  said  United  Colonies,  shall  be 
.•deemed  forfeited ;  one-third,  after  deducting  and  paying  the  wages  of  the  seamen 
and  mariners,  as  aforesaid,  to  the  ofHcers  and  men  on  board ;  and  two-thirds  to  the 
use  of  the  said  United  Colonies. 

That  all  ships  or  vessels,  with  their  tackle,  apparel  and  furniture,  goods,  wares  and 
merchandize,  belonging  to  any  inhabitant  or  inhabitants  of  Great  Britain,  as  afore- 


536  RECOEDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

said,  wliich  shall  be  taken  by  any  vessel  or  vessels  of  war,  fitted  out  by  and  at  the 
expense  of  any  of  the  United  Colonies,  shall  be  deemed  forfeited  and  divided,  after 
r4ledueting  and  paying  the  wages  of  the  seamen  and  mariners,  as  aforesaid,  in  such 
manner  and  proportions  as  the  Assembly  or  convention  of  such  colony  shall  direct. 

That  all  ships  or  vessels,  their  tackle,  apparel,  furniture  and  cargoes,  belonging  to 
any  inhabitant  or  inhabitants  of  Great  Britain,  as  aforesaid ;  and  t\lso  all  vessels 
which  shall  be  employed  in  carrying  supplies  to  the  ministerial  armies,  which  shall 
happen  to  be  taken  near  the  shores  of  any  of  said  United  Colonies,  by  the  people  Or- 
the  country,  or  any  detachment  of  the  American  army,  shall  be  deemed  lawful 
prize. 

And  the  court  of  admiralty,  within  said  colony,  is  hereby  directed  and  required, 
on  condemnation  thereof,  to  adjudge  that  all  charges  and  expenses,  Avhich  may  at- 
tend the  capture  and  trial,  be  first  paid  out  of  the  moneys  arising  from  the  sales  ci>f 
the  prize  ;  and  the  remainder  equally  divided  among  all  those  who  shall  have  been 
actually  engaged  in  taking  said  prize. 

Provided,  that  where  any  detachments  of  the  arqiy  shall  have  been  employed,  as 
aforesaid,  their  part  of  the  prize  money  shall  be  distributed  among  them  in  propor- 
tion to  the  pay  of  the  officers  and  soldiers  so  engaged. 


Therefore,  in  conformity  to  the  aforesaid  resolves, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  all  ships  and  vessels,  with 
their  tackle,  apparel  and  furniture,  goods,  wares  and  merchan- 
dize, belonging  to  any  inhabitant  or  inhabitants  of  Great  Britain, 
as  aforesaid,  which  shall  be  taken  by  any  vessels  of  war,  fitted 
by,  and  at  the  expense  of,  this  colony,  shall  be  deemed  for- 
feited, and  divided,  after  deducting  and  paying  the  wages  of 
the  seamen  and  mariners,  as  aforesaid,  in  the  following  man- 
ner and  proportions,  to  wit : 

One-third,  after  deducting  and  paying  the  wages  of  the  sea- 
men and  mariners,  as  aforesaid,  to  the  officers  and  men  on 
board  ;   and  two-thirds  to  the  use  of  this  colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  all  armed  vessels,  taken  by 
any  vessel,  fitted  by,  and  at  the  expense  of,  this  colony,  and 
legally  condemned,  agreeably  to  this  act,  after  deducting  the 
charge  of  condemnation,  shall  be  divided  in  the  following  man- 
ner and  proportions,  to  wit : 

One-half  to  the  officers  and  men  ;  and  the  other  half  to  the 
use  of  the  colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  upon  condemnation  of  any 
vessel,  as  aforesaid,  the  judge  shall  give  three  months  notice 
fop  any  person  owning  said  vessel,  so  condemned,  to  lay  in  their 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  537 

claims  ;  and  that  no  division  of  said  vessels  be  made  among  the 
owners  of  the  privateers,  the  officers  and  men,  until  bond  be 
given  to  the  judge  for  the  refunding  to  the  claimants  of  said 
vessel,  upon  their  proving  their  property,  so  much  as  shall  be 
left,  after  paying  salvage  and  all  lawful  cost. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  said  judge  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  directed  to  proceed  to  and  govern  himself,  in  all  trials 
at  said  court,  according  to  the  aforesaid  resolves  of  the  Con- 
gress ;  and  the  aforesaid  act  of  the  General  Assembly  of  this 
colony,  passed  in  March,  1776. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  whereas,  by  said  act,  passed 
in  March,  1776,  the  attorney  general  was  appointed  advocate 
in  said  court,  wdiich  two  offices  in  one  person,  may  prove  in- 
compatible ;  — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted,  that  that  part  of  said  act  be,  and 
the  same  is  hereby,  repealed. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  artillery  companies  estab- 
lished in  the  several  towns  in  this  colony,  consisting  of  fourteen 
men  each,  be  allowed  and  paid  as  follows,  to  wit : 

The  captain,  five  shillings  ;  the  lieutenant,  four  shillings  ; 
each  private,  two  shillings  per  day,  when  on  duty  ;  and  that 
they  be  paid  for  exercising  at  other  times,  as  by  law  already 
established. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  one  hundred  weight  of  lead  be 
allowed  to  the  town  of  Warren  ;  and  that  the  committee  who 
have  the  colony's  lead  in  possession,  deliver  the  same  to  the 
treasurer  of  said  town  of  Warren. 

Whereas,  it  hath  incontestibly  appeared  to  this  Assembly, 
that  Henry  Babcock,  Esq.,  colonel  of  a  regiment  in  the  service 
of  this  colony,  is  at  times  deprived  of  the  perfect  use  of  his 
reason,  and  thereby  rendered  unfit  to  command  ;  — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  Henry  Babcock  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  dismissed  from  the  command  of  the  said  regir 
ment ;   and  that  office  is  hereby  declared  vacant. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Peter  Phillips,  Esq.,  pay  into 
the  general  treasury  the  sum  of  £422,  lawful  money,  the  same 

VOL.  VII.         68 


538  RECORDS    OP    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [177G. 

being  for  guns  appvalsed  in  Col.  Vamum's  regiment,  belonging 
to  the  colony. 

Both  Houses,  joined  in  a  gnuid  committee,  chose  the  follow- 
ing oflicers,  to  wit : 

Christopher  Lippitt,  Esq.,  colonel  ;  Adam  Comstock,  Esq.^ 
lieutenant-colonel  ;  and  Christopher  Olney,  Es(|.,  major,  of  the 
second  regiment  in  the  colony's  brigade. 

Wm.  Barton,  Esq.,  brigade-major,  of  the  colony's  brigade. 
William  EUery,  Esq.,  one  of  the  delegates  to  represent  this 
colony  in  the  Continental  Congress. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  empowered  to  appoint  a  gunner  for  Fort  Lib- 
erty, upon  Goat  Island,  who  shall  have  the  rank  and  pay  of  a 
lieutenant  of  artillery,  in  the  colony's  brigade,  and  be  subject 
to  the  commander,  thereof ;  and  that  he  be  commissioned, 
accordingly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  in  case  the  farm  at  James- 
town, lately  belonging  to  Governor  Hutchinson,  now  in  posses- 
sion of  this  colony,  shall  not  be  let  in  ten  days  from  the 
rising  of  this  Assembly,  the  commanding  officer  of  the  troops 
on  Jamestown  make  use  of  the  rails  on  said  farm,  and  improve 
tiie  farm  to  the  best  advantage  for  the  colony. 

The  return  of  the  choice  of  officers  to  command  the  inde- 
pendent company,  in  South  Kingstown,  called  the  Kingstown 
Reds,  was  read  in  Council,  and  is  as  follows,  to  wit : 

John  Gardner,  captain  ;  Thomas  Potter,  first  lieutenant ; 
Itouse  J.  Helme,  second  lieutenant ;  Rowland  Brown,  ensign  ; 
which  being  considered  by  the  Council — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  officers  be,  and  here- 
by are,  approved. 

In  Council  was  read  the  return  of  the  choice  of  officers  to 
command  the  United  Company  of  the  Train  of  Artillery,  in 
Providences  and  is  as  follows,  to  wit : 

Daniel  Tillinghast,  colonel ;  Levi  Hall,  lieutenant  colonel ; 
Elihu  Robinson,  major  ;  Robert  Taylor,  captain  ;  Daniel  Still- 
>vell,  lieutenant ;   which  being  considered  by  the  Council — 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  539 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  officers  be,  and  arc 
hereby,  approved. 

The  reiurn  of  the  officers  chosen  to  command  the  Cadet 
Company,  in  Providence,  was  read  in  Council,  which  is  as 
follows,  to  wit : 

Joseph  Nightingale,  captain  ;  William  Russell,  iirst  lieuten- 
ant ;  Nathaniel  Greene,  second  lieutenant ;  Ebenezer  Thomp- 
sou,  ensign  ;   which  being  considered  by  the  Council — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  officers  be,  and  they 
are  hereby,  approved. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  John  CI.  Wanton  be  requested 
ed  to  take  copies  of  the  acts  passed  at  the  last  and  this  present 
session  of  the  Assembly,  respecting  damages  done  by  the  sol- 
diers in  houses  belonging  to  private  persons  ;  and  for  removing 
soldiers  out  of  the  best  houses  in  Newport,  into  other  conven- 
ient houses  ;  and  to  cause  said  copies  to  be  inserted  in  the 
Newport  Mercury. 

Whereas,  the  Continental  Congress,  on  the  loth  day  of  April 
last,  did  resolve  that  Bohea  tea  ought  not  to  be  sold  in  the 
smallest  quantity  at  a  higer  price,  in  any  colony,  than  at  the 
rate  of  three-fourths  of  a  dollar  per  pound  ;  and  other  teas  at 
such  price  as  shall  be  regulated  by  the  committees  of  the  town 
or  county  where  the  tea  is  sold  ;  and  that  all  persons  who  shall 
give  or  take  a  greater  price  for  it,  ought  to  be  considered  as 
enemies  to  the  American  cause,  and  treated  accordingly  ;  and 
it  was  earnestly  recommended  to  all  committees  of  inspection 
and  observation,  as  well  to  be  vigilant  in  carrying  said  resolve 
into  execution,  as  those  which  prohibit  the  importation  of 
India  tea  from  any  part  of  the  world  ;  it  being  the  desire 
of  Congress  to  exclude  all  teas,  except  such  as  may  make  part 
of  the  cargoes  of  prizes  taken  by  the  ships  of  war  or  privateers 
belonging  to  these  colonies  ;  — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committees  of  in- 
spection of  the  several  towns  within  this  colony,  be  required  to 
see  said  resolve  strictly  complied  with  ;  that  they  publish  the 
names  of  all  delinquents,  as  enemies  to  the  liberties  of  the 
of   the  American   colonies  ;   and   if  in  any  town  within   thi.s 


640  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  1776. 

colony,  there  is  not  any  committee  of  inspection,  the  good  peo- 
ple of  said  town  are  requested  to  give  information  to  this  As- 
sembly of  any  persons  counteracting  said  resolve. 

It  is  voted  and  resolvedj  that  Messrs.  Nathaniel  Mumford, 
Thomas  Greene  and  Gideon  Mumford,  be,  and  they,  or  any 
two  of  them  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  audit  the 
accounts  of  the  persons  who  have  fitted  out  any  vessels  upon 
the  colony's  account,  to  purchase  warlike  stores  or  salt ;  and 
that  they  make  report  to  this  Assembly  at  the  next  session. 

In  Council,  was  read  the  return  of  the  officers  chosen  to 
command  the  company  of  Light  Infantry,  in  Newport,  which  is 
as  follows  : 

Jabez  Champlin,  captain  ;  Charles  Spooner,  first  lieu- 
tenant ;  Philip  Moss,  second  lieutenant ;  Samuel  Spooner, 
ensign. 

Which  being  considered  by  the  Council, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  officers  be,  and  they 
ate  hereby,  approved. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Metcalfe  Bowlerj  John 
G.  Wanton,  John  Jenckes,  Thomas  Greene  and  Jabez  Bowen, 
or  the  major  part  of  them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed 
a  committee,  to  audit  the  accounts  of  the  general  treasurer 
with  the  colony  ;  and  also  to  burn  all  the  lawful  money  bills 
and  treasurer's  notes,  that  may  remain  in  the  treasurer's 
hands  ;  and  that  they  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  as  soon  as 
may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolvedj  that  Messrs.  John  Brown,  Cromel 
Child,  John  G.  Wanton  and  Joshua  Babcock,  be  a  committee 
to  inquire  what  wages  the  several  colonies  allow  their  delegates, 
for  attending  on  the  Continental  Congress,  and  make  report  to 
the  next  session. 

Whereas,  it  hath  been  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that 
John  Wright,  of  New  Shoreham,  hath  betrayed  and  delivered 
up  to  the  officers  of  a  certain  ship  of  war,  of  the  British  King, 
two  seamen,  who  had  deserted  from  said  ship  ;  and  by  so 
doing,  hath  manifestly  shown  himself  to  be  an  enemy  to  his 
country. 


177B.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  541 

And  whereas,  there  may  be  some  other  inhabitants  of  said 
New  Shoreham,  of  suspected  political  characters, — 

It  is  therefore  resolved,  that  Jonathan  Hazard,  Esq.,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  empowered  to  proceed,  as  soon  as  may  be, 
to  said  New  Shoreham,  taking  sufficient  aid,  and  apprehend 
said  John  Wright,  and  any  other  persons,  who,  it  shall  appear  to 
him  have  given  any  supplies  or  intelligence  to  the  ships  of  the 
said  King  ;  and  confine  the  said  Wright,  and  other  such  sus- 
pected persons,  in  jail,  that  they  may  be  brought  before  this 
Assembly,  at  their  next  session,  in  order  that  they  may  be 
duly  examined  and  passed  upon  ;  and  that  Mr.  Hazard  ear- 
nestly exhort  the  inhabitants  of  New  Shoreham  to  remove  off 
from  the  island. 

An  Act  for  granting  a  bounty  upon  salt,  manufactured  within 
this  colony, 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly^  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  a  bounty  of  three  shillings, 
lawful  money,  be  allowed,  out  of  the  general  treasury,  for 
every  bushel  of  salt  manufactured  within  this  colony,  from  the 
rising  of  this  Assembly,  to  the  1st  day  of  November  next. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  Messrs.  Samuel  Fowler, 
Amos  Atwell,  John  Coddington,  Wm.  Greene^  Joseph  Noyes, 
John  Northup,  Samuel  Seagars,  Job  Comstock,  Benjamin 
Underwood,  Joseph  Stanton,  Jr.,  Nicholas  Easton,  Shearjashub 
Bourn,  John  Cooke,  Thomas  Brownell,  Cromel  Child,  Zuriel 
Waterman  and  Edward  Bosworth,  be,  and  they,  or  any  one  of 
them,  are  hereby  appointed,  to  inspect  the  salt  so  made  ;  and 
if  they,  or  either  of  them,  shall  approve  of  said  salt,  and  the 
manufacturer  thereof,  declare  under  oath,  before  any  magis- 
trate or  justice  of  the  peace,  or  either  of  said  inspectors  (who 
are  hereby  empowered  to  administer  the  same),  that  the  salt 
so  inspected,  was  by  them  manufactured  within  this  colony, 
within  said  time,  the  said  inspector  or  inspectors  shall  give  such 
manufacturer  a  certificate  of  the  quantity  of  said  salt  so  manu- 
factured, and  of  his  or  their  approbation  thereof ;   which  cer- 


542  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

tificate,  being  produced  to  the  general  treasurer,  the  said  man- 
ufiicturer  shall  be  paid  said  bounty,  by  the  general  treasurer. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be  re- 
quested to  write  to  Mr.  Thomas  Gushing,  informing  him  of  the 
receipt  of  his  letter  ;  and  that  this  colony,  in  case  the  Massa- 
chusetts colony  shall  be  invaded,  will  assist  them  to  defend  the 
said  colony  in  the  best  manner  we  can. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  following  towns  be  sup- 
plied with  the  following  quantities  of  powder  and  lead,  respec- 
tively, to  wit : 

lOU  lbs.  of  powder,  and  200  lbs.  of  lead 
"  600  " 
"  400  " 
"  300  " 
"  120  " 
"  ICO  " 
"  100  " 
'«  200  " 
"  100  " 
"  100  " 
ic  200  " 
"  "     50  " 

That  the  same  be  delivered  to  the  town  treasurers  of  each  re- 
spective town,  out  of  the  colony's  magazine,  by  the  committee 
appointed  for  that  purpose  ;  and  that  if  any  town  had  rather 
have  cartridges  than  powder  and  lead,  they  shall  have  liberty 
to  receive  the  same. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  colony  purchase  of  Mr. 
John  Brown  and  Company  twenty-three  or  twenty-four  nine- 
pound  cannon,  which  are  already  cast. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  John  Smith  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  appointed  to  attend  the  sale  of  the  salt  lately  taken 
by  the  armed  gallies  of  this  colony  (if  the  same  shall  be  con- 
demned), and  to  bid  for  the  same,  in  behalf  of  the  colony,  to 
such  a  sum  per  bushel,  as  he  shall  think  prudent. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  £60,  lawful  money,  be  allowed 


Coventry, 

100 

Scituate, 

250 

Smithfield, 

200 

Glocester, 

150 

North  Providence, 

60 

Johnston, 

80 

Westerly, 

— 

Cumberland, 

100 

West  Greenwich, 

50 

Cranston, 

50 

Portsmouth, 

— 

Exeter, 

50 

177G.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTxVTIONS.  543 

and  paid  to  William  Ellery,  Esq.,  appointed  a  delegate  in  the 
Continental  Congress,  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  defray  his 
present  expenses  ;  and  that  he  account  for  the  same,  to  the 
General  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  or 
Deputy  Governor,  and  the  members  of  the  General  Council, 
five  of  whom,  to  be  a  quorum,  together  with  such  of  the  depu- 
ties belonging  to  the  respective  towns,  in  this  colony,  as  may 
attend,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  act 
and  transact  such  business  as  the  exigency  of  public  affairs 
during  the  recess  of  the  General  Assembly  may  require,  and  to 
advise  His  Honor  therein  ;  and  that  all  orders  by  them  made 
and  issued,  and  all  other  their  transactions,  be  laid  before  the 
next  session  of  the  General  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  one-half  of  the  nine-pound 
cannon,  purchased  of  Nicholas  Brown  and  Company,  be  imme- 
diately mounted  on  field-carriages  ;  and  the  other  half,  on  car- 
riages suitable  for  a  battery. 

That  they  be  ready  to  be  placed  in  such  places  as  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  may  order  at  their  next  session. 

That  the  four  eighteen-pound  cannon  be  mounted  on  carri- 
ages suitable  for  a  battery. 

That  Messrs.  Cromel  Child,  John  Collins,  Edward  Church 
and  Thomas  Corey,  be  a  committee  for  that  purpose  ;  and  that 
twelve  of  said  cannon,  be  sent  to  Newport. 

Whereas,  the  inhabitants  of  the  island  of  New  Shoreham, 
from  their  exposed  and  defenceless  situation,  are  in  the  power 
of  the  enemy's  ships  of  war  ;  and  although  in  general,  they  are 
well  effected  to  the  common  cause  of  America  ;  yet,  as  in  all 
other  places,  there  are,  no  doubt,  some  among  them,  who,  for 
the  lucre  of  gain,  will  supply  the  enemy  with  provisions,  and 
give  them  all  the  intelligence  in  their  power. 

This  Assembly,  therefore,  not  doubting  but  the  inhabitants  of 
that  Island  will  see  the  necessity  of  preventing  the  enemy  from 
receiving  supplies,  and  gaining  intelligence,  and  cheerfully  ac- 
quiesce in  the  measure, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and   it  is  voted   and  resolved,  that  no 


644  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

person  or  persons  be  permitted  to  come  from  the  said  island,  to 
any  other  place  than  to  Newport,  to  bring  their  fish  or  produce 
to  marlcet. 

That  they  be  not  permitted  to  purchase  any  more  provisions, 
or  other  necessaries,  than  shall  be  permitted  them  by  the  com- 
mittee appointed  bV  this  act ;  who  are  hereby  directed  not  to 
suffer  any  to  go  upon  the  said  island,  but  such  as  are  immedi- 
ately necessary  for  the  internal  consumption  of  the  inhabitants. 

That  if  any  inhabitant  of  that  island  shall  be  found  in  any 
other  part  of  the  colony,  saving  Newport,  he  shall  be  immedi- 
ately confined  to  jail,  and  there  be  kept  until  the  next  succeed- 
ing session  of  the  General  Assembly,  to  which  he  shall  be 
brought,  to  be  dealt  with,  according  to  his  demerits. 

That  if  any  person  shall  be  detected  in  carrying,  or  in  at- 
tempting to  carry,  upon  the  said  island,  any  provision  or  neces- 
saries, excepting  such  as  shall  be  allowed  by  said  committee, 
he  shall  be  considered  as  a  person  supplying  the  enemy,  con- 
trary to  law,  and  shall  suffer  the  pains  and  penalties  in  such 
case  provided. 

And  that  Messrs.  John  Collins,  George  Sears  and  John  G. 
Wanton,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  for 
the  aforesaid  purposes. 

Thomas  Gushing  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Watertown,  May  3,  1776. 
Sir  : — By  ordei-  of  a  committee  of  the  General   Court   of  this  colony,  whereof  I 
have  the  honor  to  be  chairman,  I  enclose  you  a  copy  of  a  piece  of  intelligence  which 
may  be  depended  upon. 

As  the  British  troops  were  driven  in  a  hasty  manner  from  this  colony,  we  think 
we  have  reason  to  expect  that  they  will  endeavor  to  retrieve  their  character  in  the 
same  place ;  we  therefore  ardentlj-  wish  that  you  would  hold  a  number  of  militia 
regiments  in  readiness  to  reinforce  us,  or  to  give  us  the  same  assistance  you  may  de- 
pend upon  from  us,  should  the  attack  be  made  on  your  colony. 

I  remain,  with  great  respect,  &c., 

THOMAS  CUSHING. 
Tq  the  Honorable  Nicholas  Cooke,  Esq.,   7 
Governor  of  the  colonv  of  Rhode  Island.    > 


1776.1  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  545 


The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Thomas  Cushing. 

Providence,  May  6tL,  1776. 
Sir : — At  the  request  of  the  General  Assembly,  I  am  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 
of  yours  of  the  3d  instant;  and  to  inform  you,  that  in  case  of  an  attack  upon  the 
Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  this  colony  will  afford  all  the  assistance  in  our 
power  to  give.  Orders  have  been  given  to  several  of  the  colonels  of  militia,  to  hold 
their  regiments  in  readiness. 

The  enclosed  act  passed  the  upper  house,  unanimously,  and  the  Iqvver  house,  by  a 
vast  majority ;  there  being  upwards  of  sixty  members  present,  and  only  six  votes 
against  it.  I  am,  with  great  regard,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 
To  the  Honorable  Thomas  Cushing,  Esq. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island^  to  General  Washington. 

Providence,  May  6th,  1776. 

Sir :— Your  Excellency's  favor,  in  which  you  assure  me,  that  you  Avill  recommend 
this  unhappy  colony  to  the  Continental  Congress,  hath  been  laid  befof^  the  General 
Assembly,  to  whom  it  gave  great  satisfaction. 

I  enclose  you  a  copy  of  Col.  Babcock's  dismission.  The  office  of  brigadier  general 
is  still  kept  vacant,  in  hopes  that  the  brigade  will  be  put  upon  the  Continental  es- 
tablishment, and  that  a  commander  in  chief  will  be  appointed  by  Congress. 

I  also  enclose  a  copy  of  an  act  discharging  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony  from  al- 
legiance to  the  King  of  Great  Britain,  which  was  carried  in  the  house  of  deputies, 
after  a  debate,  with  but  six  dissentient  voices  ;  there  being  upwards  of  sixty  members 
present. 

I  may  also  inform  Your  Excellency  that  the  delegates  from  this  colony  are  in- 
structed and  authorized  to  join  with  the  major  part  of  the  delegates  ii)  entering  into 
treaty  with  any  prince,  state,  or  potentate  for  the  security  of  the  colonies  ;  and  to 
adopt  any  other  measures  that  may  be  thought  prudent  and  effectual.  This  instruc- 
tion passed  7iem.  con. 

The  lower  house  afterwards  passed  a  vote  for  taking  the  sense  of  the  inhabitants 
at  large  upon  the  question  of  independence ;  but  the  upper  house  represented  to 
them  that  it  would  probably  be  discussed  in  Congi'ess  before  the  sense  of  the  inhab- 
itants could  be  taken  and  transmitted  to  the  delegates ;  in  which  case,  the  Colony 
would  lose  their  voice,  as  the  delegates  would  be  laid  under  the  necessity  of  waiting 
for  instructions  from  their  constituents  ;  and  further  observed,  that  the  delegates, 
Avhen  they  should  receive  a  copy  of  the  vote  renouncing  allegiance  to  the  British 
King,  and  their  instructions,  could  not  possibly  be  at  a  loss  to  know  the  sentiments  of 
the  General  Assembly.     Upon  this,  the  matter  was  dropped. 

I  have  the  satisfaction,*  also,  to  inform  Your  Excellency,  that  at  a  very  full  tOMp 
meeting  of  the  inhabitants  at  Newport,  held  last  JVIonday,  it  was  unanimously  voted, 
to  enter  into  the  defence  of  the  town  ;  and  last  Thursday,  a  considerable  body  of 
them  began  to  work  upon  the  fort  to  be  erected  upon  Brenton's  Point. 

VOL.  VII.         69 


I 


546  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776 

This  happy  event,  I  have  great  hopes  -will  make  us  a  united  people,  and  root  up 
every  seed  of  disaffection  in  the  colony. 

I  take  the  liberty  once  more  to  press,  Your  Excellency  in  behalf  af  the  colony, 
the  defence  of  which  must  be  abandoned,  unless  we  receive  assistance  from  the 
Congress.  I  am.  with  great  respect,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 
To  His  Excellency  General  "Washington. 

P.  S.  By  this  day's  post,  I  have  forwarded  to  Mr.  Hopkins,  an  instruction  from 
the  General  Assembly,  directing  him  to  make  immediate  application  to  Congress,  to 
put  our  troops  upon  the  Continental  establishment. 

Edmund  Pendleton,  President  of  the  ^General  Convention  of  Vir- 
ginia, to  Metcalfe  Bowler,  Speaker  cf  the  House  of  Depu- 
ties of  the  General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island. 

Virginia,  May  22d,  1776. 
Sir : — I  am  honored  with  the  commands  of  the  General  Convention  of  this  colony, 
to  transmit  to  you  the  enclosed  resolutions,  which  they  have  thought  it  indispensa- 
bly necessary  to  enter  into  at  this  important  crisis  ;  requesting  you  will  communicate 
their  contents  to  the  General  Assembly  of  your  colony,  for  their  consideration. 
I  have  the  honor  to  be,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 
EDM'D  PENDLETON,  President. 
To  the  Honorable  the  Speaker  of  the  General  Assembly  of  Khode  Island. 

Proceedings  of  the  General  Convention  of  Virginia,  relative  to 
a  Declaration  of  Independence  by  the  United  Colonies,  of  the 
Crown  of  Great  Britain. 

Ix  COXVEXTION-*,  -\ 

Present,  one  hundred  and  twelve  members,    y, 
Wednesday,  May  15,  1776. 

Forasmuch,  as  all  the  endeavors  of  the  United  Colonies,  by  the  most  decent  rep- 
resentations and  petitions  to  the  King  and  Parliament  of  Great  Britain,  to  restore 
peace  and  security  to  America,  under  the  British  government,  and  a  re-union  with 
that  people,  upon  just  and  liberal  terms,  instead  of  a  redress  of  grievances,  have 
produced,  from  an  imperious  and  vindictive  administration,  increased  insult,  oppres-. 
sion,  and  a  vigorous  attempt  to  effect  our  total  destruction. 

By  a  late  act,  all  those  colonies  are  declai-ed  to  be  in  rebellion,  and  out  of  the  pro- 
tection of  the  British  crown  ;  our  properties  subjected  to  confiscation ;  our  people, 
frhen  captivated,  compelled  to  join  in  the  murder  and  plunder  of  their  relations  and 
countrymen ;  and  all  former  rapine  and  oppression  of  Americans,  declared  legal  and 
just.  Fleets  and  armies  are  raised,  and  the  aid.  of  foreign  troops  engaged,  to  assist 
these  destructive  purposes. 


177G.]  AND    PKOVIDKNCE   PLANTATIONS.  547 

The  King's  representative  in  this  colony,  hath  not  only  withheld  all  the  powers  ot 
government  from  oi)erating  for  our  safety  ;  but,  having  retired  on  board  an  armed 
-ship,  is  carrying  on  a  piratical  and  savage  war  against  us  ;  tempting  our  slaves,  by 
every  artifice,  to  resort  to  him,  and  training  and  employing  them  against  their 
masters. 

In  this  state  of  extreme  danger,  Ave  have  no  alternative  left,  but  an  abject  sub- 
mission to  the  will  of  those  ovei'bearing  tyrants,  or  a  total  separation  from  the  crown 
and  government  of  Great  Britain  ;  uniting  and  exerting  the  strength  of  all  America, 
for  defence ;  and  forming  alliances  with  foreign  powers,  for  commerce,  and  aid  in 
war. 

Wherefore,  appealing  to  the  Searcher  of  Hearts,  tor  the  sincerity  of  former  declara- 
tions, expressing  our  desire  to  preserve  our  connection  with  that  nation ;  and  that 
we  are  driven  from  that  inclination  by  their  wicked  councils,  and  the  eternal  laws 
of  self-preservation, — 

Besolved  unanimously,  that  the  delegates  appointed  to  represent  this  colony,  in 
General  Congress,  be  instructed  to  propose  to  that  respectable  body,  to  declare  the 
United  Colonies  free  and  independent  states  ;  absolved  from  all  allegiance  to,  or  de- 
pendence upon,  the  crown  or  Parliament  of  Great  Britain  ;  and  that  they  give  the 
assent  of  this  colony  to  such  declaration,  and  to  whatever  measures  may  be  thought 
proper  and  necessary  by  the  Congress,  for  forming  foreign  alliances,  and  a  confed- 
eration of  the  colonies,  at  such  time,  and  in  the  manner,  as  to  them  shall  seem  best. 

Provided,  that  the  power  of  forming  government  for,  and  the  regulations  of  the 
internal  concerns  of  each  colony,  be  left  to  the  respective  colonial  legislatures. 

Resolved  unanimously,  that  a  committee  ought  to  be  appointed  to  prepare  a 
declaration  of  rights,  and  such  a  plan  of  government,  as  will  be  most  likely  to  main- 
tain peace  and  order  in  this  colony,  and  secure  substantial  and  equal  liberty  to  the 
people.  EDMUND  PENDLETON,  President. 

(A  copy.)  JOHN  TAZEWELL, 

Clerk  of  the  Convention. 


General  Schuyler  to  the  Governor  cf  Rhode  Island. 

■ » 

Fort  George,  May  23d,  177b'. 

Sir: — I  am  honored  with  jour  letter  of  the  loth  inst.,*  which  was  yesterday  de- 
livered me  by  Major  Robinson ;  from  whom,  I  also  received  to  the  amount  of  $1,713, 
in  specie  ;  for  which,  I  have  passed  my  receipt.  This  sum,  small  as  it  is,  will  much 
alleviate  the  distress  of  our  army,  and  will  be  sent  into  Canada  this  morning,  by 
General  Sullivan,  who  has  already  re-eived  it  into  his  charge. 

You  have  doubtless,  ere  this,  been  minutely  informed  of  the  particulars  of  raising 
the  blockade  of  Quebec ;  an  event  greatly  unfortunate  for  us ;  but  which  I  trust 
will  not  be  attended  with  so  many  dreadful  consequences  as  the  generaUty  of  peo- 
ple, on  the  first  account  of  such  an  occurrence,  are  apt  to  imagine. 

General  Thomas  has  retired  no  further  than  the  force  of  necessity  obliged  him  to 
do,  and  he  holds  his  ground  at  Dechambault ;  and  although  he  has  been  greatly  dis- 
tressed, in  the  article  of  provision,  and  reduced  to  the  most  scanty  allowance,  yet  he 

*  This  letter  ia  not  among  the  files  in  the  Secretary's  office. 


548  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

has  been  some  days  since  relieved  by  what  I  have  sent  from  hence ;  noT  will  he  ex- 
perience a  scarcity  in  future,  as  I  have  already  forwarded  more  than  a  month's  pro- 
vision for  what  army  is  now  in  Canada ;  and  the  remainder  of  General  Sullivan's 
brigade  will  carry  considerably  more  than  that  with  them,  for  their  number. 

The  sending  off'  General  Sullivan's  and  General  Thompson's  brigades  into  Canada, 
which  Avas  done  as  soon  as  resolved  on,  has  given  me  my  hands  full ;  and  has  occa- 
sioned the  building  of  two  hundred  batteaux  more  than  Congress  intended  ;  an  ai'- 
duous  business,  at  a  season  of  the  year  when  all  forage  was  expended,  and  the  roads 
extremely  bad.  The  troojjs  have,  however,  not  been  detained,  except  the  last 
brigade,  for  a  very  few  days,  that  it  might  be  preceded  by  a  quantity  of  provisions? 
the  third  regiment  will  move  at  eight,  this  morning  ;  another  to-morrow,  and  the 
two  remaining  ones  as  soon  as  they  can  arrive  at  this  place,  which  I  trust  Avill  be  in 
the  course  of  this  week  ;  part  of  one  of  them  I  have  sent  into  Tryon  county,  to  ap- 
prehend the  forces  there. 

The  arrival  of  General  Sullivan's  brigade,  I  am  confident  will  have  a  happy  effiL'Ct 
on  the  Canadians,  and  inspire  them  with  confidence,  which  is  all  they  want ;  for  I 
have  good  intelHgence  that  most  of  the  peasants  are  warmly  attached  to  us,  and  will 
readily  atFord  us  every  assistance  on  the  prospect  of  our  being  able  to  maintain  our 
ground  in  Canada.  • 

The  first  accounts  may  have  exaggerated  our  loss,  although  I  have  no  regular  re- 
turn ;  I  cannot  learn  that  it  exceeds  two  hundred,  who  were  in  the  hospital ;  the 
parties  stationed  at  Orleans  and  Point  Levi,  having  both  joined  General  Thomas ;  a 
circumstance  that  gives  me  more  pleasure,  as  it  is  a  convincing  proof  of  the  friendly 
disposition  of  the  Canadians,  who  certainly  might  have  cut  off"  these  small  bodies,  if 
they  chose.  All  the  heavy  cannon  and  ammunition  sent  from  hence  this  spring,  is 
safe,  except  about  twenty-seven  barrels  of  powder,  which  the  enemy  took  in  a  smaU 
schooner. 

I  hope  soon  to  have  the  happiness  to  announce  to  my  superiors,  that  our  affairs  in 
Canada,  are  re-established ;  and  that  the  Hand  which  sometimes  chastises,  will  nev- 
ertheless support  the  much  injured  Americans  against  their  unnatural,  unrelenting 
and  cruel  enemy  ;  and  establish  them  a  free  and  a  happy  people. 
I  ami,  sir,  with  esteem, 
•  *  Your  honor's  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

PH.  SCHUYLER. 

To  the  Honorable  Governor  Cooke,  &c.,  &c 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  ^649 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly ^  held  for  the  Colonij  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations^  at  Newport,  on 
the  second  Monday  in  June,  1776. 

The  Hon.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Bradford,  Deputy  Governor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  persons  at  whose  houses 
the  picket  guard  kept  at  Middletown,  the  winter  and  spring 
last  past,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  allowed  two  pence,  lawful 
money,  per  night,  for  each  and  every  soldier,  who  kept  at 
said  houses,  as  a  picket  guard,  during  the  said  time. 

That  the  owners  of  said  houses  be  accountable  for  what  w^ood 
they  received  of  the  colony  ;  and  that  the  money  be  paid  by 
the  committee  of  safety. 

Whereas,  Messrs*  Metcalfe  Bowler,  John  Jenckes,  Jabez 
Bowen,  Thotnas  Greene  and  John  G.  Wanton,  were  appointed 
a  committee  to  audit  the  accounts  of  Joseph  Clarke,  Esq.,  gen- 
eral treasurer  ;  and  they  having  presented  to  this  Assembly 
the  following  state  of  his  account,  and  report  thereon,  to  wit : 

[Here  follows  the  account.]  * 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Nathaniel  Mumford, 
Thomas  Greene  and  Gideon  Mumford,  be,  and  they  are  hereby, 
directed  to  make  inquiry  what  salt  is  in  the  colony,  belonging 
to  the  government,  and  what  the  same  cost,  including  the  ves- 
sels and  cargoes  which  were  lost,  as  well  as  those  which  re- 
turned safe  ;  and  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  by  Friday 
morning  next,  at  farthest. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  New- 
port do,  and  he  is  hereby  directed  to,  take  immediate  possession 
of  the  tan-yard,  vats,  leather,  stock  of  hides,  and  every  thing 
else  in  the  tan-yard,  in  Newport,  belonging  to  George  Rome, 
for  the  use  of  the  colony. 


550  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1776* 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Cromel  Child  be,  and  he 
is  hereby,  directed  to  make  suitable  wooden  wheels  to  the  ship 
gun  carriages  he  is  employed  to  make  for  the  colony  ;  and  j:hat 
Mr.  Edward  Church  make  such  wheels  for  the  carriages  he  is 
employed  to  make  for  the  colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of 
Newport  do,  and  he  is  hereb}^,  directed  to  take  immediate  pos- 
session of  a  lot  of  land,  with  two  dwelling  houses  thereon,  lying 
in  Newport,  on  the  south  side  of  the  Parade,  being  the  estate 
of  George  Rome,  to,  and  for,  the  use  of  the  colony. 

That  the  said  sheriff  likewise  take  into  his  possession,  for  the 
use  of  the  colony,  all  other  the  estate  of  the  said  George  Rome, 
lying  in  the  county  of  Newport,  which  hath  not  already  been 
seized. 

And  that  the  tenants  of  the  estate,  aforesaid,  account  for  all 
arrearages  of  rent,  to  the  colony. 

Whereas,  during  the  recess  of  the  General  Assembly,  such 
of  the  members  thereof,  as  could  conveniently  be  immediately 
convened,  did  assemble,  and  thinking  it  to  be  expedient  that 
John  Collins,  Esq.,  should  present  unto  the  Most  Honorable  the 
Continental  Congress  the  following  memorial : 

Memorial  of  the   Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  to  the  Continental 
^  Congress. 

To  the  Most  Ilouorablo  tlie  delegates  of  the  United  Colonics,  in  Congress,  assembled 
at  Philadelphia : 

In  the  absence  of  the  Governor  and  Deputy  Governor,  Commodore  Eseck  Hop- 
kins hath  applied  to  us  for  the  re-delivery  of  twenty  pieces  of  cannon  which  he  hath 
landed  in  this  colony ;  we  have  thought  it  absolutely  necessary  to  detain  them,  until 
Your  Honors  should  be  made  acquainted  with  the  circumstances  of  the  colony,  not 
doubting  but  that  upon  mature  consideration,  it  Avould  be  thought  best  for  the  com- 
mon interest  to  permit  them  to  remain  here. 

We  beg  the^most  favorable  construction  of  this  measure,  and  assure  Your  Honors, 
that  no  persons  living  are  more  sensible  of  the  necessity  of  establishing  the  authority 
of  Congress,  nor  more  ready  to  pay  obedience  to  it. 

Your  Honors  have  doubtless  frequently  with  pain  reflected  upon  the  unhappy 
state  of  the  town  of  Newport,  which  was  entirely  defenceless ;  surrounded  by  a  pow- 
erfuUnaval  armament,  and  daily  threatened  with,  and  in  danger  of,  immediate  de 
struction;  for  it  was  incontestibly  in  the  power  of  the  British  fleet  to  destroy  it  at 
pleasure. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  651 

In  this  situation,  it  is  not  at  all  strange  that  near  a  third  part  of  the  inhabitants, 
removed ;  and  that  a  majority  of  the  remainder  were  induced  to  temporize,  and 
even  to  assume  an  appearance  rather  unfriendly  to  the  United  Colonies.  To  this 
situation,  alone,  is  the  former  conduct  of  Newport  to  be  attributed,  and  not  to  the 
want  of  spirit,  or  love  of  their  country. 

In  this  state  of  affairs,  the  British  fleet  quitted  the  harbor,  and  Commodore  Hop- 
kins most  providentially  arrived  with  twenty-six  cannon  and  some  shot,  which  ho 
offered  to  the  town.  The  inhabitants,  elated  with  having  this  means  of  defence,  as- 
sembled in  a  full  town  meeting,  and  unanimously  voted  to  work  upon  the  necessary 
fortifications,  and  to  defend  the  town  ;  and  immediately  entered  upon  it  with  vigor. 
This  decisive  resolution  gave  every  friend  to  the  United  Colonies  a  new  spring,  as 
many  of  us  looked  upon  Newport  as  worse  than  lost  to  the  common  cause.  Three 
considerable  woi'ks  have  been  erected.  These  cannon  have  been  with  great  expe- 
dition mounted  upon  carriages,  and  placed  upon  the  platforms ;  and  the  town  of 
Newport  is  now  capable  of  being  defended  against  all  the  frigates  in  the  British 
navy. 

Fortifications  are  also  making  at  Bristol  Ferry,  and  on  the  east  side  of  Rhode 
Island ;  which,  when  completed,  will  effectually  secure  a  communication  with  the 
continent,  and  enable  us  to  defend  that  most  valuable  island. 

We  are  happy  in  the  idea  of  having  put  a  total  stop  to  supplying  the  enemy,  of 
destroying  the  very  seeds  of  disaffection  in  the  colony,  and  of  being  an  united  people. 
"We  looked  upon  saving  the  town  of  Newport ;  the  commanding  the  haibor  in  which, 
from  its  easiness  of  access,  vessels  from  sea  may  find  a  quick  protection  under  the  can- 
non of  the  forts ;  and  which  will  at  all  times  afford  a  safe  assylum  to  the  Continental 
ships,  and  to  privateers  and  their  prizes,  as  well  as  to  other  vessels ;  and  which,  by 
means  of  the  works  now  erected,  may  pass  in  and  out  in  spite  of  all  the  British  fleet 
as  objects  of  very  great  ijnportance  to  the  common  cause. 

But  our  pleasing  prospects  are  greatly  interrupted  by  the  order  to  deliver  twenty 
of  these  cannon  to  Messrs.  Hollingsworth  and  Richardson,  to  be  transported  to  Phil- 
adelphia. From  the  face  of  it,  which  is  directed  to  the  commodore,  and  in  his  ab- 
sence, to  Mr  Tillinghast,  it  appeared  clearly  to  us  that  Your  Honors  thought  the 
cannon  were  barely  landed  here  ;  and  had  no  idea  of  their  being  fitted  with  carri- 
ages, and  planted  in  forts  erected  purposely  for  their  reception. 

We  beg  leave  to  refer  you  for  a  general  state  of  the  colony,  to  the  memorial  from 
the  Assembly,  which  is  now  before  Your  Honors,  and  is  in  no  degree  exaggerated,  by 
which  you  will  be  able  to  judge  of  the  exposed  situation  of  the  colony,  of  its  great 
exertions  for  the  common,  as  well  as  our  own  defence,  and  of  the  utter  impossibility  of 
our  defending  ourselves ;  to  which,  we  would  add,  that  there  are  now  in  the  colony, 
exclusive  of  those  brought  by  the  commodore,  but  twenty-four  pieces  of  heavy  can- 
non ;  being  twenty-four  and  eighteeu-pounders. 

The  Assembly  had  contracted  with  the  owners  of  Furnace  Hope,  for  sixty  more  ; 
but  the  commodore  having  brought  twenty-six  heavy  cannon  into  the  colony,  the 
Assembly  consented  that  the  cannon  for  the  Continental  ships  should  be  first  made, 
as  the  owners  of  the  furnace  could  not  possibly  supply  both  departments  in  season  | 
so  that  we  have  yet  had  but  four  eighteen-pounders  from  them  ;  nor  can  the  others 
be  made  under  a  long  time,  unless  a  stop  be  put  to  those  making  for  the  ships. 

AVe  are  informed  by  the  commodore,  that  he  landed  thirty-six  heavy  cannon  at 
New  London ;  which,  from  its  situation,  can  be  defended  with  one-quarter  of  the 
pumber  required  for  the  defence  of  the  bay,  town  and  harbor  of  Newport. 

And  when  the  difference  of  the  towns  of  Newport  and  New  London,  in  point  of 


552  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

the  number  of  inhabitants  and  value ;  in  jDoint  of  importance  to  the  United  Colonies 
and  in  the  abilities  of  the  two  colonies,  of  which  they  are  a  part,  to  defend  them,  are 
considered,  Ave  think  it  will  not  admit  a  doubt  from  which  place  the  twenty  cannon 
wanted,  are  to  be  removed. 

We  beg  leave  also  to  mention  to  Your  Honors  some  of  the  probable  consequences 
of  depriving  us  of  those  cannon  : 

All  the  disaffected,  all  the  lukewfg:"m,  and  all  the  timid,  cry  out  that  this  colony 
hath  been  totally  neglected  by  Congress,  while  every  other  colony  that  is  exposed,  is 
defended  by  the  Continental  troops,  which  the  most  hearty  in  the  common  cause 
cannot  deny ;  this,  with  the  dangerous  situation  of  the  town  of  Newport,  the  capital 
of  the  colony,  containing  upwards  of  thirteen  hundred  dwelling-houses,  and  between 
nine  and  ten  thousand  souls,  hath  produced  a  very  great  division,  and  'W'as  near 
overthrowing  that  administration  which  had  so  greatly  exerted  the  force  of  the 
colony.  The  blow,  however,  was  averted,  and  the  most  seasonable  arrival  of  those 
cannon,  with  the  decisive  resolution  of  the  town  of  Newport,  hath  given  union, 
spirit  and  vigor  to  the  colony.  Take  them  from  us,  and  we  cannot  answer  for  the 
event.  The  town  of  Newport  and  the  island  of  Rhode  Island  are  Ipst.  A  small 
part  of  that  army  now  at  Halifax,  may,  in  their  way  to  the  westward,  effect  their 
destruction,  without  being  detained  three  days.  It  will  be  impossible  for  the  inhab- 
itants to  defend  themselves  ;  they  will  not  even  attempt  it.  There  is  danger,  that 
those  people  who  are  so  desirous  of  reconciliation  with  Great  Britain  upon  any 
terms,  will  gain  the  ascendancy,  and  of  the  colony's  being  lost  to  America,  Leave 
us  the  cannon,  we  can  save  Newport,  which  hath  been  induced  in  consequence  of 
their  arrival,  to  take  such  steps  as  must  bring  upon  them  the  British  arms,  and  who 
will  be  most  cruelly  treated  in  being  deprived  of  them.  We  can  keep  possession  of 
Rhode  Island,  which  is  of  great  consequence  to  the  inhabitants  and  trade  of  Taunton 
and  Swanzey  Rivers ;  and  we  shall  be  a  united  people,  ready  with  our  lives  and 
fortunes  to  support  the  measures  of  Congress. 

We  submit  this  representation  to  Your  Honors,  which  Avill  be  delivered  to  you  by 
John  Collins,  Esq.,  the  first  assistant  in  this  colony,  to  whom  we  beg  leave  to  refer 
you,  for  further  information ;  not  in  the  least  doubting  that  upon  full  inquiry  and 
deliberation,  Your  Honors  will  consent  that  the  cannon  remain  here,  until  we  can 
be  otherwise  supplied. 

Signed  by  order  and  in  behalf  of  such  members  of  the  General  Assembly,  as 
could  conveniently  be  convened,  by —  HENRY  WARD,  Secretary. 

Providence,  May  20,  177G. 

Whereupon,  this  Assembly,  taking  the  premises  into  con- 
sideration,— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  aforegoing  memorial  be, 
and  the  same  is  hereby,  approved. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of 
Newport  immediately  make  an  inventory  of  the  whole  stock  in 
the  tan-yard  now  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Edward  Cole,  of 
Newport  ;  and  that  the  said  sheriff,  with  Col.  Christopher 
Lippitt  and  Mr.  Robert  Taylor,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  be  a 


I 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  553 

committee,  to  employ  suitable  persons  to  work  up  the  whole  of 
the  said  stock,  upon  reasonable  terms,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
colony. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Thomas 
Greene,  Nathaniel  Mumford  and  the  aforesaid  Robert  Taylor, 
^r  the  major  part  of  them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed 
a  committee  to  examine  and  state  the  accounts  between  the 
said  Edward  Cole  and  George  Rome,  respecting  the  said  tan- 
yard,  from  the  time  they  entered  into  partnership. 

That  the  said  Edward  Cole  submit  to  the  inspection  of  the 
said  committtee,  under  oath,  the  original  contract  of  partner- 
ship, and  all  books  of  accounts  and  papers,  whatever,  relating 
to  the  said  tan-yard,  and  to  all  accounts  of  every  nature,  sub- 
sisting between  them  ;  and  that  the  said  committee  report  to 
this  Assembly  as  soon  as  may  be. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  Nathaniel  Mumford,  Thomas  Greene  and 
Gideon  Mumford,  were  appointed  a  committee  to  inquire  ^at 
salt  is  now  in  the  colony,  belonging  to  the  government,  and 
what  the  same  cost,  including  all  charges  ;  and  they  having 
prestented  unto  this  Assembly  an  account,  by  them  stated,  with 
their  report  thereon,  as  follows,  to  wit : 

Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  by  the   General  Assembly^ 
relative  to  the  Quantity  of  Salt  in  the  Colony j  ^c. 

June,  1776.     Salt,  imported  and  purchased  by  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,     Dr. 

£  s.  d. 
To  amount  of  cargo,  outfits  and  inward  charges,  of  brig  Nancy,  fitted 

by  John  Northup  -  -  -  -  -  -  -     310  13  06 

To  amount  of  cargo,  outfits  and  loss,  of  sloop  Maryland,  by  Jacob 

Greene  .......  445  14  10 

To  amount  of  cargo,  outfits  and  inward  charges,  of  s(^hr)oner  Abigail, 

by  William  Greene            -            -            -  -  -     317  14  04 

To  amount  of  cargo   and  outfits  of  brig  —    by   Smith  and 

Mathewson     -  -  *  -  -  -  -  216  16  05 

To  amount  of  the  loss  of  said  brig  -  .  .  .  .    48O  00  00 

To  amount  of  cargo,  outfits  and  portage  bill,  of  the  schooner  Eagle,  by 

Joseph  Stanton,  supposed       -  -  .  _  .  303  00  00 

"To  amount  of  eighteen  hundred  and  eighty  bushels,  pupcjiased  by  John 

Smith,  averaged  as  per  Paul  Tew's  account,  at  Ss,  ,■  -     752  00  00 

VOL.  VII.  70 


554               RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [177C^. 

£      .9.   d. 

To  amount  of  six  hundred  and  seventeen  bushels,  bought  by  Sylvester 

Child,  at  o5.           -             -^          .             .             .             ,             -  92  11  OO 

Measuring  and  shifting  do.              -             -             -              -             -  18  00 
To.  amount  of  Cory  and  Irish's  charges  in  fitting  out  two  vessels  to  fetch 

salt,  stopped  by  the  Assembly         -             -             -             -             -  172  13  00 


£3,091  19  01 
By  salt  imported  in  brig  Nancy,  2,500  bushels. 

"     "         "  schooner  Abigail,  1,880       " 

'"     "        "  "         Eagle      1,500       " 

Bought  by  John  Smith,  -         -       1,880        " 

"  Sylvester  Child,        -         -     617 

8,377 
Allowed  for  wastage,  wharfage  and, 

storage',  at  7  1-2  per  cent.,  628       "     deducted. 

Remain,  7,749,  at  7s.  11  3-4        -         -         3,091    19  01 
At  Westerly,  purchased  by  Col.  Noyes,  130 

^m^  7,879  bushels. 

llPlport,  June  13,  1776. 

Having  carefully  examined  the  accounts  of  the  cargoes,  outfits  and  inward  charges, 
of  the  aforementioned  vessels,  and  the  losses  thereon  sustained,  and  averaged  them 
with  the  salt  imported  and  purchased,  we  find  that  it  cost  the  colony  seven  shillings: 
and  eleven  j^ence  three  farthings  per  bushel.  NATHAXIEL  MUMFORD, 

THOMAS  GREENE. 

And  the  premises  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  aforesaid  report  be,  and 
hereby  is,  accepted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  thanks  of  this  Assembly  be 
given  to  His  Excellency  George  Washington,  Esq.,  commander 
in  chief  of  the  forces  of  the  United  Colonies,  for  his  favorable 
representation  of  the  state  of  this  colony,  to  the  Most  Honora- 
ble the  Continental  Congress,  and  interposition,  in  procuring 
the  colony's  brigade  to  be  taken  into  Continental  pay  ;  and 
that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be  requested  to  transmit  to  His 
Excellency  a  copy  of  this  vote. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Jonathan  Arnold,  Henry  Mar- 
chant  and  Henry  Ward,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  ap- 
pointed a  committee  to  prepare  a  bill  for  establishing  suitable 


I 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  555 

offices  at  Newport  and  Providence,  for  entering  and  clearing 
vessels,  and  fixing  the  fees  of  the  officers. 

Whereas,  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Newport,  in  town 
meeting,  legally  assembled,  on  the  29th  day  of  April  last, 
unanimously  voted  that  they  would  defend  the  said  town,  and 
ordered  that  the  inhabitants  should  work  upon  the  fortifications, 
upon  the  penalty  of  paying  three  shillings  per  day,  for  each 
and  every  day's  neglect ;  and  at  a  meeting  held  on  the  25th 
day  of  May  last,  ordered,  that  the  fines  of  the  delinquents 
should  be  collected  by  William  Davis ;  and  that  in  case  of  re- 
fusal, he  should  destrain. 

And  whereas,  some  doubts  have  arisen  respecting  the  au- 
thority of  the  said  town  meetings  to  pass  the  said  votes, — 

It  is  therefore  revived  and  declared,  and  it  is  hereby  de- 
clared by  this  Assembly,  that  by  the  acts  of  incorporation  of 
the  several  towns  in  this  colony,  they  are,  and  ever  were,  suffi- 
ciently authorized  and  empowered  to  make  and  ordain  acts, 
laws,  orders  and  regulations,  binding  upon  their  respective  in- 
habitants, in  all  cases  whatever,  for  their  advantage,  safety 
and  defence  ;  and  to  impose  such  fines  and  penalties  for  the 
breaches  thereof,  as  they  shall  deem  meet ;  and  to  appoint  a 
person  or  persons  to  collect  such  fines  and  penalties,  with  power 
to  destrain,  in  case  of  refusal  or  neglect  to  pay  the  same. 

Provided,  such  acts,  laws,  orders  and  regulations,  are  not 
repugnant  to  the  acts,  laws,  orders  and  regulations  of  this 
General  Assembly. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Samuel  Johnson  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly 
an  account,  by  him  charged  againsLthe  colony,  for  four  pieces 
of  cannon,  for  the  use  of  the  colony ;  and  the  said  account 
being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed;  and  that  £50  IO5.,  being  the  amount  of  said  ac- 
count, be  paid  unto  the  said  Samuel  Johnson,  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Jeremiah  Clarke  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly 
an  account,  by  him  charged  for  six  pieces  of  cannon,  delivered 


556  RECORDS   OF   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE  ISLAND        [ITtOV 

to  Brigadier  General  West,  for  the  use  of  the  colony  ;  which 
said  account  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  £90,  lawful  money,  being  the  amount 
thereof,  be  paid  unto  the  said  Jeremiah  Clarke,  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  persons  appointed  by  this 
Assembly  to  take  possession  of  estates  belonging  to  persons  dis- 
affected to  the  United  Colonies,  in  behalf  of,  and  for  the  use 
of,  the  government,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  directed  immedi- 
ately to  render  an  account,  in  writing,  of  their  proceedings 
therein,  to  this  Assembly. 

Whereas,  William  Potter  and  John  Northup,  Esqs.,  who- 
were  appointed  at  the  last  session,  a  comriRttee,  to  let  out,  in 
behalf  of  the  colony,  all  the  real  estates  in  the  county  of 
Kings  county,  lately  belonging  to  persons  disaffected  to  the 
united  Colonies,  and  heretofore  ordered  by  this  Assembly  ta 
be  taken  into  possession  by  the  sheriff  of  said  county,  &c.,  did, 
upon  a  copy  of  their  appointment,  make  report ;  to  which  they 
subjoined  an  account,  by  them  charged  against  the  colony,  as 
follows,  10  wit : 

Report  of  the  Committee  to  the  General  Assembly. 

We,  the  subscribers,  with  Peter  Philips,  Esq.,  in  obedience  to  the  within  orderj 
have  leased  all  the  estates  taken  into  possession  by  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Kings 
county,  as  within  mentioned,  to  wit : 

The  estate  lately  belonging  to  the  heirs  of  John  Borland,  consisting  of  two  tracts 
of  land;  one  of  which,  we  have  let  to  Rowland  Kobinson,  Esq.,  and  the  other  to 
Mr.  Christopher  Robinson.  W 

The  estate  lately  belonging  to  Dr.  Thomas  Moffatt,  we  have  let  to  Mr.  Charles 
Dyer. 

The  estate  lately  belonging  to  George  Rome,  we  have  let  to  Mr.  Stephen  Boyer  • 
and  the  estate  lately  belonging  to  Samuel  Sewal,  consisting  of  two  tracts;  one  of 
which,  we  have  leased  to  Mr.  Silas  Niles,  and  the  other,  to  Mr.  David  Austin ;  and 
have  taken  writen  leases  thereof,  which  Ave  herewith  present  to  Your  Honors. 

We  have  also  disposed  of,  at  public  vendue,  four  horses,  lately  belonging  to  the' 
said  George  Rome,  for  the  sum  of  £49  16s. ;  which  we  are  ready  to  account  for. 

WILLIAM  POTTER, 
JOHN  NORTHUP. 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  557 

Both  which,  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be  accepted  ; 
that  the  said  account  of  the  committee  be  allowed,  and  paid 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  in  the  aforesaid  proportions  ;  and 
that  the  committee  pay  the  said  sum  of  £A9  IQs.,  into  the 
general  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Nathaniel  jMumford, 
Thomas  Greene  and  Gideon  Mumford,  be,  and  they,  or  the 
major  part  of  them,  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  pre- 
pare a  statement  of  the  demands  of  this  colony  upon  the  Con- 
tinental treasury  ;  and  that  they  lay  the  same  before  this  As- 
sembly at  the  next  session,  in  order  that  it  may'be  transmitted 
with  the  vouchers,  to  the  treasury  office. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  arrearages  of  rents  due 
from  the  tenants  in  possession  of  the  lands  lately  belonging  to 
persons  disaffected  to  the  American  cause,  and  taken  into  pos- 
sion  of  this  colony,  be  paid  into  the  general  treasury. 

That  Col.  John  Cooke,  for  the  county  of  Newport ;  Paul 
Tew,  Esq.,  for  the  county  of  Providence  ;  William  Potter, 
Esq.,  for  the  county  of  Kings  county  ;  and  Mr.  Cromel  Child^ 
for  the  county  of  Bristol,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a 
committee,  to  inquire  into  and  settle  said  arrearages. 

That  the  secretary  deliver  to  the  general  treasurer  all  the 
leases  and  papers  relating  to  said  estates  that  are  in  his 
possession. 

And  that  in  case  the  said  arrearages  be  not  paid  within  two 
months  after  the  rising  of  this  Assembly,  the  general  treasurer 
be,  and  he  is  hereby,  directed  to  sue  for  the  same. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the. sheriff  of  the  county  of 
Newport,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  directed  to  take  possession,  in 
behalf  of  the  colony,  of  a  dwelling  house  and  lot,  situate  in 
Newport,  in  the  said  county,  belonging  to  James  Frost,  who 
hath  engaged  in  the  service  of  the  enemies  to  the  United 
Colonies  ;  but  that  the  wife  of  the  said  James  Frost  may  reside 
on  the  premises,  or  receive  the  rents  and  profits  thereof,  until 
further  orders  from  this  Assembly, 


558  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776, 

Whereas,  the  coDihiittee,  appointed  to  examine  and  state  the 
accounts  between  George  Rome  and  Edward  Cole,  have  in- 
formed this  Assembly,  that  the  said  Edward  Cole  refuseth  to 
submit,  under  oath,  the  accounts,  papers,  &c.,  to  the  inspec- 
tion of  the  said  committee, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  Edward  Cole 
be  immediately  taken  into  custody  by  the  sheriff  of  the  county 
of  Newport,  and  safely  kept  until  he  shall  submit  the  said  ac- 
counts, &c.,  to  the  inspection  of  the  said  committee,  agreeably 
to  the  act  of  this  Assembly  made  in  that  behalf. 

In  Council,  was  read  the  return  of  the  officers  chosen  for 
the  independent  company,  called  the  Kentish  Guards,  who  are 
as  follows : 

Richard  Fry,  captain ;  Hopkins  Cooke,  first  lieutanant ; 
Thomas  Ilolden,  second  lieutenant  ;   Sylvester  Greene,  ensign. 

And  the  same  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted,  that  the  said  choice  be,  and  hereby  is,  ap- 
proved. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  William  Potter,  Esq.,  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  directed  to  procure  the  court  house  in  South 
Kingstown  to  be  glazed,  painted  and  finished,  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible ;  and  that  he  be  empowered  to  draw  £300,  lawful  money 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  for  that  purpose. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  soldiers  who  were  sta- 
tioned at  Block  Island,  be  paid  the  wages  still  due  to  them,  by 
John  Northup  and  Joseph  Stanton,  Jr.,  Esqs.,  two  of  the  com- 
mittee of  safety,  as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be  ;  and  that 
they  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  at  the  next  session. 

In  Council  was  read  the  return  of  the  officers  chosen  for 
the  company  called  the  North  Providence  Rangers,  who  are  as 
follows  : 

John  Angell,  son  of  Stephen,  captain  ;  Thomas  Olney,  Jr., 
lieutenant  ;   Joseph  Hawkins,  Jr.,  ensign. 

And  the  same  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  choice  be,  and  hereby 
is,  approved. 


1776.1  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  559 


An  Act  permitting  inoculation  for  the  small  pox,  in  this  colony. 

Whereas,  the  small  pox  hath  made  the  most  dreadful  rav- 
ages in  the  army  lately  before  Quebec,  which  was  a  principal 
cause  of  raising  the  blockade  of  that  city  ;  and  there  is  great 
danger  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  United  Colonies  may,  by  the 
prevalence  of  that  dreadful  distemper,  be  rendered  incapable 
of  defence  at  a  time  when  their  safety  may  depend  upon  their 
•most  vigorous  exertions. 

And  whereas,  that  distemper,  taken  by  inoculation,  is  so 
easy  and  light,  and  the  method  of  treatment  so  beneficial,  that 
any  number  of  persons  inoculated,  are  more  likely  to  live,  than 
the  same  number  of  persons  not  inoculated  ;  and,  as  by  intro- 
ducing the  practice  of  inoculation,  with  prudence  and  caution, 
the  greater  part  of  the  male  inhabitants  of  the  colonies,  may 
soon  get  over  that  terrible  disease,  and  the  fatal  consequences 
to  be  apprehended  from  our  armies  being  infected  there- 
with, be  averted, — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  one  hospital  may  be 
established  for  inoculating  for  the  small  pox,  in  each  county  in 
this  colony,  in  such  town  as  the  majority  of  the  deputies  in  the 
county,  in  a  meeting  duly  warned,  shall  agree  upon. 

That  the  hospital  in  the  town  which  shall  be  so  agreed  upon, 
shall  be  fixed  in  some  suitable  and  retired  place,  in  such  town, 
under  the  direction  of  the  town  council,  or  of  such  committee 
as  the  town  shall  appoint. 

Provided,  that  when  such  hospital  shall  be  improved  for  that 
purpose,  the  town  shall  mark  off  the  ground  round  said  hos- 
pital, at  a  distance  not  less  than  two  hundred  yards  every  way 
therefrom,  and  set  and  maintain  a  sufficient  guard,  to  prevent 
all  persons  in  the  hospital  from  going  beyond  those  limits,  and 
all  persons  without,  from  passing  within  one  hundred  yards 
of  them,  without  the  permission  of  the  directors  of  the  hospital, 
upon  the  penalty  of  forfeiting  and  paying,  as  a  fine,  into  the 
general  treasury,  £100,  lawful  money,  to  be  recovered  of  the 


560'  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1776. 

town  treasurer  of  such  town,  by  the  general  treasurer,  at  any- 
inferior  court  of  common  pleas  in  the  colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
every  person  passing  the  said  limits,  without  permission,  as 
aforesaid,  shall  forfeit  and  pay  as  a  fine,  c^l5,  lawful  money, 
to,  and  for  the  use  of,  such  town,  to  be  recovered  by  the  town 
treasurer,  at  a  special  court,  to  be  called  and  holden  in  the 
same  manner  as  special  courts  are  called  and  held  in  other 
-cases  ;  and  shall  also  suffer  three  months  imprisonment,  with- 
out bail  or  mainprize. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
it  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  said  guard,  and  they  are  hereby  em- 
powered, to  apprehend  and  immediately  commit  to  jail  every 
person  who  shall  transgress  with  respect  to  the  said  limits, 
there  to  remain  until  he  shall  be  acquitted,  or  the  sentence 
passed  upon  him  be  executed  ;  unless  such  transgressor  shall 
be  under  inoculation,  in  which  case  he  shall  be  carefully  kept 
within  the  said  limits  until  he  shall  be  recovered  and  cleansed, 
and  then  be  committed  to  jail,  as  aforesaid. 

And  it  is  further  enacted,  that  if  any  person,  being  so  inocu- 
lated, shall,  after  his  recovery  from  the  small  pox,  go  beyond 
tlie  said  limits,  without  a  certificate  of  his  being  thoroughly 
cleansed  therefrom,  together  with  the  wearing  apparel  he  shall 
carry  out  with  him,  he  shall,  in  default  thereof,  be  liable  to  the 
penalty  of  c£30,  lawful  money,  to  be  recovered  in  manner  as 
above  directed. 

And  if  any  person  having  such  certificate,  shall  by  himself, 
or  by  means  of  the  apparel  he  may  carry  out  with  him,  com- 
municate the  small  pox  to  any  person  without  the  hospital,  the 
doctor  or  physician,  of  such  hospital,  shall  be  liable  to  the  pen- 
alty of  £30,  lawful  money,  to  be  recovered  in  manner  as 
above  directed. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
no  person  shall  carry  out  from  the  hospital,  where  he  may  be 
inoculated,  any  bedding  or  other  articles,  linen  sheets,  and  his 
wearing  apparel,  as  aforesaid,  excepted  ;   and  that  every  article 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  661 

which  he  shall  carry  out,  shall  be  particularly  enumerated  in 
the  certificate  from  the  doctor  or  physician  of  such  hospital, 
under  the  penalty  of  £30,  lawful  money,  to  be  recovered  of 
such  inoculated  person  so  offending,  in  manner  as  above 
directed. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
any  town  in  which  an  hospital  shall  be  established,  as  afore- 
said, be,  and  hereby  is,  empowered  to  make  such  further  regu- 
lations, to  prevent  communicating  the  infection  from  the  hos- 
pital in  such  town,  and  to  lay  such  fines  and  penalties  upon  the 
offenders,  as  they  shall  think  proper. 

And  that  all  acts  made  by  such  town,  in  that  behalf,  shall  be 
of  the  same  force  and  validity  as  if  enacted  by  this  General 
Assembly. 

Protest  against  the  above  Bill. 

The  subscribers  protest  against  this  bill's  passing  into  an  act,  for  the  following  rea. 
sons,  to  yf'it : 

1.  For  that  although  we  urged,  that  in  a  case  of  such  vast  importance  as  Intimately 
affects  the  lives,  safety  and  well-being  of  the  community,  the  consent  and  approba- 
tion of  our  respective  constituents  ought  to  have  been  first  had  and  obtained,  yet 
this  motion  hath  been  rejected. 

2.  For  that  an  act  of  this  kind  hath  not  been  suffered  to  continue  but  for  a  short 
time  in  any  of  the  New  England  colonies ;  and  that  where  it  hath  been  permitted  or 
winked  at,  It  Is  now  entirely  d'scontlnued,  and  discountenanced. 

3d.  For  that  there  Is  in  this  act  no  provision  made  for  the  poor,  who  are  by  far 
the  much  more  numerous  part  of  the  community. 

JOHN  G.  WANTON,  BENJAMIN  UNDERWOOD, 

JOSHUA  BABCOCK,  THOMAS  WELLS, 

JOHN  NORTHUP,  SYLVESTER  GARDNER, 

JOSHUA  BARKER,  EDWARD  SANDS,  JR., 

THOMAS  FREEBODY.         JOHN  THURSTON. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  John  Waterman  be,  and 
and  he  is  hereby,  appointed  and  empowered  to  agree  with  some 
suitable  person,  upon  the  best  terms  he  can,  to  work  in  the 
powder  mill  belonging  to  the  colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Grov- 
ernor,  William  Potter,  George  Sears,  Jonathan  Arnold,  William 
Greene  and  Henry  Ward,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  ?ip- 

TOL.  vu.  71 


662  RECORDS   OP    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

pointed  a  committee,  to  inquire  into  the  circumstances  of  the 
uneasiness  subsisting  among  a  number  of  the  officers  of  the 
colony's  brigade,  stationed  upon  Rhode  Island,  respecting  Maj. 
Barton  ;  and  that  they  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  as  soon 
as  may  be. 

In  pursuance  of  the  recommendation  of  the  Most  Honorable 
the  Continental  Congress, — 

Resolved,  that  an  account  be  immediately  taken  of  the  num- 
ber of  inhabitants  in  each  town  in  this  colony  ;  that  the  persons 
whose  names  are  set  down  in  the  subsequent  list,  be,  and  they 
are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  for  that  purpose,  to  wit : 

Newport — Messrs.  George  Sears,  William  Coddington  and 
Gideon  Wanton. 

Providence — Messrs.  Martin  Seamans  and  Theodore  Foster. 

Portsmouth — Mr.  John  Coddington, 

Warwick — Mr.  Charles  Holden. 

Westerly- — Messrs,  Ichabod  Babcock  and  Joseph  Crandall. 

New  Shoreham — Mr.  Edwai-d  Sands,  Jr. 

North  Kingstown — Mr.  Joseph  Coggeshall. 

South  Kingstown — Mr.  Daniel  Rodman. 

East  Greenwich — Mr.  Thomas  Sheffield. 

Jamestown — Mr.  Benjamin  Underwood. 

Smithfield — Mr.  Daniel  Mo  wry,  Jr. 

Scituate — Mr.  Christopher  Potter,  or  Mr.  William  West. 

Glocester — Mr.  Zebedee  Hopkins,  Jr. 

Charlestown — Mr.  Jonathan  Hazard. 

West  Greenwich — Mr.  Judiah  Aylsworth. 

Coventry — Mr.  Ephraim  Westcot. 

Exeter — Mr.  George  Pierce. 

Middletown — Mr.  John  Barker. 

Bristol — Mr.  Shearjashub  Bourn. 

Tiverton — Messrs.  John  Cooke  and  Walter  Cooke. 

Little  Compton — Mr.  Thomas  Brownell. 

Warren — Mr.  William  Miller. 

(Cumberland — Mr.  John  Dexter. 

Richmond — Mr.  Richard  Bailey* 

iJranston — Mr.  Zuriel  Waterman, 


1776.]  aKd  providence  plantations.  563 

Hopkinton— Mr.  Thomas  Wells. 

Johnston-*-Mr.  John  Fenner. 

North  Providence^Mr.  Jonathan  Jenckes,  Jr. 

Barrington — Mr.  Thomas  Allen. 

That  they  take  the  account  in  the  same  manner  as  the  in- 
habitants of  this  colony  were  last  numbered. 

That  they  be  under  engagement  for  the  faithful  discharge  of 
the  trust  reposed  in  them  ;  and  that  they  make  report  to  this 
Assembly,  at  the  next  session.  . 

This  Assembly,  deploring  the  unhappy  situation  of  the  in- 
habitants of  New  Shoreham,  and  willing  to  give  them  every 
relief  in  their  power  ;  and  beiog  also  necessitated  to  provide 
for  the  general  safety, — 

Do  resolve,  in  addition  to,  and  amendment  of,  the  act 
passed  at  the  last  session,  respecting  the  said  island,  that 
the  committee  appointed  in  the  said  act  may  permit  such  of 
the  inhabitants  of  the  said  island  as  they  can  confide  in,  to  go 
t?o  Pawcatuck  River,  to  procure  at  the  mills  there,  such  a 
quantity  of  meal  as  shall  be  necessary  for  the  inhabitants  of  the 
said  island  ;  they  taking  the  same  and  other  necessaries  on 
board,  under  the  direction  and  with  the  written  permission  of 
George  Sheffield  and  Phineas  Clarke,  or  either  of  them,  who 
are  hereby  directed  to  transmit  to  the  said  committee  an  ac- 
count of  all  the  articles  so  taken  on  board  for  the  said  island. 

That  the  said  committee  be  empowered  to  permit  such  in- 
habitants of  the  said  island  as  they  can  confide  in,  to  proceed 
to  any  part  of  the  colony,  to  transact  the  necessary  business  of 
the  island ;  and  that  no  other  person  belonging  to  the  said 
island,  besides  the  deputies,  shall  go  to  any  other  part  of  the 
colony,  excepting  to  Goat  Island,  in  the  township  of  Newport, 
upon  the  penalty  of  being  committed  to  jail,  as  in  the  aforesaid 
act  is  directed. 

James  Honeyman,  Esq.,  advocate-general  of  the  court  of 
vice  admiralty,  in  this  colony,  under  the  crown  of  Great 
Britain,  having  appeared  before  and  informed  this  Assembly, 
that  if  his  holding  the  said  office  be  disagreeable  to  the  colony, 
he  will  deliver  up  his  commission, — 


564  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  his  holding  the  same,  is  disa- 
greeable to  the  colony  ;  and  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of 
Newport  call  upon  the  said  James  Honey  man,  to  receive  the 
said  commission  ;  and  that  he  deliver  it  to  His  Honor  the  Gov- 
ernor, to  be  lodged  in  the  secretary's  office. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  salt  belonging  to  the 
colony,  be  divided  among  the  several  towns,  in  proportion  to 
the  number  of  polls  in  each  town,  which  is  to  be  ascertained 
by  the  account  of  the  number  .of  inhabitants  in  the  colony,  at 
this  session  ordered  to  be  taken  ;  that  the  same  be  delivered  by 
Messrs.  John  Smith,  William  Greene,  John  Northup,  Joseph 
Stanton,  Jr.  and  Sylvester  Child  ;  that  each  town  be  at  the 
cost  of  transporting  its  proportion  ;  and  that  it  be  disposed  of 
at  the  discretion  of  each  town,  at  the  rate  af  six  shillings  per 
bushel,  for  cash  only,  by  such  persons  as  the  town  shall 
appoint. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  each  town  may  im- 
mediately receive  the  following  quantity,  in  part  of  its  said 
proportion,  to  wit : 


J 

Newport 

ausoeis. 

200 

Coventry  - 

lusneis. 

80 

Providence 

100 

Exeter 

50 

Portsmouth    - 

50 

Middletown 

40 

Warwick  -         -         - 

100 

Bristol  - 

50 

Westerly 

300 

Tiverton  -         -         - 

60 

New  Shoreham  - 

30 

Little  Compton 

50 

North  Kingstown   - 

100 

Warren    -         -         - 

50 

South  Kingstown 

150 

Cumberland  - 

60 

East  Greenwich 

100 

Richmond 

60 

Jamestown 

30 

Cranston 

100 

Smithfield      - 

150 

Hopkinton 

80 

Scituate   -         -         - 

150 

Johnston 

50 

Glocester 

120 

North  Providence 

20 

Charlestown 

60 

Barrington     - 

25 

West  Greenwich     - 

80 

Whereas,  Mr.  John  Carter  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly,  an 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  565 

account  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  printing  lawful 
money  bills,  divers  acts  of  Assembly,  commissions,  proclama- 
tions, &c., — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  upon  due  examination  of  the  said 
account,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is,  allowed  ;  and  that 
j£30  4s.  9c?.,  lawful  money,  being  the  amount  thereof,  be  paid 
•the  said  John  Carter,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  Capt.  Ethan  ClarkCj  adminstrator  to  the  estate  of 
the  Hon.  Samuel  Ward,  Esq.,  deceased,  late  a  delegate  from  this 
colony,  in  the  General  Congress,  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly, 
an  account  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  the  services 
of  the  said  Samuel  Ward,  in  the  said  capacity,  from  the  26th 
day  of  August  last,  to  the  26th  day  of  March  last,  being  the 
day  of  his  death,  for  the  wages  of  his  servant  and  horse-hire  ; 
for  his  expenses  in  going  to  Philadelphia,  and  during  his  abode 
there  ;  and  for  the  charges  of  his  last  sickness  and  funeral, 
amounting  to  £392  7d.,  lawful  money  ;  and  deducted  there- 
from the  sum  of  £120,  received  by  the  the  said  Samuel  Ward, 
from  the  colony, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  upon  due  examination  of  the  said 
account,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is,  allowed  ;  and  that 
<£272  7c?.,  lawful  money,  being  the  balance  thereof,  be  paid  to 
the  said  Ethan  Clarke,  as  administrator  to  the  said  estate,  out 
of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  it  appears  to  this  Assembly,  by  a  report  of  the 
committee,  appointed  to  estimate  the  damages  done  to  the  es- 
tate of  Mr.  John  Banister,  by  the  colony  troops  stationed  in 
his  house,  that  they  have  made  considerable  waste  and  destruc- 
tion ;  and  this  Assembly  being  desirous  of  making  a  reason- 
able allowance  therefor,  but  not  being  satisfied  with  the  said 
report, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
sum  of  £80,  lawful  money  be  paid  to  the  said  John  Bannister, 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  towards  the  damages  he  hath  sus- 
tained, as  aforesaid. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Henry  Peckham,  for  the 
county  of  Newport ;  Mr.  Thomas  Greene,  for  the  county  of 


566  RECORDS    Of   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  1776. 

Providence  ;  Mr.  Pardon  Tillinghast,  for  the  county  of  Kings 
county  ;  Mr.  Benjamin  Bosworth,  for  the  county  of  Bristol  ; 
and  Mr.  Thomas  Tillinghast.  for  the  county  of  Kent,  or  the 
majof  part  of  them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  com- 
mittee, to  inquire  into  the  damages  done  within  this  colony,  by 
the  troops  in  the  service  of  tht5  colony,  before  the  act  was 
made  directing  who  should  be  answerable  for  such  damages  ;• 
and  that  they  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  at  the  next 
session. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Nathaniel  Mumford^ 
Thomas  Greene  and  Gideon  Mumford,  be,  and  they  are  herebyj 
appointed  a  committee,  to  audit  the  accounts  of  the  committee 
of  safety,  and  of  the  commissary  of  the  colony's  brigade  ; 
and  that  they  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  at  the  next 
session. 

An  estimate  of  the  damages  done  to  a  house  in  Newport,  be- 
longing to  John  Northup,  Esq.,  by  the  soldiers  of  the  colony's 
brigade,  having  been  laid  before,  and  duly  considered  by,  this 
Assembly, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  £5  7s.  4c?.,  lawful  money, 
being  the  sum  they  were  estimated  at,  be  allowed  therefor,  and 
paid  the  said  John  Northup,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

An  Act  empowering  the  members  of  the  upper  and  lower 
houses  of  Assembly,  to  tender  to  such  of  the  inhabitants  as 
are  hereinafter  mentioned,  a  declaration,  or  test,  for  sub- 
scription. 

Whereas,  the  great  danger  to  which  this  colony  is 
exposed,  makes  it  necessary  to  use  every  measure  for  de- 
tecting those  persons  among  us,  who  are  inimical  to  the 
United  Colonies,  and  preventing  their  doing  injury  to  the 
common  cause, — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  all  the  male  inhabit- 
ants of  this  colony,  of  sixteen  years  of  age  and  upwards,  who 
shall  be  suspected  of  being  inimical  to  the  United  American 
Colonies,  and  the  arduous  struggle  in  which  they  are  engaged, 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  567 

against  the  force  of  Great  Britain,  shall  make  and  subscribe  the 
following  declaration,  or  test,  to  wit : 

Declaration  or    Test,  to   be  made  by  suspected  persons  in  the 
Colony,  relative  to  the  War  ivith  Great  Britain 

"  I,  the  subscriber,  do  solemnly  and  sincerely  declare,  that  I 
believe  the  war,  resistance  and  opposition,  in  which  the  United 
American  Colonies  are  now  engaged,  against  the  fleets  and  ar- 
mies of  Great  Britain,  is  on  the  part  of  the  said  colonies  just 
and  necessary  ;  and  that  I  will  not,  directly  nor  indirectly, 
afford  assistance  of  any  sort  or  kind,  whatever,  to  the  said 
fleets  and  armies,  during  the  continuance  of  the  present  war ; 
but  that  I  will  heartily  assist  in  the  defence  of  the  United 
Colonies." 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
in  case  any  such  suspected  person  shall  refuse  to  subscribe  the 
same,  it  shall  be  in  the  power  of  either  of  the  members  of  the 
upper  or  lower  house  of  Assembly,  in  this  colony,  and  they  are 
hereby  directed  to  issue  a  summons,  and  call  the  person  so  re- 
fusing, before  him,  and  make  inquiry  into  the  reasons  of  his 
refusal ;  and  if  he  shall  continue  such  refusal,  without  giving 
satisfactory  reasons  for  the  same  to  the  member  summoning 
him,  or  shall  refuse  to  appear  upon  being  summoned,  such 
member  shall  issue  his  warrant,  directed  to  the  sheriff  of  the 
county  where  the  person  so  refusing  shall  dwell,  or  his  deputy, 
commanding  him,  with  sufficient  aid,  to  make  strict  and  dili- 
gent search  for  all  arms,  ammunition  and  warlike  stores,  be- 
longing to  such  persons  so  refusing,  and  to  take  and  deliver 
the  same  to  the  captain  of  the  company  of  militia  in  whose 
district  the  delinquent  shall  live,  to  be  made  use  of  in  time  of 
an  alarm,  taking  a  receipt  of  the  captain,  therefor  ;  which 
arms,  ammunition  and  warlike  stores,  shall  be  appraised  by  two 
indifferent  persons,  to  be  appointed  by  such  member  so  issuing 
the  summons,  and  be  paid  for  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

And  that  such  member,  so  summoning  any  suspected  person, 


568  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

shall  make  return  of  all  his  proceedings,  in  pursuance  of  this 
act,  to  the  General  Assembly,  at  the  next  succeeding  session, 
after  his  issuing  any  summons. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  and  it  is  further  enacted  by  the 
authority  aforesaid,  that  in  case  any  person  so  summoned,  shall 
produce  a  certificate  from  the  clerk  of  any  Meeting  of  the 
Friends,  that  he  is  in  unity  with  that  society,  or  shall  take  the 
affirmation  directed  in  an  act  entitled,  "An  act  for  the  relief 
of  persons  of  tender  consciences,  and  for  preventing  their  being 
burthened  with  military  duty,"  he  shall  be  excused  from  sub- 
scribing to  the  said  declaration,  or  test. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
a  copy  of  this  act  be  inserted  in  the  next  Newport  Mercury 
and  Providence  Gazette. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  John  Smith  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  directed  to  deliver  to  Mr.  Ephraim  Westcot,  four  guns, 
bayonets  and  cartouch  boxes,  for  the  same  articles  which  are 
due  from  the  colony  to  Messrs.  Job  Greene,  Nathan  Franklin, 
Uriah  Franklin  and  Peleg  Colvin,  taking  the  said  Westcot's 
receipt  therefor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  thanks  of  this  General  As- 
sembly be,  and  they  are  hereby,  presented  to  John  Collins, 
Esq.,  for  his  services  at  the  Continental  Congress  ;  and  that 
his  expenses  to,  at  and  from  Philadelphia,  be  allowed  and 
paid,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  safety  for  the 
county  of  Newport,  purchase  two  hundred  spears,  for  the  bat* 
teries,  in  the  township  of  Newport. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  general  treasurer  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  directed  to  prosecute  Mr.  Silas  Casey,  for  a 
breach  of  contract,  in  not  delivering  a  quantity  of  salt  pur- 
chased of  him  by  the  colony. 

"Whereas,  the  militia  of  the  town  of  Exeter,  is  so  numerous, 
as  to  bo  sufficient  for  three  companies, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be  divided 
into  three  companies. 

That  all  the  persons  living  to  the  eastward  of  Second  River, 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  669 

SO  called,  where  it  comes  out  of  West  Greenwich,  running 
through  the  land  of  John  Josselyn,  until  it  conies  to  John* 
Chapman's  grist  mill ;  and  from  thence,  southerly,  as  it  runs, 
until  it  comes  to  South  Kingstown,  shall  compose  the  first 
company. 

That  the  persons  living  to  the  westward  of  the  said  line,  and 
to  the  eastward  of  a  line  beginning  at  the  highway  that  comes 
from  News  Neck,  so  called,  and  running  from  thence,  south- 
erly, as  the  said  highway  runs,  across  Black  Plain,  to  the  Ten 
Rod  Highway  ;  and  from  thence,  southerly,  as  the  said  high- 
way runs,  until  it  comes  to  the  town  of  Richmond,  shall  com- 
pose the  second  company. 

And  that  the  persons  living  to  the  westward  of  the  said  last 
mentioned  line,  shall  compose  the  third  company. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  Richard  Beale,  John  Nicholl,  Nicholas 
Lechraere,  Thomas  Vernon  and  Walter  Chaloner,  having  been 
examined  before  this  Assembly,  and  refused  to  subscribe  the 
test,  ordered  by  this  Assembly  to  be  tendered  to  suspected  per- 
sons ;  and  it  appearing  that  while  they  continue  in  the  princi- 
ples by  them  avowed  before  this  Assembly,  they  are  justly  to 
be  deemed  unfriendly  to  the  United  Colonies, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the 
county  of  Newport  forthwith  remove  the  said  Richard  Beale, 
John  Nicholl,  Nicholas  Lechmere  and  Thomas  Vernon,  to  the 
town  of  Glocester,  in  this  colony,  where  they  shall  be  permitted 
to  go  at  large,  within  the  limits  of  said  town  ;  they  giving 
their  parole  of  honor  to  continue  there  until  further  orders  from 
this  Assembly. 

That  if  either  of  them  shall  forfeit  his  parole,  he  shall,  upon 
being  apprehended,  be  committed  to  jail,  and  kept  closely  con- 
fined until  further  orders  from  this  Assembly. 

And  that  in  case  either  of  them  shall  refuse  to  give  his  pa- 
role, as  aforesaid,  he  shall  be  confined  to  such  house,  in  the 
said  town  of  Glocester,  as  the  said  sheriff  shall  think  fit,  with 
liberty  of  the  farm  whereon  the  house  stands. 

And  whereas,  the  said  sheriff  hath  in  his  hands,  several  exe= 
cutions  against  the  said  Walter  Chaloner,  which  are  ^Qon  re- 

VOL.  vn.         72 


570  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

turnable,  and  upon  which  he  is  now  in  the  custody  of  the  said 
•sheriff, — 

It  is  therefore  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  as  soon  as  the 
said  Walter  Chaloner  shall  be  discharged  from  the  said  execu- 
tions, the  said  sheriff  immediately  remove  him  to  the  said  town 
of  Glocester,  in  manner  us  the  said  Richard  Beale  and  others 
are  ordered  to  be  removed,  and  under  the  like  conditions  and 
restrictions. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  this  colony  do  purchase  of  Col. 
Joseph  Noyes  all  the  salt  that  he  hath  to  dispose  of;  and  hat 
he  be  allowed  and  paid  therefor  at  the  rate  of  four  shillings  per 
bushel. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  safety  be,  and 
they  are  hereby,  directed  to  purchase  every  necessary  article 
for  the  soldiers,  provisions  excepted,  and  deliver  the  same  to 
the  commissary,  who  shall  supply  the  soldiers  with  them,  at 
the  prime  cost,  including  the  charges ;  and  that  a  bale  of 
clothes,  now  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  John  Smith,  be  imme- 
diately forwarded  to  the  commissary,  for  the  aforesaid  purpose. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  requested  to  inform  the  delegates  from  this  colony 
in  Congress,  of  the  act  permitting  inoculation  for  the  small  pox 
in  this  colony,  and  desire  them  to  move  in  Congress,  as  a  matter 
of  real  importance  to  the  safety  of  the  army  and  the  United 
Colonies,  that  all  common  soldiers  and  seamen,  in  the  Conti- 
nental service,  or  who  shall  hereafter  engage  therein,  be  per- 
mitted to  be  inoculated  at  the  expense  of  the  United  Colonies, 
in  such  hospitals  as  may  be  allowed,  under  such  restrictions 
and  rules  as  are,  or  may  be,  enacted  by  the  respective 
colonies. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  John  G.  Wanton, 
Samuel  Fowler  and  John  Bartlet,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  procure  upon  the  best  terms  they  can, 
a  suitable  house,  to  be  used  as  an  hospital,  for  the  colony  troops 
stationed  upon  Rhode  Island  ;  and  that  the  sick  be  immedi- 
ately removed  from  the  present  hospital,  and  the  house  be 
cleansed. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  571 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Daniel  Mowry,  Jr.,  Esq.,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  appointed  to  proceed  immediately  to  the 
county  of  Providence,  and  make  diligent  inquiry  after  the  per- 
sons concerned  in  counterfeiting  the  bills  of  credit  emitted  by 
this  colony. 

That  he  take  with  him  the  counterfeit  bill  now  before  this 
Assembly  ;  and  that  Capt.  Joseph  Manchester  attend  this  As- 
sembly, to  give  information  of  what  he  knows  respecting  the 
said  counterfeit  bill. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  John  Smith  be,  and  he  is 
hereby,  appointed  and  empowered  to  dispose  of,  at  public  ven- 
due, the  claret,  in  his  possession,  belonging  to  the  colony  ;  and 
that  he  give  notice  of  the  time  of  sale  in  the  Newport  Mercury 
and  Providence  Gazette. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  two  tons  of  gun  powder  be  de-' 
livered  out  of  the  colony's  store  to  Major  Robert  Elliott^  for 
the  use  of  the  brigade  stationed  upon  Rhode  Island. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  Henry  Babcock  be,  and 
and  he  is  hereby,  allowed  one  month's  pay,  after  the  time  he 
was  dismissed  from  the  command  of  the  regiment  in  the  service 
of  this  colony  ;  during  which  time  he  was  confined  by  the  pleu- 
risy, with  which  he  was  seized,  while  in  the  service. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Nathan  Miller,  commissary 
of  the  colony's  brigade,  forthwith  pay  into  the  general  treasury 
£1,000,  lawful  money,  it  being  part  of  the  sum  by  him  taken 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  purchase  necessaries  for  the  said 
brigade,  and  now  in  his  hands  undisposed  of. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  commissary  of 
the  colony's  brigade  purchase  wood  therefor,  as  heretofore. 

An  Act  regulating  trade  within  this  colony,  and  establishing 
proper  ofi&ces  for  entering  and  clearing  vessels  and  mer- 
chandize. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  any  goods,  wares  and  mer- 
chandize, other  than  shaken  or  knocked  down  casks  for  mo- 
lasses, may  be   exported  from  this  colony,  by  the  inhabitants 


572  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND         [1776. 

thereofj  and  of  the  other  United  Colonies,  and  by  the  people  of 
all  such  countries  as  are  not  subject  to  the  King  of  Great  Brit- 
ain, to  any  parts  of  the  world  which  are  not  under  the  dominion 
of  the  said  King. 

Provided,  that  no  vessel  be  permitted  to  export  any  greater 
number  of  shaken  or  knocked  down  molasses  casks  than  the 
same  vessel  is  capable  of  carrying,  when  filled. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
any  goods,  wares  and  merchandize,  except  such  as  are  of  the 
growth  and  manufacture  of,  or  brought  from  any  country  under 
the  dominion  of  the  King  of  Great  Britain,  and  except  East 
India  tea,  may  be  imported  from  any  other  parts  of  the  world 
into  this  colony,  by  the  inhabitants  thereof,  and  of  the  other 
United  Colonies,  and  by  the  people  of  all  such  countries  as  are 
not  subject  to  the  said  King. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
there  shall  be  two  persons  annually  appointed  by  this  General 
Assembly,  as  intendants  of  trade,  who  shall  be  under  oath  for 
the  faithful  execution  of  their  offices  ;  one  of  whom,  shall  re- 
side in  and  keep  his  office  in  Newport ;  and  the  other,  shall  re- 
side in  and  keep  his  office  at  Providence ;  and  shall  each  of 
them,  be  empowered  to  appoint  a  deputy. 

That  it  shall  be  the  duty  and  business  of  the  said  intendants 
to  take  a  bond,  payable  to  the  Governor  and  Company  of  this 
colony,  to,  and  for  the  use  of,  the  colony,  from  the  master  of 
every  vessel  cleared  out  at  their  respective  offices,  with  one  suf- 
ficient surety,  in  double  the  value  of  the  cargo  shipped  on  board 
such  vessel,  conditioned  for  the  true  observance  of  the  re^^ula- 
tions  made  by  the  Most  Honorable  the  Continental  Congress, 
and  this  General  Assembly,  concerning  trade,  and  for  securing 
the  observance  of  such  parts  of  the  association  as  are  not  incon- 
sistent therewith  ;  and  that  the  obligor  shall,  within  eighteen 
months  after  the  departure  of  the  vessel,  produce  to  such  in- 
tendant  a  certificate  from  the  proper  officers,  at  the  port  or 
place  where  the  cargo  shall  be  delivered  (provided  it  be  within 
the  United  Colonies,  and  proper  officers  are  appointed),  or 
otherwise,   under  the  hands  and  seals  of  three   or  more  re- 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  573' 

spectable  merchants,  residing  there,  that  the  same  was  there 
unhi(3ed. 

That  the  said  intendanfcs  shall  also  take  manifests  upon  oath 
of  the  cargoes  exported  and  imported,  and  keep  fair  accounts 
and  entries  thereof,  give  bills  of  health  when  desired,  grant 
registers,  showing  the  property  of  the  vessel  cleared  out  (which 
registers  shall  be  also  given  under  the  hand  and  seal  of  the 
Governor  of  this  colony,  for  the  time  being),  and  sign  certifi- 
cates that  the  requisites  for  qualifying  vessels  for  trade  have 
been  complied  with. 

And  that  the  said  intendants  shall  make  return  to  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly,  at  every  session,  of  all  imports  and  exports. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
if  any  vessel  coming  into  this  colony,  shall  break  bulk,  before 
report  of  her  cargo,  and  whence  she  came,  be  made  to  one  of 
the  said  intendants,  the  said  vessel  and  her  cargo,  or  such  part 
thereof,  as  the  General  Assembly  shall,  upon  considering  their 
case,  think  fit,  shall  be  forfeited  ;  one-half  to  the  use  of  the 
colony  ;  and  the  other  half,  to  the  use  of  the  informer  and 
prosecutor  of  the  same. 

And  that  if  the  master  of  any  vessel  shall  be  convicted  of 
having  taken  a  false  oath  before  either  of  the  said  intendants, 
he  shall  suffer  the  pains  and  penalties  of  perjury. 

And  l)e  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
all  prosecutions  and  trials,  for  any  offences  against  the  regula- 
tions, aforesaid,  shall  be  commenced  and  had  before  the  inferior 
court  of  common  pleas,  in  the  county  where  such  offence  shall 
be  committed  ;  and  that  no  prosecution  upon  any  of  the  bonds 
given,  as  aforesaid,  shall  be  commenced  after  the  expiration  of 
three  years  from  the  date  thereof. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  thaS 
the  said  intendants  shall  give  constant  and  regular  attendance 
in  their  respective  ofiices  every  day  in  the  year,  Sundays  ex- 
cepted, from  ten  o'clock,  in  the  forenoon,  until  one  in  the  af- 
ternoon ;  and  shall  be  allowed  and  receive  the  same  fees  for 
the  same,  and  similai'  duty,  as  by  a  law  of  this  colony  were  al- 


574  RECORDS    OF    ME    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776''. 

lowed  to  the  late  collector  of  the  customs  in  this  colany,  until 
a  proper  table  of  fees  shall  be  established  by  this  General 
Assembly. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
all  goods,  wares  and  merchandize,  except  such  as  are  made 
prize  of,  which  shall  be  imported  directly  or  indirectly  from 
Great  Britain  or  Ireland,  into  this  colony,  contrary  to  the 
regulations  established  by  the  said  Congress,  shall  be  for- 
feited ;  one-half  to  and  for  the  use  of  the  colony,  and  the 
other  half  to  the  use  of  the  informer  and  prosecutor  for  the 
same  ;  and  shall  be  liable  to  trial  and  condemnation  in  the 
court  erected  in  this  colony  for  the  trial  of  prizes. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
a  copy  of  this  act  be  inserted  in  the  Newport  Mercury  and 
Providence  Gazette. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  HiS' 
Honor  the  Deputy  Governor  and  the  assistants  of  this  colony, 
five  of  whom  to  be  a  quorum,  together  with  such  members  of 
the  lower  house  of  Assembly,  as  may  attend,  and  the  secretary,- 
be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee  to  act  and 
transact  such  business  as  the  exigency  of  public  affairs  shall' 
make  (during  the  recess  of  the  General  Assembly)  necessary  ; 
and  that  all  their  acts  and  doings  be  laid  before  this  Assembly, 
at  the  next  session. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, Mr.  Thomas  Freebody,  Mr.  John  Brown,  William  Pot- 
ter, Esq.  and  Charles  Holden,  Esq.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby, 
appointed  a  committee,  to  inquire  into  the  number  of  cannon  in 
this  colony,  belonging  thereto,  and  to  determine  where  it  will 
be  most  advantageous  to  place  them,  and  to  give  orders  for 
placing  them,  accordingly  ;  and  that  they  make  report  to  this 
Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  following  officers  be,  and 
they  are  hereby,  appointed  to  command  the  trained  bands,  or 
companies  of  mililia  in  the  town  of  Newport,  to  wit : 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  575 

Officers  to  command  the  several  Militia  Companies  of  the  Town 
of  Newport. 

"William  Tripp,  captain  ;  Caleb  Carr,  Jr.,  lieutenant ;  and 
Jonathan  Simmons,  ensign,  of  the  first  company. 

Henry  Wiles,  captain  ;  Robert  Dunbar,  lieutenant ;  and 
William  Pendleton,  ensign,  of  the  second  company. 

Wing  Spooner,  captain  ;  Stukely  Wyatt,  lieutenant ;  and 
Lee  Langley,  ensign,  of  the  third  company. 

William  Downing,  captain  ;  John  Nichols,  lieutenant  ;  and 
Benjamin  Hammett,  ensign,  of  the  fourth  company. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  several  members  of  the 
committee  of  safety  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  and 
directed  to  inquire  into  and  examine  the  certificates  of  guns 
taken  from  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  while  in  the  Conti- 
nental service  ;  and  that  they  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  at 
the  next  session. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  following  persons  be,  and 
they  are  hereby,  appointed  to  command  the  trained  bands  or 
companies  of  militia,  in  the  town  of  Exeter,  to  wit : 

Officers  to  command  the  several  Militia  Companies  of  the  Town 
of  Exeter. 

Jonathan  Bates,  captain  ;  Stephen  Wightraan,  lieutenant ; 
and  Henry  Reynolds,  ensign,  of  the  first  company. 

John  Hoxsie,  captain  ;  George  Sweet,  Jr.,  lieutenant ;  and 
Eber  Sherman,  ensign,  of  the  second  company. 

Daniel  Barber,  Jr.,  captain  ;  Phineas  Kinyon,  lieutenant; 
and  George  Wilcox,  ensign,  of  the  third  company. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  following  bills  be  paid  : 

Bills  to  be  Paid. 

£     s.  d. 
'To  the  committee  for  signing  £20,000,  in  laAvful  money  bills     -         -         -     50  00  0 
"  "  "         £20,,000,  "  .'  .         .         .       100  00  0 

Allowance  to  Watch  Company,  Newport,  2s.  a  day  each,  Dr.  Peter  Tur- 
ner for  attendance  on  a  sailor  belonging  to  the  galley  Washington     -     16  00  9 
Hopkins  Cooke,  for  a  whale  boat  used  in  the  colony's  servicce  -        -         -       6  00  0 
Kachel  Cranston,  for  boarding  one  Hamilton,  a  prisoner,  who  was  sick  at 

her  house .9  154 


576 


RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND 


[1776. 


£     s.d. 

William  Turner  Miller,  for  rum  -         -         - 10  0 

Philip  Wilkinson,  for  four  four-pound  cannon  -         -         -         -         -         -72  160 

Edward  Sands,  for  three  double-fortified  three-pounders       -         -         -  27  00  0 
Dr.  Thomas  Truman,  for  attendance  on  two  prisoners  wounded  on  Pru- 
dence Island         ------.-..  3  07  0 

Edward  Simmons,  for  iron-work  on  three  gun  carriages   -         -         -         -37  06  0 

Wilkins  Treby,  for  duck  for  the  galley  Washington      -         -         -         -  15  0 

Nicholas  Easton,  for  cart  wheels,  taken  for  the  use  of  the  troops       -         -  6  12  0 

John  Pitman,  for  iron-work  on  gun  carriages        -         -         -         -         -  23  019 

Samuel  Davenport,  for  "             '•             " 36  08  5 

Cromel  Child,  for  materials  and  labor  for  the  galley  Washington  -         -  18  02  6 

Benjamin  Bosworth,  for  getting  hay  off  Prudence  Island           -         -         -  25  07  3 

William  Gorton,  Jr.,  ibr  victualling  the  Kentish  Guards        -         -         -  1116 
George  B.  Allen,  for  boarding  soldiers,  and  for  their  passages  to  Prudence, 

Bristol,  &c.  -         - -         -  31  02  4 

John  Waterman,  for  eight  reams  of  paper,  for  printing  lawful  money  bills,  8  00  0 

Amos  Lockwood,  for  sundries  for  troops  at  Warwick  Neck  -         -         -  9  07  0 

Edward  Simmons,  expense  of  carriage  of  a  cannon  to  Tower  Hill     -        -  5  16  4 
Ezekiel  Burr,  expenses  of  express  to  General  Washington,  and  for  bring- 
ing prisoners  from  Boston         -         -         -         -         -         -         -         -14  117 

Welcome  Arnold,  for  carrying  express  to  Governor  Trumbull       -         -  2  14  0 

James  Wallace,  for  carrying  express  to  General  Washington    -         -         -  2  08  0 
Sylvester  Gardner,  for  his  time,  horse-hire  and  expenses,  in  removing  stock, 

corn  and  hay,  from  Jamestown         - 95  05  1 

Ruth  Peckham,  for  boarding  a  wounded  prisoner  at  Providence    -         -  3  05  6 

Col.  Joseph  Belcher,  for  articles  furnished  the  row-galley  Spitfire     -         -  7  01  8 
Abraham   Anthony,   for   victualling   the  Pawtuxet  Rangers,  while  upon 

alarm  at  Warwick  Neck  -         -         -         -         -         -         -         -2199 

John  Newton,  for  a  boat  and  oars,  taken  by  General   Hopkins,  for  the  use 

of  the  colony 6  10  0 

George  B.  Allen,  for  freighting  hay  and  grain  from  Prudence  Island     -  7  02  0 

Capt.  Benjamin  Pierce,  for  attendance  at  the  trial  of  Col.  Henry  Babcock  2  02  6 
Charles  Tillinghast,  for  services  in  removing  hay  and  stock  from  Prudence 

Island 24  16  1 

Anthony  Low  for  billeting  part  of  Capt.  Thomas  Rice's  company      -         -  08  4 
Abraham  Lockwood,  for  provisions  furnished  the  militia  when  upon  duty 

at  the  alarms  on  Warwick  Neck  -------  07  8 

Daniel  Austin,  for  rent  of  a  house  removed  near  Newport,  to  make  room 

for  the  North  Battery 6  00  0 

Daniel  Chace,  for  a  feather  bed  for  the  use  of  a  wounded  prisoner,  damaged,  1  05  0 
William  Barton  and  others,  expense  of  bringing  ten  prisoners  from  Boston 

to  Providence 13  08  0 

Benjamin  Shearman,  for  the  use  of  his  boat  seven  months,  by  General 

Hopkins -         -         -2  16  0 

Solomon  Southwick,  for  paper  for  printing  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the 

army 6  06  2 

John  Coddington,  for  a  cedar  boat  for  the  service  of  the  coJoay     -         -  6  00  0 
John  Goddard,  for  transporting  by  water  various  detachments  of  the  colo- 
ny's brigade,  at  divers  times     -         -         - 4138 


18  14  0 

2  14  0 

8  00  0 

15  15  4 

10  04  0 

3  07  G 

1,  7  09  G 

6  19  6 

6  15  0 

1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  577 

£     s-d. 
James  Smith,  for  timber  for  platforms  in  the  fort,  at  Bristol  Ferry   -         -       2  04  4 
Cromel  Child,  for  making  twenty-one  carriages  for  cannon,  etc.     -    ,    -       217  02  0 
James  Arnold,  Jr.,  for  materials  for,  and  laying,  a  platform  in  the  battery 

upon  Long  Neck,  in  Cranston,  and  for  field-carriages  for  cannon        -     75  16  2 
Caleb  Carr,  for  provisions  supplied  Capt.  Throop's  company  -         -  4  05  6 

Joshua  Ingraham,  for  rent  of  house  and  stores  in  Bristol,  improved  by  the 

colony's  troops  -         -         -         -         -         -         -         -         -         -5000 

Thomas  Sabin,  for  board  and  entertainment  of  the  Indian  chiefs  that  were 
before  the  Assembly  in  January  last  -         .         ^         .         -         , 

For  damages  done  by  troops  to  the  estate  of  John  Banister  -         -         - 
William  Dillingham,  for  a  large  cedar  boat  taken  by  Gen.  Hopkins, 
Nathaniel  Mumtbrd,  for  his  services  in  settling  the  accounts  of  the  com- 
mittee of  war,  and  of  the  commissary      ,,---- 

Gideon  jMumford,  services  for  the  same  duty       ^         _         -         -         , 
Jonathan  Hazard,  for  expenses  to  Block  Island,  to  apprehend  disaffected 
persons  ------------ 

Dr.  William  Hunter,  for  attendance  on  Daniel  Tillinghast,  a  wounded  man, 
Dr.  Jonathan  Easton,  '•  "  "  '* 

Anthony  Holden,  for  board  of  prisoners  of  war         .         .         ^         - 

God  save  the  United  Colonies. 

Stephen  Hopkins  and  William  Ellery,  Delegates  of  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  in  the  Continental  Congress,  to  the  Governor  of 
Rhode  Island. 

Philadelphia,  June  8th,  1776. 

Sir : — That  correspondence  between  the  colony  and  its  delegates,  which,  by  the 
death  of  Mr.  Ward,  and  the  great  inconvenience  which  attends  Mr.  Hopkins  in 
writing,  hath  for  some  time  past  been  interrupted,  we  wish  might  be  resume:!. 

Mr.  Hopkins  gave  the  earliest  notice,  by  express,  that  our  brigade  was  put  under 
the  Continental  establishment ;  and  John   Collins,  Esq.,  informed  the  Assembly  of 
the  determination  of  Congress  respecting  the  cannon  which  were  landed  at  Newport 
by  the  commander  in  chief  of  the  Continental  navy.     Since  that,  the  Congress  have 
ordered  six  thousand  of  the  militia,  to  reinforce  the  army  in  Canada,  and  keep  up  a 
communication  with  that  province. 
Massachusetts  is  requested  to  furnish  of  their  militia,  for  that  purpose,  four 

battalions  .-.-----    3,000 

Connecticut,  two  battalions  ,  ^  .  -  -  -  1,500 

New  Hampshire,  one  battalion  ..----       750 

New  York,  one  battalion  ._-.--  750 

To  reinforce  the  army  at  New  York,  there  are  ordered  of  the  militia  -  13,800 

Massachusetts  is  requested  to  furnish  thereof      .  .  -  -  2,000 

Connecticut  "  *'  u         ,  .  .  .  .    .5^500 

New  York  "  u  .....  .  3,000 

New  Jersey  "  "  .'.•.-..    3,30Q 

VOL.  VII.         73 


578  BECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [177&. 

A  flying  camp  is  ordered  to  be  formed,  to  consist  of  ten  thousand  militia,  and  to 
be  farnislied  as  follows  : 

Pennsylvania  .-..._._     6,000 

Maryland         '  •  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  3,400 

Delaware  government  -  -  -  -  -  -  -600 

The  Congress  have  also  empowered  Gen.  Washington  to  employ  in  Canada, 

Indians  ---------     2,000 

John  Hopkins  and  Samuel  Tompkins  are  appointed  to  the  command  of  the  two 
ships  built  in  Providence;  but  which  of  the  ships  they  are  respectively  to  command, 
is  not  yet  determined ;  when  it  is,  we  shall  give  you  notice,  thereof,  as  well  as  of 
every  thing  of  importance  which  passes  the  Congress. 

Please  to  desire  the  committee  appointed  to  build  the  ships  in  Providence,  to 
transmit  to  the  marine  committee  of  Congress,  the  names  of  the  lieutenants  and 
other  oflicers  they  have  appointed,  in  order  that  they  may  receive  their  commissions. 

By  letters  from  Canada  to  Congress,  It  appears  that  our  affairs  there,  are  in  a  bad 
situation.  Gen.  Arnold  in  a  letter  of  the  ■27th  of  May  last,  informs  that  five  hun- 
dred of  our  troops  were  taken  prisoners,  at  a  place  above  Montreal,  called  The 
Cedars,  by  fifty  regulars,  three  hundred  Canadians,  and  two  hundred  and  fifty  In- 
dians.    We  lost  only  ten  privates,  and  not  one  otficer. 

Gen.  Arnold  writes  that  as  soon  as  he  had  intelligence  of  his  defeat,  he  collected 
a  body  of  men,  and  determined  to  attack  the  enemy ;  but  he  could  not  get  his  bateau 
ready  early  enough  for  his  purpose ;  and  that  he  had  agreed  with  the  commander 
of  the  enemy's  forces  to  an  exchange  of  prisoners ;  officer  for  officer,  and  man 
for  man. 

Foster,  who  commanded  the  party  of  the  enemy,  Avhen  he  became  acquainted 
with  Arnold's  design  to  attack  him,  told  him,  Avith  seeming  concern,  that  if  he  did 
attack  him,  his  Indians  would  immediately  destroy  every  prisoner  ;  that  it  would  be 
out  of  his  power  to  prevent  it,  &c.,  &c.  This  did  not  check  Gen.  Arnold ;  but  it 
seems  that  his  bateau  not  being  able  to  get  to  him  seasonably,  put  a  stop  to  his  de- 
sign. We  are  at  a  loss  how  to  account  for  this  capture  of  our  men,  by  a  body  but 
a  little  superior  to  them  in  numbers ;  in  our  detachment  were  Major  Sherburn  and 
another  major,  and  nine  or  ten  captains. 

Two  privateers  fitted  out  from  this  place,  have  taken  three  valuable  ships,  bound 
to  England,  from  Jamaica ;  one  of  the  privateers  hath  arrived  at  Egg  Harbor,  and 
sent  to  this  city  by  land  S24,800 ;  the  other  privateer,  with  the  prizes,  were  bound 
for  Bedford.  We  are,  with  great  respect, 

Your  Honor's  most  obedient,  humble  servants, 
STEP.  HOPKINS, 
WILLIAM  ELLERY. 

To  Governor  Cooke,  Rhode  Island. 

The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island,  to  General  Washington. 

Providence,  June  20th,  1776. 

Sir  :— It  is  with  great  pleasure,  that  I  do  myself  the  honor  to  transmit  to  Your 
Excellency  the  enclosed  vote  of  the  General  Assembly. 

The  putting  the  colony  brigade  upon  the  Continental  establishment,  for  which  we 
esteem  ourselves  so  much  indebted  tq  Your  Excellency,  gave  the  highest  satisfaction 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  679 

Mr.  Hopkins  sent  me  the  commissi  jns,  with  power  to  fill  up  those  for  the  captains 
and  subalterns,  as  should  be  thought  best  here ;  but  added,  that  "  as  the  field  oflicers 
will  be  appointed,  or  at  least  approved,  by  Congress,  I  could  wish  that  you  would 
transmit  to  me  the  names  of  such  gentlemen  as  you  may  think  the  most  capable  to 
fill  those  oflices."  The  General  Assembly  have  not  nominated  any  persons  to  those 
offices. 

I  most  earnestly  request  Your  Excellency's  attention  to  the  troops  in  this  colon}', 
and  to  the  necessity  of  appointing  an  officer  of  ability  and  reputation,  to  command 
them,  which  is  most  ardently  wished  for  by  every  body. 
I  am,  with  great  respect, 

Your  Excellency's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 
To  His  Excellency  General  Washington.    • 

John  Hancock,  President  of  the  Continental  Congress,  to  the 
General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island. 

Philadelphia,  June  20th,  1770. 

Gentlemen  : — I  do  myself  the  honor  of  enclosing,  in  obedience  to  the  commands  of 
Congress,  sundry  resolutions,  to  which  I  beg  leave  to  request  your  attention. 

I  have  only  time  to  observe,  in  general,  that  it  is  totally  impossible  the  American 
troops  should  ever  be  on  a  respectable  footing  ;  or  that  they  should  I'ender  any  very 
essential  services  to  their  country,  unless  the  United  Colonies,  on  their  part,  will 
take  care  to  have  them  well  appointed  and  qualified  with  every  thing  necessary  for 
an  army. 

In  this  view  of  the  matter,  the  enclosed  resolve,  respecting  the  mode  of  providing 
proper  clothing  for  our  troops,  is  most  certainly  of  the  greatest  importance ;  and  I 
make  no  doubt,  will  appear  in  the  same  light  to  you,  and  claim  your  immediate  and 
closest  attention.  I  have  the  honor  to  be,  gentleme-i, 

Your  most  obedient  and  very  humble  servant, 

JOHN  HANCOCK,  President. 

To  the  Honorable  General  Assemblv,  of  Rhode  Island. 


Lord  Howe  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Eagle,  oflT  the  coast  of  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,     i 
June  the  20th,  1776.  \ 

Sir : — Being  appointed  commander  in  chief  of  the  ships  and  vessels  of  His  Maj- 
esty's fleet,  employed  in  North  America,  and  having  the  honor  to  be,  by  His  Majesty, 
constituted  one  of  his  commissioners  for  restoring  peace  to  his  colonies,  and  for 
granting  pardons  to  such  of  his  subjects  therein,  as  shall  be  duly  solicitous  to  benefit 
by  that  effect  of  his  gracious  indulgence  ;  I  embrace  this  opportunity  to  inform  you 
of  my  arrival  on  the  American  coast,  where  toy  first  object  will  be  an  early  meeting 
with  General  Howe,  whom  His  Majesty  hath  been  pleased  to  join  with  me  in  the 
said  commission. 

In  the  mean  time,  I  have  judged  it  expedient  to  issue  the  enclosed  declaration,  in 
ord  ^r  that  all  persons  may  have  immediate  information  of  His  Majesty's  most  "-ra- 
cious  intentions.     And  I  desire  you  will  be  pleased  forthwith  to  cause  the  said 


580  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

declaration  to  be  promulgated,  in  such  manner,  and  at  su?li  places  within  the  colony 
of  Ilhode  Island,  as  will  render  the  same  of  the  most  public  notoriety. 

Assured  of  being  favored  Avith  your  assistance  in  every  measure,  for  the  speedy 
and  eftectual  j-estoration  of  the  public  tranquility,  I  am  to  request  you  will  commu^ 
nicate,  from  time  to  tibie,  such  information  as  you  may  think  will  facilitate  the  at- 
tainment of  that  important  object  in  the  colony  over  Avhich  you  preside. 
I  have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect  and  consideration,  sir, 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

HOWE. 
To  the  Honorable  Governor  Wanton,  &c.,  &c.,  Rhode  Island  ;    ^ 
or  other  magistrate  of  the  colony.  ^ 

Froclamation  by  Lord  Howe. 

By  Richard  Viscount  Howe,  of  the  kingdom  of  Ireland,  one  of  the  King's  cohimis- 
sioners  for  restoring  peace  to  His  Majesty's  colonies  and  plantations  in  North 
America,  &Ci,  i>;c. 

DECLARATION. 

AVhereas,  by  an  act  passed  in  the  last  session  of  Parliament,  to  prohibit  all  trade 
and  intercourse  with  the  colonies  of  New  Hampshire,  Massachusetts  Bay,  Rhode  Is- 
land, Connecticut)  New  York,  New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  the  three  lower  counties 
on  the  Delaware,  Maryland,  Virginia,  North  Carolina,  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
and  for  other  purposes,  therein  mentioned,  it  is  enacted,  that  "It  shall,  and  may  be, 
lawful  to,  and  for,  any  person  or  persons,  appointed  and  authorized  by  His  Majesty) 
to  grant  a  pardon  or  pardons  to  any  number  or  description  of  persons,  by  proclama- 
tion, in  His  Majesty's  name,  to  declare  any  colony  or  province,  colonies  or  provinces, 
or  any  county,  town,  port,  district,  or  place,  in  any  colony  or  province,  to  be  at  the 
peace  of  His  Majesty ;  and  that,  from  and  after  the  issuing  of  any  such  proclama- 
tion in  any  of  the  aforesaid  colonies  or  provinces ;  or,  If  His  Majesty  shall  be  gra- 
ciously pleased  to  signify  the  same,  by  his  royal  proclamation  ;  then,  from  and  after  the 
issuing  of  such  proclamation,"  the  said  "  act,  with  respect  to  such  colony  or  province, 
colonies  or  provinces,  county,  town,  port,  district,  or  place,  shall  cease,  determine 
and  be  utterly  void." 

And  whereas,  the  King,  desirous  to  deliver  all  his  subjects  from  the  calamities  of 
war,  and  other  oppressions  which  they  now  undergo,  and  to  restore  the  said  colonies 
to  his  protection  and  peace  as  soon  as  the  constitutional  authority  of  government 
therein  may  be  replaced,  hath  been  graciously  pleased,  by  letters  patent,  under  the 
"reat  seal,  dated  the  6th  day  of  May,  in  the  sixteenth  year  of  His  Majesty's  reign,  to 
nominate  and  appoint  me,  Richard  Viscount  Howe,  of  the  kingdom  of  Ireland  ;  and 
William  Howe,  Esquire,  general  of  the  forces  in  North  America,  and  each  of  uSj 
jointly  and  severally,  to  be  His  Majesty's  commissioner  atid  commissioners,  for 
granting  his  free  and  general  pardons  to  all  those  who  in  the  tumult  and  disorder  of 
the  times,  may  have  deviated  from  their  just  allegiance,  and  who  are  Avilling,  by  a 
speedy  return  to  their  duty,  to  reap  the  benefits  of  the  royal  favor ;  and  also  for  de* 
daring  In  His  Majesty's  name,  any  colony,  province,  county,  town,  port,  district  or 
place,  to  be  at  the  peace  of  His  Majesty. 

I  do  therefore,  hereby  declare,  that  due  consideration  shall  be  had  to  the  meritori- 
ous services  of  all  persons  who  shall  aid  and  assist  in  restoring  the  public  tranquility 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  581 

in  the  said  colonies,  or  in  any  part  or  parts  thereof;  that  all  pardons  shall  be  granted, 
dutiful  representa4:ions  received,  and  every  suitable  encouragement  given  lor  pro- 
moting such  measures  as  shall  be  conducive  to  the  establishment  of  legal  govern- 
ment, and  peace,  in  pursuance  of  His  Ma^^jesty's  most  gracious  purposes,  aforesaid. 
Given  on  board  His  ^Majesty's  ship  the  Eagle,  off  the  coasts  of  the  Province  of 
the  Massachusetts  Bay,  the  20th  day  of  June,  1776.  HOWE. 


Proceedings  (f  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  on 
Thursday,  the  ISth  day  of  July,  1776. 

The  Hon.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Bradford,  Deputy  Governor. 

This  Assembly,  taking  into  the  most  serious  consideration, 
the  resolutions  of  the  Most  Honorable  the  Continental  Congress 
of  the  United  States  of  America,  of  the  4th  instant,  declaring 
the  said  states  free  and  independent  stales,  do  approve  the  said 
resolution  ;  and  do  most  solemnly  engage,  that  we  will  support 
the  said  General  Congress,  with  our  lives  and  fortunes. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  resolution  of  the  General 
Congress,  declaring  the  United  Colonies  free  and  independent 
states  ;  and  the  act  of  this  Assembly,  approving  said  resolu- 
tion, be  published  by  the  secretary,  to-morrow,  in  Newport,  at 
twelve  o'clock,  in  the  presence  of  both  houses  of  the  General 
Assembly. 

That  thirteen  cannon  be  discharged  at  Fort  Liberty,  upon 
reading  the  said  proclamation  ;  and  that  the  brigade  be  drawn 
up  on  the  Parade,  in  thirteen  divisions,  and  immediately  after 
the  discharge  of  the  cannon,  make  a  discharge  of  musketry  ; 
each  division  firing  one  volley,  in  succession. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  resolution  and 
act  be  published  in  Providence,  on  Thursday  next,  at  twelve 
o'clock,  in  such  manner  as  His  Honor  the  Governor  shall  think 
fit,  and  that  thirteen  cannon  be  discharged  on  the  occasion. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  resolution  and 


682  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

act  be  read  iu  the  several  town  meetings,  to  be  holden  on  the 
last  Tuesday  in  August  next  ;  and  that  the  secretary  seasona- 
bly furnish  the  necessary  copies. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  captains  of  the  two  row- 
gallies  in  the  service  of  this  state,  forthwith  proceed  with  said 
gallies  to  the  city  of  New  York  ;  and  that  on  their  arrival 
there,  they  receive  the  orders  of  His  Excellency  Gen.  Wash- 
ington, and  govern  themselves  accordingly. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  for  the  future,  the  style  and 
title  of  this  government,  in  all  acts  and  instruments,  whether  of 
a  public  or  private  nature,  shall  be  the  State  of  Rhode  Island 
and  Providence  Plantations  ;  and  that  this  act,  and  the  act  ap- 
proving the  declaration  of  the  General  Congress,  declaring  the 
United  States  of  America  free  and  independent  states,  be  pub- 
lished in  the  next  Newport  Mercury  aud  Providence  Gazette. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of 
Newport  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  ordered  and  directed  forthwith 
to  take  into  his  custody  Edward  Thurston,  of  Newport  ;  and 
that  Messrs.  George  Sears,  Jonathan  Arnold,  Jonathan  Has- 
zard,  William  Greene  and  Cromel  Child,  be  a  committee,  to 
proceed  with  the  said  sheriff  to  the  dwelling  house  of  the  said 
Edward  Thurston,  and  there  to  demand  of  him  that  he  open 
to  their  view  all  desks,  chests  or  other  suspected  places,  under 
lock  or  otherwise  ;  and  if  he  shall  refuse  to  show  and  unlock 
the  same,  that  the  said  committee  be,  and  hereby  is,  directed 
to  break  open  the  same,  and  carefully  inspect  and  make  search  for 
any  and  all  letters  of  correspondence  upon  the  disputes  between 
the  independent  states  of  America  and  Great  Britain,  or  of  a 
political  nature  ;  and  such  letters  or  papers  as  they  shall  think 
proper  to  bring  with  them  for  the  inspection  of  this  General 
Assembly. 

And  that  the  said  sheriff  at. the  same  time  have  the  said  Ed- 
ward Thurston  before  this  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  for  the  county  of 
Newport,  together  with  Messrs.  George  Sears,  Jonathan  Ar- 
nold, Jonathan  Haszard,  William   Greene   and   Cromel  Child, 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  583 

proceed  to  the  dwelling  house  of  Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall,  then 
and  there  to  demand  of  him,  that  he  open  to  their  view  all 
desks,  chests,  or  other  suspected  places,  under  lock  or  other- 
wise ;  and  if  he  shall  refuse  to  show  and  unlock  the  same,  that 
the  said  committee  be,  and  hereby  is,  directed  to  break  open 
the  same,  and  carefully  inspect  and  search  make  for  any  and 
all  letters  of  correspondence,  upon  the  disputes  between  the 
independent  states  of  America  and  Great  Britain,  or  of  a.  po- 
litical-nature, and  such  letters  or  papers,  as  they  shall  think 
proper  to  bring  with  them,  for  the  inspection  of  this  General 
Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  John  Smith  be  requested 
to  pay  the  captains  of  the  gallies  £140,  lawful  money,  on  ac- 
count of  the  wages  due  to  the  officers  and  men,  on  board  said 
gallies. 

Whereas,  the  Honorable  William  Bradford,  Esq.,  Messrs. 
John  Brown  and  Charles  Holden,  Jr.,  who  with  William  Pot- 
ter, Esq.,  were  appointed  a  committee  to  ascertain  the  places 
for  fixing  the  cannon  belonging  to  the  state,  presented  unto 
this  Assembly  the  following  report,  to  wit : 

Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly  to 
determine  in  what  places  in  the  State  certain  Cannon  shall  he 
stationed. 

We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly  to  place  the 
twenty ^seven  cannon,  to  be  received  from  the  owners  of  Furnace  Hope,  at  such 
places  as  we  sliould  think  would  prove  most  advantageous  to  the  state,  do  determine 
that  the  said  guns  be  mounted  as  soon  as  possible,  and  placed  as  followeth,  to  wit : 

At  Jamestown — Three  twelve-pounders,  on  field  carriages. 

South  Ivingstown — Four,  viz. :  two  eighteen-pounders,  and  two  nine-pounders  ;  all 
on  field  carriages. 

Warwick  Neck — Two  eighteen-pounders.  Field's  Point — Three  nine-pounders. 
On  the  opposite  shore — Two  nine-pounders.  Warren — Two  nine-pounders.  Bris- 
tol harbor — Two  nine-pounders.  Bristol  Ferry — Five  nine-pounders,  viz.:  one,  on 
the  main  ;  and  four,  on  the  island.  Ilowland's  Ferry,  on  the  main — Four  nine- 
pounders.     Twenty-seven  in  all. 

Cannon  now  in  the  state,  besides  the  above  mentioned,  viz. : 

Newport  county — Five  twenty-four  pounders  ;  fourteen  eighteen-pounders  ;  twelve 
twelve-pounders  ;  one  nine^pounder ;  nine  six-pounders  ;  ten  four-pounders  ;  four 
three-pounders.     Total,  fift}-five. 


584  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

Providence  county — Five  eighteen-pounders ;  sixteen  two,  three  and  four-pound- 
ers, mounted  on  field  carriages,  for  the  several  towns  on  the  sea  coast,  and  which 
lie  now  ready  for  them.  Two  three-pounders,  and  two  four-pounders,  old  and  not 
mounted.     Total,  twenty-five. 

Bristol  county — One  twenty-four  pounder ;  three  eighteen-pounders  ;  eleven 
three  and  four-pounders.     Total,  fifteen. 

Kent  county — One  nine-pounder  ;  sixteen  three,  four  and  six-pounders.  Total, 
seventeen. 

Newport  county — Fifty-five.  Providence  county — Twenty-five,  Bristol  county 
— Fifteen.  Kent  county — Seventeen.  New  cannon,  per  this  account,  twenty- 
seven.  Total,  one  hundred  and  thirty-nine  cannon  in  all,  exclusive  of  what  may  be 
in  Kings  county. 

William  Potter,  Esq.,  not  being  present,  the  above  is  agreed  to  by  us, — 

WILLIAM  BRADFORD, 
JOHN  BROWN, 
CHARLES  HOLDEN,  JR. 


And  the  said  report  being  duly  considered  by  this  As- 
sembly,— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be,  and  the 
same  is  hereby,  accepted. 

An  Act  making  the  paper  money  bills  emitted  by  the  General 
Congress  of  the  United  States  of  America,  and  of  this  state, 
a  legal  tender  in  discharge  of  all  debts  and  securities. 
Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority of  the  same,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  paper  money  bills 
already  emitted,  or  that  shall  be  emitted  by  the  said  General 
Congress  of  the  United  States,  or  by  this  state,  be,  and  the 
same  are  hereby,  declared  to  be  a  legal  tender  in  all  contracts, 
debts,  judgments,  executions,  mortgages,  or  securities,  for  dol- 
lars, or  money  of  any  kind,  whatever ;  and  that  if  any  person 
or  persons  shall  refuse  said  bills  in  payment,  or  in  discharge  of 
any  contract,  debt,  judgment,  execution,  mortgage,  duty,  de- 
mand, or  securities,  for  dollars,  or  of  a  pecuniary  nature,  the 
same  being  tendered  before  any  two  or  more  credible  persons, 
such  person  shall  ever  after  be  precluded  from  having  or  re- 
covering upon  such  contract,  debt,  judgment,  execution,  mort- 
gage, security,  duty,  or  demand,  if  he  shall  not  consent  to  re- 
ceive the  same  in  one  month  from  the  time  of  such  tender  so  to 


177G.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  585 

be  made,  as  abovesaid,  and  give  notice  thereof  to  the  person 
or  persons  who  shall  have  tendered  him  the  same. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  that  the  person  or  persons  who  shall 
make  such  tender,  shall  lodge  the  principal  sum,  exclusive  of 
any  interest,  in  the  general  treasury  of  this  stnte,  for  the  use 
thereof,  within  three  months  from  the  time  such  tender  shall 
be  made,  together  with  the  deposition  of  the  persons  in  whose 
presence  such  tender  .>>hall  be  made,  respecting  the  time  when, 
and  how,  such  tender  was  made,  taken  before  a,  judge  of  the 
inferior  court  and  justice  of  the  peace,  within  the  county  where 
the  person  lives,  to  v\'hom  such  tender  shall  be  made,  he  being 
duly  notified  to  attend  at  the  taking  of  such  deposition. 

And  the  general  treasurer  is  hereby  ordereil  to  give  his  re- 
ceipt therefor,  and  his  security  in  behalf  of  this  state,  to  the 
person  lodging  such  moneys,  to  indemnify  and  save  him  harm- 
less from  said  contract,  debt,  judgment,  execution  or  mortgage, 
so  far  as  such  principal  sum  and  the  interest  thereof,  from  the 
time  the  same  shall  be  lodged  in  said  general  treasury. 

And  upon  any  suit,  bill  or  action,  brought  upon  any  such 
contract,  debt,  judgment,  execution  or  mortgage,  or  for  re- 
demption of  any  mortgaged  estate,  this  act  shall  or  may  be 
given  in  evidence  under  the  general  issue,  or  being  specially 
pleaded,  shall  be  sufficient  to  bar  any  such  suit,  bill  or  action, 
or  for  the  redemption  of  such  estate. 

An  Act  to  punish  persons  who  shall  acknowledge  the  King  of 
Great  Britain  to  be  their  sovereign. 

Whereas,  the  General  Congress  of  the  United  States  of 
America,  by  their  resolution  of  the  4th  instant,  after  enu- 
merating many  of  the  various  acts  by  which  George  the  Third, 
King  of  Great  Britain,  hath  demonstrated  his  intention  to  es- 
tablish an  absolute  tyranny  over  the  said  states,  have  declared, 
that,  "  A  prince,  whose  character  is  thus  marked  by  every  act 
which  may  define  a  tyrant,  is  unfit  to  be  the  ruler  of  a  free 
people." 

And  have  further  declared,  that  the  said  states  "  are,  and  of 
right  ought  to  be   free  and  independent  states  ;   that  they  ar§ 

VOL.  vii.         74 


586  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OP    RHODE   ISLAND  1776. 

absolved  from  all  allegiance  to  the  British  crown  ;  and  that  all 
political  connection  between  them  and  the  state  of  Great  Britain, 
is,  and  ought  to  be,  totally  dissolved  ;"  which  said  resolution 
hath  been  approved,  and  solemnly  published,  by  order,  and  in 
presence  of  this  General  Assembly  ;  — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  if  any  person  within 
this  state,  shall,  under  pretence  of  preaching  or  praying,  or  in 
any  other  way  and  manner,  whatever,  acknowledge  or  declare, 
the  said  King  to  be  our  rightful  lord  and  sovereign  ;  or  shall 
pray  for  the  success  of  his  arms,  or  that  he  may  vanquish  or 
overcome  all  his  enemies,  shall  be  deemed  guilty  of  a  high  mis- 
demeanor, and  shall  therefor  be  presented  by  the  grand  jury  of 
the  county  where  the  offence  shall  be  committed,  to  the  supe- 
rior court  of  the  same  county  ;  and  upon  conviction  thereof, 
such  offender  shall  forfeit  and  pay  as  a  fine,  to  and  for  the  use 
of  this  state,  the  sum  of  d£lOO,  lawful  money,  and  pay  all  costs 
of  prosecution,  and  shall  stand  committed  to  jail  until  the  same 
be  satisfied  ;  and  that  a  copy  of  this  act  be  inserted  in  the 
Newport  and  Providence  newspapers. 

Whereas,  a  brigantine  was  chartered  of  WilUam  West,  Esq., 
by  this  state,  which  was  afterwards,  while  in  the  service  of  said 
state,  taken  by  the  enemy, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  ^480, 
lawful  money,  with  interest  on  said  sum,  from  the  time  said 
vessel  was  taken  into  service,  be  paid  the  said  William  West, 
out  of  the  general  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  safety  be  em- 
pov>^ered  and  directed  to  procure,  as  soon  as  possible,  fifty  pick- 
axes and  four  hundred  and  fifty  spades  and  shovels,  at  the  ex- 
pense of  the  state  ;  and  that  the  same  be  deposited  in  such 
places,  within  this  state,  as  shall  be  thought  proper  bythe  major 
part  of  the  committee  who  were  appointed  to  direct  where  the 
cannon  should  be  placed. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £10,000,  be  imme- 
diately struck  off,  in  bills  of  the  same  form  and  tenor  with 
those  ordered  to  be  emitted  at  the  last  March  session. 

That  they  be  signed  and  lodged  in  the  general  treasury,  by 


I 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  587 

the  following  persons,  viz.  :  Messrs.  John  G.  Wanton,  John 
Dexter,  John  Cole,  Joseph  Clarke,  Thomas  Greene,  Welcome 
Arnold,  James  Congdon,  3d,  and  Christopher  EUery,  three  of 
whom  shall  sign  all  bills  of  five  shillings  and  upwards,  and  two 
all  bills  under  five  shillings  ;  and  that  the  bills  be  of  the  fol- 
lowing denominations  : 

800  bills,  of  sixty  shillings  each,  is         -  -  ^G2,400 

2,000 

"         -  -  -     2,250 

l,tZOO 

750 

375 

"         -  -  -        300 

225 
''         -  -  -        105 

50 
"         -  -  -  45 


1,000,  " 

forty 

1,500,  " 

thirty 

1,500,  " 

twenty 

1,500,  " 

ten 

1,500,  " 

five 

1,500,  " 

four 

1,500,  " 

three 

1,050,  " 

two 

1,000,  " 

one 

1,200,  "  n 

inepence 

i:io,ooo 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  lawful 
bills  be  a  lawful  tender,  for  paying  and  discharging  all  debts 
and  demands,  whatsoever ;  and  that  said  bills  be  redeemed 
within  six  years  from  the  date  thereof. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  committee  be 
allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury  one -quarter  per 
cent,  for  their  trouble  ;  that  they  procure  paper  for  the  same, 
at  the  charge  of  the  state. 

That  Mr.  John  Carter  be  employed  to  print  said  bills,  at  one 
shilling  and  fourpence  for  every  hundred  bills  so  printed  ;  and 
that  Mr.  Robert  Lawton  be  appointed  to  superintend  the 
press. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  that  said  £10,000  be  not  emitted,  if 
said  sum  can,  within  six  days  be  procured  by  the  general 
treasurer,  without  interest,  for  six  weeks  ;  and  the  said  gen- 
eral treasurer  is  hereby  empowered  to  procure  the  said  sum, 
and  give  his  note  or  notes  therefor,  in  behalf  of  this  state. 


588  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLOKY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [l77G. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  XlOO,  lawful  money,  be  al- 
lowed His  Honor  the  Governor,  for  his  salary  and  extraordinary- 
services  the  year  past. 

It  is  voteil  and  resolved,  that  the  clerk  of  the  inferior  court 
of  commml  pleas  and  general  sessions  of  the  pe'ice,  of  the 
county  of  Newport,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  directed  to  remove 
the  records  and  files  of  said  court,  to  the  town  of  Warren,  for 
safety. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Capt.  Samuel  Carr  be,  and  he 
is  hereby,  fully  empowered  to  remove  by  himself,  or  to  employ 
any  other  suitable  persons  to  remove  two  or  three  obnoxious 
persons  from  New  Shoreham,  to  Providence,  and  deliver  them 
to  the  authority  there. 

That  the  same  be  done  in  the  best  and  easiest  manner,  and 
with  as  little  charge  to  the  government  as  conveniently  may 
be  ;  and  that  Mr.  Carr  be  empowered  to  draw  the  charge 
thereof,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  blacksmiths  in  the  town  of 
Newport,  be  allowed  ninepenee  per  pound,  for  the  iron-work 
by  them  to  be  done  for  the  carriages  ordered  to  be  made  for 
this  state. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  and 
Mr.  John  Jenckes,  be  appointed  a  committee  to  procure  upon 
charter,  and  send  a  suitable  vessel  to  the  island  of  Hispaniola, 
to  procure  gun  powder,  arms  and  other  warlike  stores,  for  the 
use  of  this  stale  ;  and  that  they  be  empowered  to  draw  £1,000, 
lawful  money,  out  of  the  general  treasury,  for  that  purpose. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  A.ssembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  no  male  person,  of  the  age  of 
twenty-one  years,  being  an  inhabitant  or  resident  in  this  state, 
shall  prefer  a  petition  to  this  General  Assembly,  for  setting 
aside  any  judgment  or  court,  or  staying  any  execution,  or  shall 
commence  any  suit,  action,  bill  or  plaint,  before  any  court  of 
record  in  this  state,  unless  he  shall  have  previously  signed  the 
declaration  or  test,  prescribed  by  an  act,  entitled  "  An  act  em- 
powering the  members  of  the  upper  and  iower  houses  of  As- 


1776.]  AxND    PROVIDENCS    PLANTATIONS.  689 

sembly  to  tender^  to  such  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony  as 
are  herein  after  mentioned,  a  declaration,  or  test,  for  sub- 
scription." 

And  that  in  case  the  General  Assembly,  or  court,  before 
which  the  same  shall  be  brought  or  instituted,  shall  receive  in- 
formation that  the  person  presenting  or  commencing  the  same, 
hath  not  subscribed  the  said  test,  or  declaration,  such  petition, 
suit,  action,  bill,  or  plaint,  shall  be  ex  officio  dismissed,  unless 
a  proper  certificate  of  such  person's  having  subscribed  said 
declaration,  or  test,  shall  be  produced,  or  he  shall  there,  if 
personally  present,  subscribe  the  said  declaration,  or  test. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
no  person  in  this  state  shall  have  the  libei*ty  of  voting  in  any 
town  meeting  in  this  state,  in  the  choice  of  ofticers,  nor  in  any 
other  question,  unless  he  shall  have  previously  subscribed  the 
said  declaration,  or  test. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  and  be  it  further  enacted  by  the 
authority  aforesaid,  that  this  act  shall  not  be  construed  to  ex- 
tend to  any  person  who  shall  take  the  affirmation,  or  produce  a 
certificate,  as  by  the  said  act  permitted. 

And  it  is  further  enacted,  that  this  act  shall  be  in  force  in 
ten  days  after  the  rising  of  this  Assembly,  and  be  published  in 
the  Newport  Mercury  and  Providence  Gazette. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Henry  Ward,  Esq.,  and  Col, 
Jonathan  Arnold,  forthwith  prepare  an  answer  to  the  express 
from  Lord  Howe.* 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  safety  imme- 
diately procure,  on  the  best  terms  they  can,  clothing  for  the 
Continental  troops  in  this  state,  agreeably  to  the  resolution 
of  the  Most  Honorable  the  General  Congress,  of  the  19th  of 
June  last ;  and  that  the  secretary  deliver  to  them  a  copy  of  the 
said  resolution. 

Whereas,  Henry  Ward,  Esq.,  and  Col.  Jonathan  Arnold, 
who  were  appointed  a  committee  to  prepare  an  answer  to  the 
express  from   Lord  Howe,   presented  unto  this  Assembly,  a 

*  The  letter  of  Lord  Howe,  here  referred  to,  is  printed  on  page  579,  of  this  volume. 


590  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

draught  of  a  letter  to  His  Lordship  ;  which  being  duly  consid  ■ 
ered  by  this  Assembly, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
approved  ;  that  a  fair  oopy  thereof,  be  made,  to  be  signed  by 
His  Honor  the  Governor,  and  by  him  to  be  forwarded.* 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  following  gentlemen  be, 
and  they  are  hereby,  chosen  and  appointed  to  the  offices  as- 
cribed to  their  respective  names,  to  wit : 

Field  OJiceis  Chosen. 

Joseph  Stanton,  Jr.,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  of  the  first 
regiment  of  militia,  in  Kings  county,  in  the  room  of  Jesse 
Champlin,  who  resigns. 

Charles  Dyer,  Esq.,  colonel  of  the  second  regiment  of 
militia,  in  Kings  county,  in  the  room  of  Robert  Brown,  wdio 
resigns. 

Samuel  Seager,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel  of  the  same  regi- 
ment, in  the  room  of  George  Pierce,  who  resigns. 

Ray  Sands,  Esq.,  major  of  the  same  regiment,  in  the  room 
of  Charles  Dyer,  who  is  advanced. 

Officers  to  command  the  several  companies  of  militia^  or  trained 
bands. 

Providence.  Second  company — Samuel  Black,  lieutenant, 
in  the  room  of  William  Rhodes,  who  refuses. 


*  The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Lord  Howe. 

Rhode  Island  an d_ Providence  Plantations,     ) 
Newport,  July  21,  1776.  (^ 

Jly  Lord  : — I  am  favored  with  Your  Lordship's  letter  of  the  20th  of  June  last,  enclosing 
your  declaration. 

I  have  communicated  them  to  the  General  Assembly  of  this  state,  tiow  sitting  here;  and 
at  their  request,  inform  Your  Lordship  that  they  will  transmit  copies  of  them  to  the  Most 
Honorable  the  General  Congress  of  the  United  States  of  America;  to  whom,  every  applica- 
tion respecting  the  disputes  between  the  said  states  and  Great  Britain,  ought  to  be  ad- 
dressed, and  must  be  referred. 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect  and  esteem,  My  Lord, 

Your  Lordship'*  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 
To  His  Excellency  Lord  Howe. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  591 

Warwick.  First  company — Jauios  Carder,  Jr.,  ensign,  in 
the  room  of  William  Lippitt,  who  refuses. 

New  Shoreham  company — John  Sands,  captain  ;  Simon  Lit- 
tlefield,  lieutenant ;   Jolin  Pain,  ensign. 

South  Kingstown.  Second  company — Samuel  Potter,  cap- 
tain, in  the  room  of  Samuel  Seager,  advanced  to  lieutenant 
colonel. 

East  Greenwich.  First  company — John  Glazier,  captain  ; 
Ebenezer  Spencer,  lieutenant  ;    William  Hall,  ensign. 

Second  company — Allen  Johnston,  captain;  Michael  Spen- 
cer, lieutenant ;   Stephen  Greene,  ensign. 

Jamestown  company — Edward  Carr,  Jr.,  captain  ;  John 
Weeden,  son  of  Daniel  Weeden,  Jr  ,  lieutenant ;  Samuel  Carr, 
Jr.,  ensign. 

Scituate.  Fifth  company — Sam'i  Wilbour,  captain  ;  Thos. 
Field,  lieutenant  ;   William  Potter,  ensign. 

West  Greenwich.  First  company — Alexander  Hopkins, 
captain  ;   Joseph  Hopkins,  lieutenant  ;   Nicholas  Mias,  ensign. 

Second  company — -Jeremiah  Aston,  captain  ;  Benjamin  Gor- 
ton, lieutenant ;   Joseph  Weaver,  ensign. 

Third  company — Job  Angell,  captain  ;  Josiah  Mathewson, 
lieutenant  ;   Thomas  Young,  ensign. 

Middletown  company — John  Vars,  captain  ;  Oliver  Durfee, 
lieutenant ;   Benjamin  Cornell,  ensign. 

Tiverton.  Second  company — George  Westgate,  captain  ; 
Ebenezer  Slocum,  lieutenant ;   Benjamin  Borden,  ensign. 

Hopkinton.  Third  company — Nathan  Barber,  captain  ; 
Jesse  Burdick,  lieutenant  ;   Weight  Burdick,  ensign. 

North  Providence  company — James  Angell,  Jr.,  ensign,  in 
the  room  of  Jesse  Ans^ell,  who  refuses. 


'&■ 


An  Act  to  prevent  the  depreciation  of  the  Continental  cur- 
rency, and  other  current  money  of  the  United  States  of 
America,  or  the  current  paper  bills  of  either  of  the  states  of 
New  England. 

Whereas,  many  evil  minded  persons,  with  a  view  to  preju- 
dice the  cause  of  the  United  States  of  America,  have  made  use 


592  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

of  several  methods  to  depreciate  the  Continental  currency,  and 
other  current  moneys,  of  the  said  states  ;  to  keep  up  the  value 
of  which,  is  a  matter  of  the  greatest  importance,  and  essential 
to  the  safety  of  the  United  States  ;  for  preventing  such  evil 
practices  in  future, — 

It  is  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
tliority  of  the  same,  that  if  any  person  shall  hereafter  receive 
any  discount  between  the  Continental  currency,  or  the  current 
paper  bills  of  either  of  the  states  in  New  England,  and  silver  or 
gohl  in  exchange,  or  in  receiving  moneys  in  payment  of  any 
debt  or  obligation,  or  shall  sell  goods,  wares  or  merchandize,  or 
offer  them  for  sale,  for  any  less  price  for  silver  or  gold,  than 
for  either  of  the  currencies  or  bills,  aforesjiid,  or  shall  by  any 
other  w^ays  or  means  do  any  act  or  thing,  tending  to  depre- 
ciate the  value  of  said  currencies  and  bills  ;  every  person  so 
offending,  upon  due  conviction  thereof,  by  bill,  plaint  or  infor- 
mation, before  any  of  the  inferior  or  superior  courts  in  this 
state,  shall,  for  every  offence,  forfeit  and  pay  the  sum  of  £50, 
lawful  money  ;  one-half,  whereof,  shall,  upon  conviction,  be 
paid  to  the  informer  and  prosecutor,  and  the  other  half,  into 
the  general  treasury,  to  and  for  the  use  of  this  state. 

Provided,  that  information  be  given,  and  the  prosecution 
thereupon,  be  made,  within  three  months  next  after  such  of- 
fence shall  be  committed. 

And  it  is  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
no  person  shall  be  empowered  to  take  out  an  execution  upon 
any  judgment,  until  he  shall,  upon  oath  or  solemn  affirmation, 
declare  that  he  hath  never  directly  sold  or  received  silver  or 
gold,  at  any  higher  rates  than  are  established  by  the  laws  of 
this  state  ;  that  is  to  say,  reckoning  six  shillings  of  the  said 
currencies  and  bills  to  be  equal  to  one  silver  milled  dollar ; 
and  in  gold,  in  the  like  proportion. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  William  Champlin  be  cap- 
tain of  the  fourth  company  of  militia,  in  the  town  of  Newport, 
in  the  room  of  William  Downing,  who  hath  resigned. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  George  Sears  be  appointed 
to  receive  of  Mr.  Nathan  Miller,  the  provisions   and    all  other 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  593 

stores  now  in  his  possession  belonging  to  this  state,  and  give  him 
a  receipt  therefor  ;  and  that  he  deliver  the  same  to  Peter  Phil- 
lips, Esq.,  commissary  for  supplying  and  issuing  provisions  to 
the  Continental  troops  within  this  state  ;  that  he  estimate  the 
value  of  the  same,  at  the  prime  cost  and  charges,  and  that  he 
Teceive  the  amount  thereof  of  the  said  Peter  Phillips,  and  pay 
the  same  into  the  general  treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  a  company  of  fifty  men,  to  be 
led  by  one  captain,  and  two  lieutenants,  be  immediately  en- 
listed for  the  defence  of  Fort  Liberty,  and  be  there  stationed  ; 
that  the  said  officers  and  men  be  allowed  the  same  wages  and 
rations  as  are  allowed  to  the  artillery  company  in  the  brigade  ; 
(that  they  be  enlisted  for  one  year,  and  according  to  the  form 
,of  enlistment  by  which  the  soldiers  of  the  brigade  were  en- 
ilisted,  mutatis  mutandis;  that  Samuel  Sweet,  be  appointed 
.captain  ;  Daniel  Vaughan,  first  lieutenant ;  and  Ebenezer  Ad- 
orns, second  lieutenant,  of  the  said  company. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  £1,300,  lawful  money,  be  al- 
lowed and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  the  ownen^  of 
the  Furnace  Hope,  in  part  of  their  demand  for  cannon  supplied 
the  colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  John  Smith  pay  to  the 
captains  of  the  row-gallies  the  sum  of  ^10  15s.,  lawful  money, 
to  pay  off  the  men. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  Joseph  Wanton,  Jr.,  Mathew  Cozzens, 
John  Haliburton,  William  Hunter,  Samuel  Gibbs,  Silas  Cook, 
Jr.,  Anthony  Lechmere,  Christopher  Hargill,  Augustus  John- 
iston,  Andrew  Christie  and  Joseph  Farrish,  have  refused,  and 
still  refuse,  to  subscribe  the  test,  or  declaration,  prescribed  by 
an  act  of  the  Assembly,  tendered  to  them,  agreeably  to  said 
act;  — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  persons  above- 
named,  be,  by  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Newport,  removed 
at  their  own  expense,  to  the  following  places,  viz.  : 

Col.  Joseph  Wanton  to  be  removed  to  the  town  of  James- 
town, and  have  the  liberty  of  that  town,  undpr  the  inspectiqn 

VOL.  VII.         75 


594  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [177'®. 

of  the  commander  in  chief  at  Rhode  Ishind  ;  and  that  he  be 
permitted,  whenever  the  said  commander  in  chief  shall  thinlv 
proper,  to  pass  under  a  guard,  to  visit  his  farm  on  Prudence  ; 
but  to  no  other  phice,  whatever,  off  the  island  of  Connanicut. 

That  Augustus  Johnston,  be  removed  to  the  town  of  South 
Kingstown. 

That  Mathew  Cozzens,  be  removed  to  Cumberland. 

John  Haliburton,  to  Hopkinton. 

AVilliam  Hunter,  to  Smithfield. 

Samuel  Gibbs,  to  Scituate,  north  of  Plainfield  Road. 

Silas  Cooke,  Jr.,  to  South  Kingstown. 

Anthony  Lechmere,  to  Glocester. 

Christopher  Hargill,  to  Cumberland. 

Andrew  Christie,  to  North  Kingstown.  * 

Joseph  Farrish,  to  Cumberland. 

And  that  they  continue  within  the  limits  of  the  said  towns, 
and  support  themselves,  therein  ;  excepting  the  said  Samuel 
Gibbs,  who  is  to  continue  within  the  limits  before  mentioned. 

That  ifeither  of  said  persons  transgress  said  limits,  they  be 
immediately  apprehended  and  committed  to  jail,  within  the 
county  to  which  they  are  removed  ;  and  if  either  of  said  per- 
sons shall  refuse  to  pay  the  expense  of  their  removal,  and  for 
their  support  in  said  towns,  that  the  same  shall  be  allowed  by 
this  state  ;  and  that  their  estates  be  immediately  seized  to,  and 
for  the  use  of  the  state,  and  their  persons  immediately  confined 
in  the  jail  within  the  county  where  they  i^e  removed. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  William  Greene  and  John  Col- 
lins, Esqs.,  be  a  committee,  to  wait  on  the  Most  Honorable  the 
Continental  Congress,  with  a  draught  in  behalf  of  this  state, 
for  $120,000,'  and  to  request  payment ;  and  give  a  receipt  for 
the  same,  on  account  of  the  moneys  due  to  this  state,  for  the 
expense  of  the  brigade,  taken  into  Continental  pay. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  if  any  sheriff  for  the  county  of 
Newport,-  or  the  town  sergeant  of  said  town,  have  any  writs  or 
^executions  {^gainst  any  or  either  of  the  persons  ordered  by  this 
Assembly  to  he  ^\e.moved  out  of  the  town  of  Newport,  for  not 


ITT'C.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  595 

subscribing  the  test  act,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  empowered  to 
'Commit  such  persons  to  the  jail  of  the  county  to  which  they  are 
respectively  removed,  in  the  same  manner  as  they  might  com- 
mit them  in  the  county  of  Newport ;  and  the  sheriffs  or  keepers 
of  said  jails  are  hereby  ordered  to  receive  them  in  like  manner 
as  though  committed  by  any  officer  of  said  counties. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  nine-pound  cannon,  al- 
ready delivered  by  the  owners  of  the  Furnace  Hope,  to  this 
state,  be  received  in  part  of  those  to  be  delivered  by  their 
contract. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  town  of  Scituate  be  al- 
lowed one  hundred  and  thirty  pounds  weight  of  lead,  out  of  the 
stock  beloning  to  this  state. 

Ood  save  the  United  States. 


Christopher  Lippitt  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Newport,  July  the  13th,  1776. 

Dear  Sir: — It  is  with  much  anxiety  I  am  to  inform  Your  Honor  of  the  present 
state  of  affairs  here. 

It  is  not  long  since,  there  begun  to  be  much  altercation  among  the  officers  of  the 
brigade,  concerning  the  persons  of  this  town  that  have  been  thought  to  be  inimical 
to  their  country ;  and  on  the  whole,  thought  ourselves  under  the  necessity  of  showinf 
who  are  friends,  and  ready  to  take  up  arms  in  the  glorious  cause  [in  which]  America 
is  now  a  struggling. 

The  11th  instant,  many  of  the  officers  lodged  a  complaint  with  Judge  Bowler, 
against  about  twenty  persons,  requesting  him,  as  a  member  of  the  General  Assem- 
bly, to  tender  the  test  act  to  those  persons  whose  names  were  annexed  thereunto  ; 
which  was  done  Immediately  ;  they  refused  all  but  one,  and  were  summoned  to  give 
their  reasons  the  next  day ;  for  which  reasons,  I  refer  Your  Honor  to  Esquire 
Bowler,  who  will  lay  them  before  you. 

We  then  thought  fit  to  try  about  sixty  moi-e ;  but  to  my  sorrow,  found  only  two 
that  would  subscribe.  The  reason  that  many  of  them  would  not  subscribe,  I  believe 
is  greatly  owing  to  the  unwearied  pains  taken  by  them  that  were  first  taken  up,  in 
order  to  save  themselves  that  way,  by  getting  as  many  to  refuse  as  possible  ;  therein 
thinking  to  destroy  the  force  of  the  act. 

Your  Honor  will  advise  what  is  best  to  be  done.  Had  they  been  guilty  of  any 
real  facts  of  late,  we  should  have  fined  them ;  but  as  the  accusation  was  general 
purely  to  find  who  are  friends  and  which  are  enemies,  could  do  no  more  by  the  act 
than  disarm  them. 

Therefore,  as  matters  now  stand,  sir,  you  must  be  sensible  that  soiiiethinn-  ouf>ht 
to  be  done  soon.     Should  an  army  or  fleet  arrive  here  now,  what  a  horrid  situation 


696  RECORDS    OF    THE    COtONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

should  we  be  in  !     Will  it  then  be  a  time  to  take  care   of  those  that  we  have  now" 
atiiongst  us  ?     God  forbid  that  we  stop  until  we  have  tried  them  to  the  utmost;  anc* 
if  found  to  be  notorious,  remove  them  immediately  from  amongst  ns. 
I  have  the  honor  to  subscribe  myself, 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

CHRIS't.  LIPPITT. 
To  Governor  Cooke. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  arid  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  on- 
the  third  Monday  in  August,  1776. 

The  Hon.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Bradford,  Deputy  Governor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  act  of  this  Assembly, 
passed  at  their  session,  holden  in  March  last  past,  subjecting 
the  principal  and  commanding  officers  of  the  colony's  brigade 
to  the  payment  of  damages  sustained  by  any  householder,  by 
means  of  the  troops  that  may  be  quartered  or  billeted  in  such 
house,  be  in  force  from  and  after  the  13th  day  of  May,  in  the 
year  of  our  Lord  1776  ;  any  law,  custom  or  usage,  to  the  con- 
trary in  any  wise,  notwithstanding. 

Whereas,  Col.  James  Arnold,  Jr.,  Col.  John  Waterman  and 
Capt.  James  Aborn,  Avere  appointed  by  this  Assembly  a  com- 
mittee to  inquire  into  the  damages  sustained  by  Capt.  Samuel 
Tompkins,  occasioned  by  the  soldiers  being  quartered  upon 
him,  at  Prudence  ;  and  to  examine  the  account  by  him  presented 
for  the  soldiers  burning  his  rails,  and  for  supplying  them  with 
blankets,  hay  for  bedding,  &c.,  &c.,  and  they,  or  the  major 
part  of  them,  to  make  report  thereon,  presented  to  this  Assem- 
bly the  following  report : 

Report  of  the  Committee  to  the  General  Assembly. 

We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  by  the  General  As- 
sembly, a  committee,  to  examine  the  within  account ;   and  also 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  597 

to  set  a  price  on  the  several  articles  mentioned  in  said  ac- 
count ;  agreeably  to  the  said  appointment,  we  met  this  18tb 
day  of  March,  and  have  duly  considered  and  examined  the 
sad  account,  and  set  a  price  to  each  article  therein  men- 
tioned, according  to  the  best  of  our  judgment. 

In  witness  whereof,  we  have  severally  set  our  hands. 

JAMES  ARNOLD,  JR., 
JOHN  WATERMAN. 

Which  said  premises  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be,  and  hereby  is,, 
accepted  ;  and  that  the  sum  of  £76  15^.  5c?.,  lawful  money,  being 
the  sum  by  said  committee  estimated  asd  amages,  be  allowed,  and 
paid  unto  the  said  Samuel  Tompkins,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

An  account  being  laid  before  this  Assembly,  by  Mr.  Joseph 
Coggeshall,  for  drawing  leases  of  the  lands  lately  belonging  to 
the  disaffected  persons  in  Kings  county,  which  were  ordered  ta 
be  leased  out  for  the  use  of  government ;  which  being  duly  ex- 
amined,— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is,  al- 
lowed ;  and  that  ten  shillings,  being  the  amount  thereof,  be 
paid  unto  the  said  Joseph  Coggeshall,  out  of  the  general 
treasury. 

Whereas,  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Newport,  was,  by  or- 
der of  this  Assembly,  to  remove  from  out  of  the  town  of  New- 
port, those  disaffected  persons  who  refused  to  subscribe,  the  test, 
in  said  order, mentioned  ;  and  the  said  sheriff  thereupon  made 
the  following  report : 

Report  of  the  Sheriff  of  the  County  of  Newport,  to  the  General 
Assembly,  relative  to  the  Removal  of  Disaffected  Persons^ 
from  the  town  of  Newport. 

Agreeably  to  the  act  of  this  Assembly,  and  in  conformity 
thereto,  I  have  removed  Col.  Joseph  Wanton,  to  the  town  of 
Jamestown  ;  Augustus  Johnston,  to  the  town  of  South  Kings- 


RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1776. 

town  :  Matthew  Cozzens,  to  Cumberland  ;  Dr.  John  Halibur- 
t'^n,  to  Ilopkinton  ;  Dr.  WilUam  Hunter,  to  Smithfield  ;  An- 
drew Christy-,  to  North  Kingstown;  and  Silas  Cooke,  Jr.^  to 
South  Kingstown. 

Samuel  Gibbs,  Joseph  Farrish  and  Christopher  Hargill,  re-^ 
fusing  to  pay  the  expense  of  their  removal,  I  committed  them 
to  the  jail  of  this  state,  in  Providence. 

Anthony  Lechmere,  who  by  the  aforesaid  order,  was  also  to 
be  removed,  was  not,  nor  is  not,  to  be  found,  having  (as  it  is 
said),  embarked  on  board  of  a  vessel  belonging  to  Mr.  William 
Vernon,  to  proceed  to  the  West  Indies,  whereof,  George  Sweet, 
is  master.  JABEZ  CHAMPLIN,  Sheriff. 

Whereupon,  the  said  report  being  duly  examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
Jiccepted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Matthew  Scallion,  now  a  pris- 
oner, in  the  jail  at  Providence,  be  removed  from  thence  to  the 
town  of  Smithfield,  upon  his  parole  ;  and  that  he  have  liberty 
to  enter  on  board  any  of  the  privateers  fitted  out  from  this 
state. 

Whereas,  Joseph  Stanton,  Jr.,  Esq.'s  accounts,  as  one  of  the 
committee  of  safety,  were  audited,  and  report  made  to  this 
Assembly,  at  their  session,  holder!  in  March  last  past,  and  the 
said  report  accepted,  and  a  balance  due  thereon,  to  said  Joseph 
Stanton, -Jr.,  of  £140  18s.  5c?.,  lawful  money  ;  which  balance, 
it  does  not  appear  was  ever  voted  to  be  paid  him  out  of  the 
general  treasury  ;  — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  aforesaid  sum  of 
i!140  185.  ()d.,  be,  and  hereby  is,  ordered  to  be  paid  unto  the 
said  Joseph  Stanton,  Jr.,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Both  houses  joined  in  a  grand  committee,  recommended  to 
the  Most  Honorable  the  General  Congress  of  the  United  States 
of  America,  the  following  persons,  as  suitable  for  field  ofi&cers 
of  the  brigade  raised  by  this  state,  and  taken  into  Continental 
pay: 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  599 


Field  Officers  chosen  to  command  the  State's  Brigade. 

William  Richmond,  Esq.,  colonel-  Caleb  Gardner,  Esq., 
lieutenant  colonel  ;  and  Benjamin  Tallman,  Esq.,  mnjor  of  the 
first  regiment. 

Officers  chosen  to  command  the  several  Companies  in  the  First 
Regiment. 

The  following  officers  are  chosen  and  appointed  in  the  first 
regiment  : 

Thomas  Wells,  3d,  Christopher  Manchester,  James  Wallace, 
Josiah  Gibbs,  Jr.,  Benjamin  Diamond,  Samuel  Phillips,  Jr., 
Caleb  Carr,  Abimilech  Riggs,  Malachi  Ham  met,  Royzel  Smith, 
Lemuel  Bailey  and  Jonathan  Wallen,  captains. 

Peleg  Berry,  Walter  Palmer,  Jonathan  Deval,  Jr.,  Philip 
Arnold,  Philip  Traffan,  Benjamin  West,  Samuel  Stevens, 
Squire  Fisk,  Stephen  Hopkins,  Ebenezer  Macomber,  Benjamin 
Church  and  Edmond  Arrow  Smith,  lieutenants. 

John  Pearce,  Peleg  Simmons,  Jr.,  Benjamin  Burroughs, 
Elisha  Parker,  Benjamin  Stelle,  John  Handy,  Samuel  Hicks, 
Henry  Alexander,  Zephaniah  Brown,  Joseph  Springer,  Philip 
Palmer  and  Moses  Watson,  ensigns. 

Benjamin  Stelle,  adjutant ;  John  Handy,  quartermaster ; 
John  Bartlet,  surgeon. 

Field  Officers  chosen  to  command  the  Second  Regiment. 

The  following  persons  are  recommended  to  the  Most  Honor-^ 
able  the  General  Congress,  for  field  officers  in  the  second 
regiment : 

Christopher  Lippitt,  Esq.,  colonel;  Adam  Comstock,  Esq., 
lieutenant  colonel;  James  Tew,  Esq.,  major. 

Officers  chosen  to  command  the  several  Companies  in  the  Second 
Regiment. 

The  followins^  officers  are  chosen  and  appointed  for  the  second 
regiment : 


600  RECORDS   OF   THE    COLONY   OP   RHODE   IS^^AND         [1776. 

Nathaniel  Blackmar,  Jonathan  Brownel,  David  Dexter, 
Loring  Peck,  John  Carr,  Tliomas  Gorton,  Arthur  Fenner,  Ben- 
jamin Hoppin,  Simeon  Martin,  Christopher  Dyer,  Thomas  Ar- 
nold and  Lemuel  Bailey,  captains. 

Wilson  Rawson,  William  Jones,  David  Searls,  Gilbert 
Grant,  Alexander  Thomas,  Ichabod  Prentice,  Jacob  Williams, 
Abraham  Turtulot,  William  Belcher,  Peleg  Hoxsie,  Thomas 
Noyes  and  Reuben  Hewitt,  lieutenants. 

Joseph  Bowen,  Gilbert  Richmond,  Samuel  Dexter,  Joseph 
Read,  Brenton  Bliss,  Caleb  Matthews,  William  Pullen,  John 
Covven,  Philip  Martin,  John  Holden,  Benjamin  Bouyn  an4 
David  Melvil,  ensigns. 

John  Holden,  adjutant ;  Benjamin  Bourne,  quartermaster  5 
Isaac  Ross  Eliven,  surgeon  ;  William  Barton,  Esq.,  major  of 
brigade. 

Officers  of  the  Train  of  Artillery. 

Robert  Elliot,  captain  ;  William  Bull,  captain-lieutenant ; 
Joshua  Sayer,  first  lieutenant ;  Nathaniel  Gladding,  second 
lieutenant  ;   Rhodes  Packard,  lieutenant  fireworker. 

Militia  and  other  Officers  Chosen. 

Reuben  Ballon,  captain  ;  Amos  Whipple,  lieutenant ;  Na- 
thaniel Gould,  ensign,  of  the  second  company  of  militia,  for 
the  town  of  Cumberland. 

James  Parker,  captain  ;  Barber  Peckhara,  lieutenant ;  Haz- 
jird  Champlin,  ensign  of  the  second  company  of  militia,  for  the 
town  of  South  Kingstown. 

Samuel  Day,  captain  ;  George  Streeter,  lieutenant ;  Benja-s 
min  Ballou,  ensign,  of  the  first  company  of  militia,  in  the  towr^ 
of  Smithfield. 

Stephen  Smith,  captain ;  William  Troop,  lieutenant ;  Jo- 
seph Reynolds,  Jr.,  ensign,  of  the  company  of  militia  in  the 
town  of  Bristol. 

John   Davis,    lieutenant ;    Stephen  Pearce,  ensign,  in  the 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  601 

second  company  of  militia,  in  the  town  of  Little  Compton,  in 
the  room  of  David  Cooke  and  Forbes  Little,  who  refused. 

Andrew  Harris,  Esq.,  justice  of  the  peace,  for  the  town  of 
Cranston,  in  addition. 

Solomon  Southwick,  Esq.,  intendant  of  trade,  for  the  district 
of  Newport. 

Henry  Ward,  Esq.,  intendant  of  trade,  for  the  district  of 
Providence. 

Justice  of  the  Superior  Court. 

Metcalfe  Bowler,  Esq.,  chief;  William  Greene,  Esq.,  sec- 
ond ;  Shearjashub  Bourn,  Esq.,  third  ;  Jabez  Bowen,  Esq., 
fourth  ;  and  Thomas  Wells,  Esq.,  fifth,  justices  of  the  superior 
court  of  judicature,  court  of  assize,  and  general  jail  delivery,  in 
and  throughout  the  state,  aforesaid. 

Justices  of  the  Inferior   Court  of  Common  Pleas ^  for  Kings 

County. 

Simeon  Perry,  Esq.,  the  second  justice  of  the  inferior  court 
of  common  pleas,  and  general  sessions  of  the  peace,  for  the 
county  of  Kings  county,  refuses  to  accept  said  office  ;  where- 
fore,— 

Sylvester  Robinson,  Esq.,  second  ;  John  Northup,  Esq.,  third ; 
Carder  Hazard,  Esq.,  fourth  ;  and  Joseph  Hoxsie,  Esq.,  fifth, 
justices  of  the  inferior  court  of  common  pleas,  and  general  ses-^ 
sions  of  the  peace,  in  and  for  the  county  of  Kings  county. 

Justices  of  the  Inferior  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  for  the  County 
of  Newport. 

George  Hazard,  Esq.,  chief  justice  of  the  inferior  court  of 
common  pleas,  and  general  sessions  of  the  peace,  in  and  for  the 
county  of  Newport,  resigns  his  commission  ;   wherefore — 

John  Jepson,  Esq.,  chief;  John  Barker,  Esq.,  second  ; 
Thomas  Church,  Esq.,  third  ;  Benjamin  ^Jnderwood,  Esq., 
fourth  ;  and  Gideon  Wanton,  Esq.,  fifth,  justices  of  the  inferior 

VOL.  VII.         76 


602  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

court  of  common  pleas,  and  general  sessions  of  the  peace,  in 
and  for  the  county  of  Newport. 

Daniel  Rodman,  Esq.,  major  of  the  second  regiment  of  mi- 
litia, in  Kings  county,  in  the  stead  of  Ray  Sands,  Esq.,  who 
refuses. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Dr.  William  Hunter,  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  permitted  to  return  to  Newport,  to  visit  his 
family,  under  their  present  distress,  occasioned  by  the  danger- 
ous illness  of  one  of  his  children  ;  but  that  he  return  back  to 
Smithfield  (the  place  ordered  by  this  Assembly  for  his  resi- 
dence), as  soon  as  the  situation  of  his  family  may  permit. 

That  John  Collins,  Esq.,  John  Jepson,  J]sq.,  and  Peter 
Phillips,  Esq.,  three  of  the  magistrates  of  this  state,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby,  appointed  to  direct  when  the  said  Dr.  Hunter 
shall  be  sent  back  to  Smithfield. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  George  Sears  and 
Thomas  Freebody  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  to  remove 
the  cannon  from  Providence  to  Newport. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  when  any  vacancies  shall  hap- 
pen in  the  militia  officers  in  the  county  of  Providence,  the  com- 
pany in  which  such  vacancy  may  be,  shall,  and  may,  recom- 
mend to  His  Honor  the  Governor,  a  suitable  person  to  fill  said 
vacancy  up  ;  and  upon  His  Honor  the  Governor's  approving 
the  choice,  he  is  hereby  requested  to  commission  the  person  re- 
commended, accordingly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  procure,  and  transmit  as  soon  as 
may  be,  to  the  board  of  war,  at  Philadelphia,  an  account  of  the 
number  and  rank  of  the  prisoners  of  war  now  in  this  state  ;  and 
also  a  list  of  the  officers  of  the  Continental  troops  in  this  state, 
and  the  dates  of  their  respective  commissions. 

Whereas,  by  an  act  of  this  Assembly,  made  and  passed  at 
their  session  holden  in  March  last  past,  the  sheriffs  in  the  sev- 
eral counties  in  this  state  are  authorized  and  empowered  to  dis- 
pose of  any  vessels  and  their  cargoes,  that  shall  be  made  prize 
of,  and  condemned  within  their  respective  counties. 


17.76.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  603 

And  whereas,  inconveniences  have  arisen  from  the  sheriffs 
being  alone  empowered  to  dispose  of  the  said  vessels  and  their 
cargoes,  made  prize  of  and  condemned,  as  aforesaid, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  owners  of  the 
privateers,  and  agents,  hereby  have  liberty  to  employ  the 
sheriff,  his  deputy,  or  either  of  the  vendue  masters  within 
either  of  the  counties  in  which  any  vessels  or  goods  shall  be 
brought,  that  shall  be  made  prize  of  and  condemned,  as  afore- 
said ;  who  are  hereby  authorized  to  dispose  of  the  same,  agree- 
bly  to  said  act  ;  and  the  said  sheriff,  his  deputy,  or  vendue 
master,  employed,  as  aforesaid,  is  hereby  directed  to  dispose  of 
the  goods,  in  small  quantities,  by  the  cask,  bag,  &e.  ;  and  that 
he  have  the  same  fees,  as  are  already  allowed  by  law. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  sheriff,  his 
deputy,  and  vendue  master,  and  the  purchasers  at  the  vendue, 
be  liable  to  be  prosecuted  at  a  special  court,  in  the  same  man- 
ner, as  heretofore. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  court  martial  now  con- 
vened, for  the  trial  of  Capt.  Zerobabel  Westcot,  proceed  in  said 
trial,  and  pass  sentence,  agreeably  to  the  rules  and  regulations 
of  the  army,  and  cause  their  said  sentence  to  be  carried  into 
execution. 

Whereas,  His  Honor  the  Governor,  and  Mr.  John  Jenckes, 
were  appointed  to  fit  out  and  send  a  vessel  to  Hispaniola,  to 
import  gunpowder  for  this  state ;  and  as  it  now  appears 
that  some  other  parts  of  the  West  Indies  (other  than  the 
British  islands),  will  answer  better  than  the  said  island  of  His- 
paniola,— 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Gov- 
ernor and  Mr.  Jenckes,  proceed,  as  soon  as  may  be,  and  send 
the  said  vessel  to  any  part  of  the  West  Indies  they  may  judge 
best,  other  than  the  British  islands,  aforesaid. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Benjamin  Smith,  deputy 
sheriff  of  the  county  of  Providence,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  or- 
dered forthwith  to  remove  Richard  Beale,  John  Nichol,  Nicho- 
las Lechmere  and  Thomas  Vernon,  from  the  house  and  farm  of 
Stephen  Keech,  to  some  other  house  or  houses  within  the  town 


604  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  177^. 

of  Glocester,  agreeably  to  an  act  of  this  Assembly,  made  and 
passed  at  their  session,  holden  in  June,  A.  D.  1776. 

That  unless  the  said  Richard  Beale,  John  Nichol,  Nicholas 
Lechniere  and  Thomas  Vernon,  pay  the  expenses  of  their  re- 
moval and  for  their  board  and  maintenance  in  said  town,  that 
their  several  and  respective  real  estates  be  taken  into  posses- 
sion by  the  sheriff  for  the  county  of  Newport,  in  behalf  of  this 
state. 

That  the  aforesaid  Richard  Beale,  John  Nichol,  Nicholas 
Lechmere  and  Thomas  Vernon,  have  liberty  to  remove  their 
families,  to  be  with  them  in  said  town,  and  to  hire,  at  their  own 
expense,  any  house  or  houses  in  said  town,  to  live  or  reside  in, 
upon  condition  that  they  give  their  promise  in  writing,  to  the 
sheriff  of  said  county  of  Providence,  that  they  will  not  depart 
from  said  town  of  Glocester,  without  license  first  had  and  ob- 
tained from  this  Assembly  ;  which  said  sheriff  is  hereby  em- 
powered to  take  such  promise,  accordingly. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  Nicholas 
Lechmere  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  permitted  to  reside  in  any 
town  in  the  state  of  Connecticut  that  he  shall  choose  ;  first 
having  liberty  from  the  committee  of  such  town,  and  giving  his 
parole  to  observe  the  restrictions  he  shall  be  laid  under  by  such 
committee. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  New- 
port forthwith  remove  Mr.  Matthew  Cozzens  from  the  town  of 
Newport,  to  the  tovTn  of  Providence,  and  commit  him  to  jail  in 
said  town  of  Providence,  agreeably  to  a  resolve  of  this  Assem- 
bly, made  and  passed  at  their  session,  holden  in  July,  in  the 
year  of  our  Lord,  1776. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  if  any  other  of  the 
persons  removed  from  Newport,  shall  return,  or  transgress  the 
bounds  prescribed  to  them  by  this  Assembly,  that  the  sheriffs 
in  the  several  counties  within  this  state,  are  hereby  empowered 
and  directed  forthwith  to  apprehend  and  take  such  offender, 
and  him  commit  to  the  jail  in  the  county  to  which  he  or  they 
were  removed. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  commander  in  chief  of  the 


I 


1776,]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS*  605 

brigade  in  this  state,  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  allowed  £20,  lawful 
money,  per  month,  and  twelve  rations  per  day,  from  the  time 
of  his  taking  the  command  of  said  brigade. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  requested  immediately  to  write  to  the  dele- 
gates of  this  state,  that  they  endeavor  to  procure  the  appoint- 
ment by  Congress  of  a  paymaster  to  the  brigade  now  in  this 
state,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  safety  pay  the 
brigade  in  this  state  the  wages  due  unto  them  up  to  the  1st  day 
of  September,  and  no  longer,  without  further  orders  from  this 
Assembly  ;  and  that  they  draw  money  sufficient  for  that  pur- 
pose, out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  following  accounts  be  paid, 
viz.  :— 

Bills  to  be  Paid. 

£     s.d. 
Daniel  W.  Hookey,  for  horse  liire  and  expenses,  in  removing  from  tlie 

town  of  Newport  divers  persons  who  refused  to  subscribe  to  the  test,         5  04  0 
Israel  Church,  for  a  gun,  lost  in  the  attack  on  Quebec     -  -  -         2  08  0 

Henry  Peckham,  for  repairs  on  the  state  house,  Newport       -  -  7  04  6 

William  Stevens,  for  carrying  express  to  Gov.  Trumbull  -  -  -         3  00  0 

John  Low,  for  services  in  collecting  the  militia  upon  the  alarms  at  War- 
wick Neck,  and  Prudence  Island  -  -  -  -  4  04  0 

Benjamin  Pierce,  for  supplying. the  minute  men  at  Jamestown,  with  beef, 

cheese  and  cider  -  -  -  -  -  -  IS  05  0 

Nicholas  Power,  for  gun  carriages,  junk,  wads,  plank,  &Ci  -  -     128  09  1 

Richard  Smith,  for  warning  the  members  of  the  Assembly  in  Bristol  county,         12  0 
Joseph  Brown,  for  directing  the  making  of  gun  carriages,  timber,  plank, 

duck,  &c.       -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -     183  06  8 

Thomas  Carr,  for  the  use  of  oxen  to  remove  cannon  in  Jamestown     -  18  9 

Andrew  Freebody,  for  labor  in  fitting  up  whale  boats,  &c.  -  -       58  18  5 

Job  Almy,  for  labor,  rails,  boards,  lime,  bricks  for  barracks  for  soldiers,  &c.,  80  08  8 
Benjamin  Greene,  for  beef  pork,  bread,  cheese,  &c.         -  27  17  4 

God  save  the  tJnited  States. 


€06  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembhj,  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations^  at  Providence^  on 
the  first  Monday  of  September,  1776. 

The  Hon.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Bradford,  Deputy  Governor. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  two  regiments  in  the  ser- 
vice of  this  state,  proceed  under  the  particular  directions  of  the 
commander  in  chief  of  the  brigade,  to  Long  Island,  for  the  pro- 
tection of  the  inhabitants  and  the  stock,  on  said  island  ;  to- 
gether with  a  detachment  to  consist  of  forty  men  from  the 
artillery  company,  with  two  field-pieces  not  exceeding  four- 
pounders,  under  the  direction  of  such  officers  as  the  said  com- 
mander shall  think  proper. 

That  Col.  Lippitt  immediately  proceed  with  his  regiment, 
and  said  detachment  from  the  artillery  company  ;  and  that  the 
other  regiment  be  held  in  readiness  to  march  at  a  moment's 
warning,  when  ordered  by  the  commander  in  chief  of  this 
state. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  standing  committee  of  audit 
for  this  state,  inquire  into  the  number  of  cannon  now  in  the 
service,  thereof,  and  of  whom  they  were  purchased,  and  what 
price  they  cost  ;  and  that  they  make  report  to  this  Assembly 
as  soon  as  may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Nathaniel  Mumford  be, 
and  he  is  hereby,  appointed  to  visit  the  several  fortifications  in 
this  state,  and  to  inquire  into  the  number  and  sizes  of  the  can- 
non in  each  and  every  fortification  ;  and  likewise  the  number 
of  cannon  now  in  possession  of  the  state,  and  in  what  towns 
they  are. 

That  he  take  an  exact  account  of  the  number  that  are 
mounted  upon  different  carriages,  with  their  several  sizes. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  60T 

That  he  inquire  what  number  of  cannon  have  been  taken 
from  any  of  the  forts,  and  by  whom,  and  who  are  the  present 
owners  of  any  of  the  cannon  in  this  state's  possession  ;  and  that 
he  make  report  to  this  Assembly  as  soon  as  may  be. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  not  any  person  in 
future  take  any  of  the  cannon  now  in  possession  of  this  state, 
upon  any  pretence,  whatever,  unless  permission  first  be  had 
therefor,  from  this  Assembly,  upon  the  penalty  of  forfeiting  and 
paying  £100,  lawful  money,  to  and  for  the  use  of  this  state. 

Whereas,  the  corporation  of  the  university  or  college,  in  this 
state,  preferred  a  petition  to  this  Assembly,  setting  forth,  that 
divers  persons  in  Great  Britain,  Ireland,  and  different  states  in 
America,  of  charitable  and  benevolent  dispositions,  sensible  of 
the  many  and  great  advantages  derived  to  .society  from  the  es- 
tablishment of  useful  seminaries  of  learning,  have  generously 
contributed  towards  endowing  the  said  college. 

That  their  donations  have  been  made  upon  express  condition 
that  the  principal  sum  should  be  placed  at  interest,  upon  good 
security,  and  be  for  ever  kept  undiminished  ;  and  that  the  in- 
terest should  be  applied  to  the  support  of  the  president,  and 
other  uses,  for  the  benefit  of  said  institution. 

That  many  of  the  donors  were  solicitous  that  the  money  so 
given,  should  be  put  to  interest  out  of  this  state  ;  but  it  being 
thought  that  the  introducing  so  large  a  sum  of  circulating  specie 
would  be  of  eminent  service,  the  corporation  offered  it  (being 
almost  the  whole  of  their  funds,  and  amounting  to  upwards  of 
$4,000,)  to  the  General  Assembly,  who  were  pleased  to  receive 
it  into  the  public  treasury,  and  to  order  the  interest  of  it  to  be 
paid  annually. 

That  by  an  act,  passed  in  March  last,  all  persons  to  whom 
any  money  was  ^ue  from  the  state,  were  ordered  to  receive  it 
by  a  limited  time,  upon  penalty  of  forfeiting  the  interest ;  and 
that  the  said  act  will  operate  greatly  to  the  prejudice  of  said 
institution,  unless  this  Assembly  should  think  proper  to  make 
an  exception  in  its  fiivor ;  and  thereupon  prayed  this  Assem- 
bly, that  the  fund,  aforesaid,  might  be  continued  in  the  general 


608  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OP    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

treasury,  upon  the  same  terms  upon  which  it  was  at  first  re- 
ceived. 

And  this  Assembly,  taking  the  premises  into  consideration, 
and  having  maturely  considered  the  same, — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  ihat  the  prayer  of  the 
said  petition  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby,  granted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  towns  of  Bristol,  Westerly, 
Charlestown,  North  Providence,  Coventry,  Warwick,  Cumber- 
land, Johnston,  West  Greenwich,  Barrington  and  Smithfield, 
be,  and  they  are  hereby,  permitted  to  erect  an  hospital,  for  the 
inoculation  of  the  small  pox  within  their  respective  towns,  they 
complying  with  the  regulations  contained  in  an  act  made  and 
passed  in  June,  A.  D.  1776,  for  introducing  inoculation  within 
this  state. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  four  four-pounders  belong- 
ing to  Mv.  Henry  John  Overing,  and  the  three  four-pounders 
belonging  to  Jacob  Isaacs,  in  the  possession  of  this  state,  be 
delivered  to  Mr,  John  Smith,  he  producing  an  order  for  the 
same,  from  the  aforementioned  persons,  they  first  making  proof 
of  their  property  to  the  satisfaction  of  Peter  Phillips,  Esq., 
and  giving  up  the  receipts  given  therefor  in  behalf  of  this 
state. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  an  addition  of  eleven  men  be 
raised  and  made  to  the  artillery  company  in  the  town  of 
Westerly. 

That  an  addition  also  of  fourteen  men  be  raised  and  made 
to  each  of  the  artillery  companies,  in  the  towns  of  South 
Kingstown  and  North  Kingstown. 

And  that  the  artillery  companies,  heretofore  ordered  to  be 
raised  in  this  state,  be  equipped  with  small  arms  and  bayonets, 
at  their  own  expense;   and  that  they  be  subj^t  to  be  drafted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  £2,000,  in  lawful  money  bills 
of  public  credit,  be  struck  off ;  that  Mr.  John  Brown,  Joshua 
Babcock  and  John  Dexter,  Esqs.,  be  a  committee,  to  draw  up 
an  act  accordingly. 

And  that  Messrs.   John  G.    Wanton,    John   Cole,  Thomas 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  609 

Greene,  Joseph  Clarke,  John  Dexter,  Welcome  Arnold  James 
Congdon,  3d,  and  Jonathan  Haszard,  be  the  signers  of  said 
bills. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Joshua  Babcock,  John  Collins 
and  Joseph  Stanton,  Jr.,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  they,  or  any  two  of  them,  to  wait  on  His 
Excellency  General  Washington,  to  acquaint  him  with  the  state 
of  this  government ;  and  confer  with  him  respecting  the  best 
method  of  defending  the  same. 

Both  houses  in  a  grand  committee,  chose  Ray  Sands,  Esq., 
colonel,  of  the  second  regiment  of  militia,  in  Kings  county,  in 
the  room  of  Samuel  Seagar,  who  is  gone  to  sea. 

Esek  Olney,  ensign,  of  the  company  of  militia,  in  North 
Providence,  in  the  room  of  James  Angell,  Jr.,  who  declined. 

Joseph  Draper,  lieutenant,  of  the  third  company  of  militia, 
in  West  Greenwich,  in  the  room  of  Josiah  Mathewson,  who 
refused. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  draught  of  a  letter  to  His 
Excellency  General  V/ashington,  drawn  up  and  presented  to 
this  Assembly,  by  the  committee  appointed  for  that  purpose,  be 
approved  of;  and  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be  requested 
to  sign  and  transmit  the  same,  by  the  committee  appointed  to 
wait  on  His  Excellency,  to  confer  with  him  on  the  subject 
matter  thereof. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  and 
Mr.  John  Jenckes,  have  liberty  to  draw  out  of  the  general  treas- 
ury the  amount  of  the  cargo  of  the  sloop  Diamond,  purchased  by 
them,  for  this  state,  and  of  her  outfits,  agreeably  to  a  vote  of 
this  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Colonels  Church,  Cooke 
and  Belcher,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee, 
to  examine  all  the  arms  of  the  brigade,  on  Rhode  Island,  and 
to  have  the  same,  and  all  other  arms,  belonging  to  this  state, 
put  in  the  best  order  ;  and  that  they  remove  such  of  the  can- 
non from  the  town  of  Newport,  as  shall  not  be  mounted,  to  such 
places  upon  the  main  as  they  may  think  most  for  the  service  of 
this  state. 

VOL.  vn.         77 


610  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  troops  on  the  island  of 
Jamestown,  be  removed  to  the  town  of  Newport ;  and  that  the 
cannon  on  said  island  be  removed  to  such  place,  as  the  commit- 
tee appointed  to  examine  the  arms  of  the  brigade  shall  think 
most  for  the  service  of  this  state. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs,  Cromel  Child  and 
Sylvester  Child,  immediately  build  ten  flat-bottomed  boats,  for 
the  use  of  the  state,  large  enough  to  transport  about  seventy 
men  each. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  it  be  recommended  to  i\Ir. 
Thomas  Greene,  to  furnish  the  commissary  of  the  brigade  in  this 
state,  from  time  to  time,  with  so  much  of  the  salt  in  his  hands, 
belonging  to  the  continent,  as  he  may  stand  in  need  of,  for  the 
use  of  said  brigade. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  rolls  be  delivered  to  the 
standing  committee,  this  evening ;  that  they  proportion  the 
salt  to  the  several  towns,  according  to  the  number  of  inhabit- 
ants in  this  state  ;  and  that  they  make  report  of  the  same  to 
this  Assembly,  in  the  morning. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Dr.  William  Hunter  and  Dr. 
John  Halliburton,  have  the  liberty  of  returning  to  the  town  of 
Newport,  there  to  remain  until  the  next  October  session  of 
Assembly. 

Whereas,  Mr.  Stephen  Keech,  exhibited  unto  this  Assem- 
bly, an  account  by  him  charged  against  the  state,  for  eleven 
weeks  board  of  John  Nicholl,  Richard  Beale,  Nicholas  Lech- 
mere  and  Thomas  Vernon  ;  which  said  account  being  duly 
examined, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
allowed  ;  and  that  the  amount  thereof,  being  £19  I65.,  lawful 
money,  be  paid  unto  the  said  Stephen  Keech,  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  no  part  of  the  salt  ordered  to 
be  distributed  within  this  state,  be  delivered  to  the  town  of 
New  Shoreham  ;  but  that  their  proportion  thereof,  be  reserved 
for  said  inhabitants,  to  salt  any  provisions  that  may  be  brought 
from  the  said  town  to  the  main,  there  to  be  disposed  of. 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  611 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Daniel  Owen  be,  and  he 
is  hereby,  appointed  to  procure  suitable  and  convenient  places, 
within  the  town  of  Glocester,  for  Richard  Beale,  Thomas  Ver- 
non and  John  Nicholl ;  and  that  he  immediately  remove  them 
to  such  places,  accordingly. 

Resolved,  that  no  person  chosen  to  any  office,  civil  or  military, 
within  this  state,  shall  ofQciate  in  his  office  after  one  month  from 
the  rising  of  this  Assembly,  without  previously  subscribing  the 
test  prescribed  by  law,  in  the  presence  of  a  member  of  Assem- 
bly, under  the  penalty  of  £100,  lawful  money,  to  be  recovered 
before  the  inferior  court  for  the  county  where  the  offence 
shall  be  committed,  to  be  paid  into  the  general  treasury  of  this 
state. 

And  that  no  person  shall  act  as  a  counsellor  or  attorney,  in 
any  court  of  record  in  this  state,  after  said  one  month,  without 
subscribing  said  test,  in  like  manner  as  above,  under  the  like 
penalty,  and  to  be  recovered  in  like  manner. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  that  this  act  be  not  construed  to  ex- 
tend to  such  persons  as  shall  take  the  affirmation  prescribed  for 
tender  consciences  ;  or  produce  a  certificate  of  his  being  in 
union  with  the  people  called  Friends,  from  the  clerk  of  their 
meeting  ;  and  that  this  act  be  published  in  the  Newport  Mer- 
cury and  Providence  Gazette. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  $66,670,  be  im- 
mediately struck  off  in  bills  of  credit,  and  placed  in  the  general 
treasury  ;   that  said  bills  be  of  the  following  form,  to  wit : 

Form  of  Bills  of  Credit. 

"The  possessor  of  this  bill  shall  be  paid,  by  the  general 
treasurer  of  the  state  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Planta- 

tations, dollars,  within  six  years,  from  the  date  hereof. 

By  order  of  Assembly.     Providence,  the  5th  day  of  Septem- 
ber, A.  D.  1776." 

That  said  bills  be  signed  by  the  following  persons,  to  wit : 
John  G.  Wanton,  John  Cole,  Thomas  Greene,  John  Dexter. 
Joseph  Clarke,  Welcome  Arnold,  James  Congdon,  3d,  and 


612 


RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND 


[1776. 


Jonathan  Ilaszard  ;  three  of  whom,  shall  sign  all  bills  of  $1, 
and  upwards  ;  and  two,  all  bills  under  $1  ;  and  that  said  bills 
be  of  the  following  denominations,  to  wit : 

700  bills,  of  thirty  dollars  each  - 

600 

667 

600 

600 

600 

600 

600 

600 

600 
2,000 
4,000 
4,000 
4,000 
8,000 


"  twenty  "  - 

"  ten 

"  eight  "   - 

"  seven  " 

six  "  - 

five 

four  "  - 

three 

"  two  "  - 

one 
"  half  a  dollar  each 

one-quarter  of  a  " 

one-eighth     "  "  - 

one-sixteenth  of  a  " 


28,167 


$66,670,  at  65.  each. 


-  $21,000 
12,000 

6,670 
4,800 

-  4,200 
3,600 

-  3,000 
2,400 

-  1,800 
1,200 

-  2,000 
2,000 

-  1,000 
500 
500 

$66,670 
is  £20,001 


And  it  is  further  resolved,  that  said  bills  be  a  lawful  tender 
for  paying  and  discharging  all  contracts,  debts,  dues  and  de- 
mands whatsoever,  whether  of  a  public  or  private  nature  ;  and 
that  said  bills  be  redeemed  within  six  years  from  the  time  of 
emission. 

And  it  is  further  resolved,  that  said  committee  be  allowed  and 
paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  one-quarter  per  cent,  for  their 
trouble. 

That  they  procure  paper  for  the  same,  at  the  charge  of  the 
state  ;  that  Mr.  John  Carter  be  employed  to  print  said  bills, 
at  one  shilling  and  four  pence  for  every  hundred  bills  ;  and 
that  Joseph  Clarke,  Esq.,  be  appointed  to  superintend  the 
press. 

And  it  is  further  resolved,  that  the  said  Joseph  Clarke, 
Esq.,   procure  at  the  charge  of  the  state,   new  escutcheons, 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  C13 

and  such  other  devices  as  may  be  necessary  for  printing  said 
bills. 

^Vhereas,  Capt.  Asa  Kimball  presented  unto  this  Assembly, 
an  account  by  him  charged  against  the  state,  for  his  services  as 
conductor  and  engineer  of  the  \vorks  of  defence  on  Rhode 
Island  ;  for  one  blanket,  by  him  supplied  to  a  soldier  newly 
enlisted  ;  for  one  barrel,  used  for  tubs  in  digging  the  well  at 
the  fort  ;  and  for  his  expenses  in  attending  the  Assembly,  at 
East  Greenwich,  as  an  evidence  in  the  trial  of  Col.  Bubcock, 
by  order  of  Ilis  Honor  the  Governor  ;  and  the  said  account 
having  been  duly  examined  by  this  Assembly, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  J£ll  85.,  lawful  money,  there- 
of, and  no  more,  be  allowed  ;  and  that  said  sum  be  paid  the 
said  Asa  Kimball,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  there  is  no  provision,  by  law,  for  the  town  clerks 
in  this  state,  to  be  paid  for  their  trouble,  in  attending  town 
meetings,  to  draw  jurors  for  the  trial  of  prize  causes  : 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  the  authority 
thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  each  town  clerk  who  shall  attend, 
and  do  his  duty  at  such  town  meeting,  for  drawing  jurors 
to  attend  the  trial  of  any  prize  causes  or  causes,  to  be  tried  at 
the  maritime  court  in  this  state,  shall  be  allowed  the  sum  of 
six  shillings,  lawful  money,  for  his  attendance  and  trouble 
therein  ;  which  sum  shall  be  taxed  and  allowed  by  the  judge 
of  said  court,  to  be  paid  out  of  the  money  arising  from  the  sale  of 
the  prize  condemned,  in  the  same  manner  as  other  charges  are 
by  law  ordered  to  be  paid. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  the 
Deputy  Governor  and  the  members  of  the  General  Council,  any 
five  of  whom  to  be  a  quorum,  together  with  such  of  the  deputies 
belonging  to  the  respective  towns  in  this  state  as  may  attend, 
be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  a  committee,  to  act  and 
transact  all  such  business  as  the  exigency  of  public  affairs,  during 
the  recess  of  the  General  Assembly,  may  require  ;  and  to  ad- 
vise His  Honor  therein  ;  and  that  all  orders  by  them  made  and 
issued,  and  all  other  their  transactions,  be  laid  before  the  next 
session  of  the  General  Assembly. 


614  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Rufus  Waterman  be,  and 
he  is  hereby,  appointed  inspector  of  saltpeter  in  the  county  of 
Providence,  in  the  room  of  Jabez  Bowen,  Esq.  ;  and  that  the 
said  Rufus  draw  on  the  general  treasurer,  from  time  to  time, 
for  the  amount  of  the  saltpeter  he  may  receive  on  account  of 
this  state. 

And  it  is  further  resolved,  that  the  several  inspectors  imme- 
diately de  iver  the  saltpeter  they  may  have  on  hand,  to  Mr. 
John  Waterman. 

That  they  from  time  to  time,  deliver  what  they  may  here- 
after receive,  to  the  said  John  Waterman,  who  is  appointed  to 
receive  the  same,  and  make  it  into  powder,  for  the  use  of  this 
state  ;  and  that  the  expense  of  transporting  the  saltpeter  to  the 
said  John  Waterman's,  be  paid  by  this  state. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  two  hundred  small  arms  be  sent 
for  in  the  vessel  ordered  to  be  fitted  out  by  this  Assembly,  on 
account  of  this  state. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  safety  imme- 
diately furnish  the  commissary  with  the  necessary  clothing  for 
the  brigade  in  this  state  ;  and  that  the  commissary  deliver  them 
to  the  captains,  at  the  prime  cost  and  charges,  who  are  to  de- 
liver the  same  to  said  troops  at  the  same  price,  and  to  account 
therefor,  to  the  commissary. 

That  as  many  tents  and  marquees  be  immediately  made,  as 
by  the  return  of  the  colonels  commandant,  shall  be  thought 
necessary  ;  and  that  Messrs.  Thomas  Greene  and  Jacob  Greene, 
be  requested  to  deliver  as  much  of  the  continental  duck  now 
in  their  hands,  as  shall  be  wanted  for  the  purpose,  aforesaid,  to 
the  committee  of  safety,  who  are  directed  to  have  the  said 
tents  made  as  soon  as  may  be. 

And  the  said  committee  are  further  directed  to  insert  an  ad- 
vertisement in  the  Newport  Mercury  and  Providence  GazettCy 
for  procuring  fifteen  hundred  pair  of  yarn  stockings,  and  fifteen 
hundred  pair  of  double-soled  shoes,  for  the  use  cf  the  brigade, 
and  notifying  that  a  good  price  will  be  given  for  the  same. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  standing  committee  ex- 
amine the   accounts   of  Commodore  Hopkins,  respecting  the 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  615 

money  by  him  received  of  the  general  treasurer  ;  and  that  they 
make  report  to  this  Assembly,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  sign 
an  order  to  Major  Elliott,  to  deliver  to  Mrs.  Mary  Mason  the 
two  swivel  guns,  taken  from  her,  by  order  of  Eseck  Hopkins, 
Esq.,  when  commander  in  chief  of  the  forces  on  Rhode  Island. 

Whereas,  the  inhabitants  of  New  Shoreham,  from  their  pe- 
culiar situation,  are  entirely  in  the  power  of  the  enemy,  and 
very  pernicious  consequences  may  attend  the  intercourse  of  the 
said  inhabitants  with  the  continent,  by  means  of  the  intelligence 
and  supplies  which  the  enemy  may  procure  thereby, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  inhabitants 
be,  and  they  are  hereby,  prohibited  from  coming  from  said 
island  into  other  any  part  of  this  state,  upon  pain  of  being  con- 
sidered as  enemies  to  the  state,  and  of  being  imprisoned  in  the 
jail  in  the  county  where  they  may  be  found,  there  to  remain 
until  they  shall  be  discharged  by  the  General  Assembly. 

And  all  officers,  both  civil  and  military,  and  every  other  per- 
son, being  an  inhabitant  of  this  state,  is  hereby  directed  and 
empowered  to  apprehend  all  persons  so  offending,  and  to  com- 
mit them,  as  aforesaid. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  that  this  act  shall  not  extend  to  any 
inhabitant  of  the  said  island,  who  shall  remove  from  thence  with 
his  or  her  flimily,  with  an  intention  to  settle  in  any  other  part 
of  the  United  States. 

It  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  in  case  any  person  in 
this  state  shall  be  convicted  of  having  any  intercourse  or  cor- 
respondence with  the  persons  so  offending,  he  or  she  shall  for- 
feit and  pay  as  a  fine,  to  the  use  of  this  state,  £30,  lawful 
money,  to  be  recovered  by  the  general  treasurer,  at  the  inferior 
court  of  common  pleas,  in  the  county  where  the  offence  shall 
be  committed. 

It  is  further  resolved,  that  a  copy  of  this  act  be  inserted  in 
the  Newport  Mercury  and  Providence  Gazette, 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  no  person  be  exchanged  in 
future  in  the  brigade,  without  the  permission  of  the  commander 
ia  chief  of  this  state. 


618  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1776. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be  re- 
quested to  write  an  answer  to  the  letter  received  this  day  from 
Governor  Trumbull,  and  acquaint  him  with  the  measures  taking 
in  this  state  for  the  common  defence. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  and 
Mr.  John  Jenckes  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  appointed  to  pur- 
chase or  hire  a  proper  vessel,  and  fit  her  out  for  any  place  they 
may  think  best,  to  get  a  load  of  salt,  for,  and  at  the  expense 
and  risk  of,  this  state  ;  and  that  they  be  empowered  to  draw  a 
sum  of  money,  not  exceeding  £1,000,  out  of  the  general  treas- 
ury, for  the  purpose,  aforesaid. 

Resolved,  that  the  persons  chosen  by  any  of  the  towns,  to 
sit  in  the  Assembly  at  the  October  session,  the  electors  of 
whom,  had  not  subscribed  the  test,  be  not  allowed  to  take  their 
seats  at  the  said  session  of  the  Assembly  ;  but  that  the  said 
towns  proceed,  at  any  day  before  the  15th  of  October  next,  in  the 
election  of  new  members,  according  to  law  ;  and  that  this  act 
be  published  in  the  Newport  Mercury,  and  Providence  Gazette, 

Whereas,  the  committee  appointed  to  proportion  the  salt  be- 
longing to  this  state,  to  the  several  towns  within  the  same,  laid 
before  this  Assembly,  the  following  report,  to  wit : 

Proportion  of  Salt  to  the  several  Toions  in  the  State  of  Rhode 
hland  and  Providence  Plantations. 

Bushels. 

-  763  6-8 
629  7-8 

-  68  7-8 
264  7-8 

-  147  3-8 
239  4-8 

-  77  3-8 
117  4-8 

-  153  4-8 
193  5-8 

-  285  4-8 
244  7-8 


Inhabitants. 

Newport 

-     5,299 

Providence 

4,355 

New  Shoreham 

478 

Charlestown 

1,835 

Johnston 

-      1,022 

East  Greenwich 

1,664 

Barrington      - 

538 

North  Providence 

-     813 

Bristol  - 

-     1,067 

Portsmouth 

1,347 

Exeter 

-      1,982 

Cranston  - 

1,701 

1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  617 


Inhabitants 

South  Kingstown    - 

2,779 

Coventry  - 

2,300 

Richmond 

1,204 

Little  Compton  - 

1,302 

Tiverton   -     - 

2,091 

Warwick  - 

-2,376 

Warren     -     - 

1,005 

Scituate   - 

-3,289 

Cumberland  - 

1,686 

Westerly 

-],824 

Glocester 

2,832 

West  Greenwich 

-1,653 

Hopkinton      - 

1,845 

Smithfield 

-2,781 

Jamestown     - 

322 

Middletown 

-     860 

North  Kingstown   - 

2,761 

Bushels. 

400  4-8 

288  3-8 

173  1-8 

187  5-8 

301  4-8 

342  5-8 

144  6-8 

473  3-8 

243  7-8 

262  3-8 

407  6-8 

238  1-8 

265  4-8 

400  4-8 

40  4-8 

123  6-8 

397  7-8 

7,875 

4 

54,715 


Total  -  -  -  7,879 

We  suppose  it  must  lose  more  than  the  allowance  made. 
The  above  is  the  proportion  of  the  salt,  as  calculated  by — 
NATHANIEL  MUMFORD, 
THOMAS  GREENE, 
GIDEON  MUMFORD, 
Providence,  September  7,  1776. 

And  the  said  report  being  duly  considered  by  this  As- 
sembly}— 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is, 
accepted. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  following  accounts  be  paid  out 
of  the  general  treasury  : 

VOL.  VII.         78 


44  03  06 

83  02  GO 

5  17  00 

12  09  01 

35  08  03 

618  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1776d 

618  Bills  to  be  Paid. 

£     s.  d. 
Thomas  Slieffield,  for  victualling  the  militia  in  Kings  county      -  -         5  13  03 

Capt.  Joseph  Noyes,  expense  for  watching  the  shores  in  Westerly  -  15  00  00 

'•         "  "  "         of  a  guard  at  AVatch  Hill,  in  "     -  -       14  Ot  00 

Nicholas  Davis  and  others,  for  watching  the  shore  in  Charlestown  -  12  12  00 

Robert  Brown,  for  watching  the  shore  in  North  Kingstown        -  -       37  12  00 

Thomas  Greene,  for  adjusting  the  accounts  of  the  commissary         -  34  04  06 

Nathaniel  Mumford,  for  the  same,  and  for  attending  the  General  Assembly,  29  11  08 
Gideon  Mumford,       "  "  "  "  "  -       2113  11 

Thomas  Allln,  for  iron-work  on  field  carriages         -  -  -  25  1110 

Jonathan  Kerce,  for  iron-work  on  two  field-pieces         -  -  -       44  01  04 

Cromel  Child,  for  materials  for  iron-work  on  field  and  ship  gun-carriages,  321  19  11 
Benjamin  Man,  for  cannon-shot  delivered  to  Eseck  Hopkins 
Isaac  Corey,  for  billeting,  ferriage  for  iulnute-men  and  for  materials  for 

barracks  on  Rhode  Island  ------ 

William  Bradford,  Charles  Holden   and  John   Brown,  for  expenses  in 

going  to   Newport,  to  place   twenty-seven   cannon   from   Furnace 

Hope  .------_ 

Ray  Sands,  for  expenses  of  guard  on  the  shores  of  Boston  Neck 
John  Coon,  for  time  and  expenses  in  taking  care  of  a  sick  soldier 
Thomas  Allln,  for  his  services  as  caj^taln  of  minute-men,  and  of  those 

under  him,  on  Prudence  Island         -  -  -  -  -       7  04  00 

God  save  the  United  States  of  America. 

Resolves  of  the  Continental  Congress,  calling  vpon  certain  States 
to  raise  additional  Troops. 

In  Congress,  September  3,  1776. 

Resolved,  that  three  more  battalions  be  ordered  from  Virginia,  to  reinforce  the 
army  at  New  York. 

That  two  of  the  North  Carolina  battalions  be  ordered  to  march  with  all  possible 
expedition  under  the  command  of  Brigadier  Gen.  Moore,  to  reinforce  the  army  at 
New  York. 

That  it  be  recommended  to  the  Assemblies  and  Conventions  of  the  several  states 
to  the  northward  of  Virginia,  immediately  to  send  all  the  aid  in  their  power  to  the 
army  at  New  York. 

That  one  of  the  Continental  battalions  in  Rhode  Island,  be  ordered  immediately 
to  march  to  reinforce  the  army  in  New  York. 

That  it  be  recommended  to  the  Assembly  of  Massachusetts,  to  send  to  Rhode 
Island  a  battalion  of  their  militia  to  supply  the  place  of  the  Continental  battahou  or- 
dered from  thence.  By  order  of  Congress, 

JOHN  HANCOCK,  President. 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  619 

John  Hancock,  President  of  the   Continental   Congress,  to  the 
General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island.  619 

Pliiladelphia,  September  3d,  1776. 

Gentlemen : — Our  enemies  being  determined  to  make  a  powerful  attack  on  New 
York,  and  the  states  adjoining  thereto  ;  and  having  for  this  purpose,  collected  their 
whole  force,  from  every  part  of  the  continent,  it  is  incumbent  on  the  United  States  of 
America,  to  take  the  most  effectual  measures  to  defeat  this  deep  laid  scheme  against 
their  country. 

The  Congress  have  just  received  information  from  General  Washington,  of  the 
very  great  and  superior  strength  of  the  enemy ;  and  if  we  consider  the  recent  change 
in  the  situation  of  our  affairs  at  New  York,  we  shall  soon  be  convinced  that  nothing 
will  prove  an  adequate  remedy  in  our  present  circumstances,  but  the  most  vigorous 
exertions  on  our  part.  I  am  therefore,  by  order  of  Congress,  to  i-equest  you  wiU 
iuimediately  send  all  the  aid  in  your  power  to  our  army  at  New  York. 

The  state  of  our  affairs  is  so  extremely  critical,  that  delay  may  be  attended  with 
fatal  consequences.  Suffer  me,  therefore,  to  press  you,  in  the  name  and  by  the  au- 
thority of  your  country,  to  an  immediate  compliance,  and  with  all  the  earnestness  so 
naturally  suggested  by  the  importance  of  the  cause.  Although  I  doubt  not  your 
own  ardor  would  be  a  sufficient  stimulus  when  called  on  by  the  voice  of  liberty ;  yet 
my  anxiety  is  so  great,  I  cannot  refrain,  on  the  present  occasion,  from  beseeching 
you  to  exert  yourselves.  Every  thing  is  at  stake  ;  our  religion,  our  liberty,  the 
peace  and  happiness  of  posterity,  are  the  grand  objects  in  dispute ;  which,  that  we 
terrupted  to  preserve  and  transmit  to  future  generations,  is  the  constant  and  unin- 
may  be  able  Avish  of,  gentlemen, — 

Your  Honors'  most  obedient  and  very  humble  servant, 

JOHN  HANCOCK,  President. 

To  the  Hon.  Assembly  of  Ehode  Island, 


The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  to  Gen.  Washington. 

Providence,  September  6th,  1776. 

Sir : — The  necessity  which  caused  the  unexpected  evacuation  of  Long  Island,  hath 
alarmed  the  General  Assembly  of  this  state ;  as  it  seems  that  communications  cannot 
be  kept  open  with  an  island  where  the  enemy's  ships  can  approach.  This  hath  filled 
us  with  apprehensions  for  the  town  of  Newport  and  the  island  of  Rhode  Island,  which 
are  of  so  great  importance  to  this  and  the  other  United  States. 

Upon  which,  the  Assembly  have  thought  proper  to  appoint  John  CoUins,  Joshua 
Babcock  and  Joseph  Stanton,  Esqs.,  a  committee,  to  wait  upon  Your  Excellency,  to 
acquaint  you  with  the  state  of  this  government,  and  to  confer  with  you  upon  the  best 
measures  to  be  taken  for  its  defence  ;  and  with  respect  to  the  island  of  Rhode  Island, 
I  beg  the  favor  of  Your  Excellency  to  treat  them  with  the  most  entire  confidence, 
and  have  no  doubt  but  that  the  same  disposition  which  hath  always  induced  you  to 
manifest  your  regard  to  this  state,  will  induce  you  to  give  us  your  best  advice  and 
assistance. 

Upon  receiving  information  of  the  landing  of  the  enemy  upon  Long  Island,  and  ^ 


620  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1776. 

letter  from  Gov.  Trumbull,  acquainting  us  v/'ith.  your  request,  that  a  body  of  men 
might  be  thrown  upon  the  east  end  of  that  island,  this  state  ordered  the  whole  brigade, 
with  the  two  gallies  and  a  sufficient  quantity  of  provisions  and  ammunition,  to  pro- 
ceed to  that  island,  and  ordered  them  to  be  re-placed  by  the  militia  of  the  state.  We 
exerted  ourselves  to  get  them  in  readiness ;  and  some  of  them  were  imder  orders 
to  proceed ;  when  we  received  the  most  uncertain  and  aggravated  accounts  of  the 
evacuation  of  Long  Island,  which  occasioned  us  to  stop  the  men,  until  we  could 
receive  intelligence  to  be  depended  upon,  which  we  did  not  gain  until  the  last 
evening. 

I  beg  leave  to  observe  to  Your  Excellency  the  advantages  that  may  accrue  to  the 
common  cause,  from  the  several  states  having  early  and  authentic  intelligence  of  all 
matters  of  importance,  that  shall  happen,  and  to  request  Your  Excellency  to  favor  us 
with  accounts  of  every  thing  material. 
I  have  the  honor  to  be. 

With  every  sentiment  of  esteem  and  respect,  sir, 

Your  Excellency's  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

,  NICHOLAS  COOKE. 

To  His  Excellency  General  Washington. 

The  Governor  of  Connecticut  to  the  General  Assembly  of  Rhode 
Island. 

Lebanon,  September  9th,  1776. 

Gentlemen : — The  vast  importance  of  preventing  the  ministerial  army  taking  the 
benefit  of  the  stock  on  Long  Island,  and  availing  themselves  of  the  advantage  of  that 
post,  assisting  such  of  the  inhabitants  to  remove  with  their  effects  who  are  disposed 
for  it,  and  prevent  their  total  seduction,  I  apprehend  are  matters  of  more- conse- 
quence to  the  common  cause,  than  we  can  easily  imagine.  To  dislodge  that  army 
from  Long  Island,  and  destroy  the  two  ships  and  tender  in  the  Sound,  which  at  pre- 
sent prevent  supplies  that  way  by  water,  to  our  army,  might  at  one  blow,  in  a  great 
measure,  relieve  our  bleeding  country  from  its  impending  danger. 

How  far  it  would  be  practicable,  or  what  measures  are  proper  to  take  at  this 
alarming  crisis,  is  matter  of  serious  concern  with  us. 

It  is  supposed  here,  that  in  case  an  attempt  should  be  made  to  collect  a  force  at 
the  east  end  of  Long  Island,  to  remove  stock,  &c.,  that  a  number  of  whale-boats 
would  be  absolutely  necessary  to  troops,  stores,  supphes,  &c.,  as  they  might  avoid  all 
the  vessels  of  force,  the  enemy  could  send  to  obstruct  us. 

I  am  informed  that  a  large  number  of  whale-boats  that  belong  to  the  continent 
are  at,  and  near  Boston,  and  might  be  used  for  that  important  purpose ;  we  have  but 
very  few  with  us. 

I  am  also  informed  that  a  regiment  is  ordered  from  you,  to  Providence,  to  re-place 
the  Continental  battalion  removed  from  the  state  of  Rhode  Island  ;  and  whether 
your  regiment  could  not  come  in  the  whale-boats  to  Providence,  carrying  them  across 
the  land  at  Buzzard's  Bay,  is,  I  apprehend  worthy  of  your  consideration,  and  to  be 
executed  without  delay. 

We  are  equipping  what  naval  force  we  have,  with  all  possible  expedition ;  we  are 
exerting  ourselves,  and  desirous  to  unite  our  whole  strength  with  the  other  states 
in  our  common  cause.     I  don't  doubt  of  your  utmost  attention  and  most  vigorous 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  021 

exertions  therein  ;  must  entreat  your  answer  to  this,  and  such  other  measures  as  you 
judge  maybe  beneficial.     I  ha%'e  communicated  to  Governor  Cooke  on  the  subject. 
I  am,  with  great  truth  and  esteem,  gentlemen, 

Your  obedient,  humble  servant, 

J  ON  A.  TRUMBULL. 
To  the  Honorable  General  Assembly,  of  Rhode  Island. 

The  Governor  of  Connecticut  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Lebanon,  September  9th,  1776. 

Sir : — Since  my  last,  I  have  made  inquiry  what  naval  force  can  be  had  in  this  state 
to  assist  in  an  attempt  to  clear  the  Sound  of  the  enemy's  ships ;  and  find  we  can  soon 
have  a  ship  mounting  twenty  guns,  nine-pounders,  and  a  brigantiue  of  sixteen  guns, 
ready  for  that  service  ;  we  could  also  add  another  brigantine,  of  eight  guns,  could  we 
procure  cannon  to  put  upon  her,  besides  our  gallies,  which  we  hope  may  be  able  to 
join  them.  » 

I  persuade  myself  you  are  advised  of  the  present  situation  of  our  army  and  the 
enemy ;  from  which  it  will  appear  how  much  it  imports  the  success  of  the  arifly  under 
Gen,  Washington,  as  well  as  the  safety  of  these  states,  to  achieve  this  enteprize. 

Could  Commodore  Hopkins  be  prevailed  upon  to  join  the  force  under  his  com- 
mand, with  yeur  gallies  and  such  naval  force  as  your  state  can  furnish  to  our  ship, 
brigantine  and  gallies,  I  flatter  myself  it  would  be  suflicient  to  effect  the  purpose  in- 
tended;  if  greater  force  should  be  thought  uecssary,  there  are  two  privateers  in  the 
harbor  of  New  London,  that  may  be  had,  to  assist  them. 

Permit  me  to  request  your  attention  to  this  subject,  and  your  answer  by  the  return 
of  this  express  ;  and  to  assure  you — 

I  am,  with  the  greatest  respect  and  esteem. 

Your  obedient,  humble  servant, 

JONA.  TRUMBULL. 

To  the  Honorable  Governor  Cooke. 

The    Governor   of  Rhode   Island   to    Governor    Tru?nbull,    of 
Connecticut. 

Providence,  September  10th,  1776. 

Sir  : — Your  letter  to  Gov.  Cooke,  by  express,  came  to  hand  this  evening.  His  Honor 
being  in  the  hospital,  makes  it  necessary  for  me  to  inform  you,  that  a  Council  will 
be  held  at  Newport  on  Thursday  morning  at  10  o'clock,  to  take  the  necessary  stejDS 
to  forward  one  or  both  regiments  with  all  possible  dispatch.  The  Council  will  ac- 
quaint you  by  express  of  the  measures  taken. 

In  the  mean  time,  I  beg  leave  to  refer  you  to  Governor  Cooke's  letter,  for  a  state 
of  the  naval  fone  of  this  state  ;  and  am,  with  great  respect,  sir, 

Your  honor's  most  obedient,  humble  servant.* 

To  the  Honorable  Governor  Trumbull. 


*  This  letter  and  the  one  of  the  14:th  of  September,  1776,  written  to  Governor  Trumbull 
are  both  unsigned  by  the  person  who  wrote  them.    Gov.  Cooke  was  sick  at  this  time. 


622  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND         [1776. 

The    Governor  of  Rhode    Island  to  the   General  Assemhhj  of 
Massachusetts. 

Newport,  September  13th,  1776. 

Gentlemen : — The  Most  Honorable  the  Continental  Congress  having  prdered  one 
battalion  of  their  troops  stationed  here,  to  march  immediately  to  New  York,  and  in- 
formed this  state  that  they  recommended  to  you  to  re-place  the  same  with  a  regiment 
of  your  militia,  the  general  committee  appointed  to  act  during  the  recess  of  the  Gen- 
ei-al  Assembly,  have  exerted  themselves  to  get  that  battalion  in  readiness  to  proceed 
with  the  greatest  expedition  ;  part  of  which  will  march  to-morrow,  and  the  remainder 
the  next  day. 

The  committee  have  appointed  Col.  Church,  who  will  deliver  you  this,  to  make 
application  to  you  to  send  forward  the  said  regiment  as  soon  as  possible. 

Mr.  President  Hancock  having  also  written  in  the  most  pressing  terms  to  this 
state,  to  afford  all  the  aid  in  our  power  to  the  army  at  New  York,  the  committee 
have  recommended  to  Col.  Richmond  to  hold  the  other  Continental  battalion  in  this 
state  in  readiness  to  march  at  a  moment's  warfting.  And  he  will  accordingly  march 
with  it  as  soon  as  he  receives  authentic  intelligence  that  the  regiment  of  militia  from 
your  state,  shall  enter  into  this.  They  have  also  ordered  a  battalion,  to  consist  of 
seven  hundred  mihtia,  to  be  immediately  raised,  to  supply  the  place  of  one  of  the 
Continental  battalions,  removed. 

I  have  no  doubt  of  your  compliance  with  the  application  of  Col.  Church,  and  beg 
leave  to  subscribe  myself, —  With  great  respect  and  esteem,  gcntlmen. 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

NICHOLAS  COOKE. 

To  the  Hon.  General  Assembly  of  Massachusetts  Bay. 

The    Governor   of  Rhode   Island   to    Governor    Trumbull,    of 
Connecticut. 

State  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,        -^ 
Bristol,  September  14th,  1776.    ) 

Sir  : — Governor  Cooke  having  entered  the  hospital  for  inoculation,  it  becomes  ne- 
cessary for  me  to  acquaint  Your  Honor  that  I  laid  your  letter  of  the  9th  instant  be- 
fore the  committee,  appointed  to  act  in  cases  of  emergency,  during  the  recess  of  tl  e 
General  Assembly,  upon  which  Commodore  Hopkins  also  attended. 

It  is  with  pain  I  inform  Your  Honor  that  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  this  state  to 
afford  such  assistance  to  the  naval  power  of  your  state  as  would  make  an  attack  upon 
the  enemy's  ships  in  the  Sound  in  any  manner  advisable.  The  two  gallies  and  the 
Alfred,  which  is  not  a  quarter  manned,  constituting  the  whole  force  in  this' state. 

The  Congress  have  ordered  one  of  the  Continental  battalions  stationed  here,  to 
march  to  New  York  ;  and  recommended  it  to  the  Massachusetts  Bay  to  supply  its 
place  with  a  regiment  of  their  militia.  Part  of  the  former  will  proceed  this  day, 
and  the  remainder  to-morrow. 

In  this  great  crisis,  the  committee  not  having  it  in  their  power  to  afford  so  speedy 
an  aid  in  any  other  way,  have  requested  Colonel  Richmond,  who  commands  the 
other  Continental  battalion  in  this  state,  to  hold  it  in  readiness  to  march  at  the 
shortest  notice ;  and  he  accordingly  will  proceed  with  it  to  New  York  as  soon  as  he 
shalj  receive  intelligence  of  the  arrival  of  the  regiment  from  the  Massachusetts  in  this 


1776.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  623 

state  ;  to  make  application  for  whicli,  the  committee  have  deputed  one  of  their 
members. 

To  re-place  Col.  Richmond's  battalion,  the  committee  have  ordered  a  body  of 
seven  hundred  militia  to  be  immediately  raised  and  equipped. 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  esteem  and  reSpect,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant. 
To  the  Honorable  Governor  Trumbull. 

General  Washington  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Headquarters,  at  Col.  Morris's  House,    } 
September  17th,  1776.  ') 

Sir: — I  received  the  honor  of  your  favor  of  the  6th  inst.,  by  INIessrs.  Collins,  Bab- 
cock  and  Stanton,  and  should  have  acknowledged  it  before  now,  had  I  not  been  pre- 
vented by  the  peculiar  situation  of  our  affairs. 

I  communicated  my  sentiments  to  those  gentlemen  upon  the  subject  of  your  letter, 
and  the  several  propositions  that  were  before  me,  who,  I  doubt  not,  will  make  a  full 
and  due  report  of  the  same  to  you  and  your  Honorable  Assembly. 

However,  I  shall  take  the  liberty  of  adding,  that  the  divided  state  of  our  army 
which,  when  collected  in  one  body,  is  inferior  to  that  of  the  enemy  ;  their  having 
landed  almost  the  whole  of  their  force  on  Long  Island,  and  formed  a  plan  of 
cutting  off  all  communication  between  that  and  the  city  of  New  York,  Avhich  we 
had  but  too  good  reasons  to  believe  practicable  and  easy  to  effect  with  their  ships  of 
war,  made  it  necessary  and  prudent  to  withdraw  our  troops  from  the  former,  that 
our  chance  of  resistance  and  opposition  might  be  more  probable,  and  likely  to  be  at- 
tended with  a  happy  issue. 

I  feel  myself  much  concerned  on  aecount  of  your  apprehensions  for  the  town  of 
Newport  and  the  island  of  Rhode  Island  ;  and  should  esteem  myself  peculiarly  happy 
were  it  in  my  power  to  afford  means  for  their  security  and  that  of  the  state  in  gen- 
eral ;  or  to  point  out  such  measures  as  would  be  effectual  for  that  purpose.  But  cir- 
cumstanced as  I  am,  it  is  not  possible  for  me  to  grant  any  assistance ;  nor  can  I  with 
propriety  undertake  to  prescribe  the  mode  which  will  best  promote  their  defence. 

This  must  depend  on  such  a  variety  of  circumstances,  that  I  should  suppose  you 
and  the  Assembly,  who  are  in  the  state,  will  be  much  more  competent  to  the  task? 
than  what  I  or  any  person  out  of  it,  can  be ;  and  therefore  I  can  only  tecommend 
that  you  will  pursue  such  steps  as  you,  in  your  judgment  shall  think  most  conducive 
to  that  end  ;  observing  that  it  appears  to  me  a  matter  of  extreme  difficulty  (if  prac- 
ticable,) to  prevent  the  enemy's  ships  doing  damage  to  every  island  accessible  to 
them,  unless  the  passes  between  them  and  the  main  are  so  narrow  as  to  oblige  them 
to  come  near  such  batteries  as  may  be  erected  for  their  annoyance,  on  commanding 
groun  d. 

I  cannot  sufficiently  express  my  thanks  for  the  readiness  you  and  your  Assembly  mani. 
fested  in  ordering  troops,  &c.,  to  Long  Island,  on  hearing  of  my  request  to  Gov.  Trum_ 
bull  upon  that  subject.  At  the  time  that  I  made  it,  I  conceived  the  plan  of  much  import, 
ance  ;  and  that  many  valuable  and  salutary  consequences  might  have  resulted  from 
it.  But  as  things  have  undergone  a  material  change  since,  it  may  not  be  improper 
to  consider,  and  be  satisfied  of  some  facts  which  ought  to  be  clearly  known,  previous 
to  any  attempt  to  carry  it  into  execution,  and  on  which  the  success  of  it  will  greatly 
depend  ;  such  as  an  entire  conviction  of  the  friendly  disposition  of  the  inhabitants  on 
the  island ;  the  number  that  would  join  the  troops  that   might  be   sent  over ;  the 


624  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [17T6-. 

length  they  Tvould  go  ;  the  support  they  would  and  can  give,  and  whether  a  retreat 
from  thence,  could  bo  safely  effected  in  case  it  should  be  necessary. 

These  matters,  and  others,  which  a  more  minute  consideration  of  the  plan  will 
present  to  your  view,  should  be  well  weighed  and  digested,  and  which  I  thought  it 
my  duty  to  mention,  especially  as  the  scheme  had  originated  with  me.  My  anxiety 
and  concern  for  the  inhabitants  at  the  east  end  of  the  island,  who  have  been  repre- 
sented always  as  friendly,  and  well  attached  to  the  cause  of  the  states,  prompt  me  to 
wish  them  every  assistance  ;  but  if  the  efforts  you  could  make  in  conjunction  with 
Governor  Trumbull,  Avould  not  promise  almost  a  certainty  of  success,  perhaps  they 
might  tend  to  aggravate  their  misfortunes. 

The  committee  stated  sundry  propositions  respecting  this  expedition ;  such  as  if 
any  thing  was  attempted,  where  a  stand  should  be  made  ? 

This  must  be  left  to  the  discretion  of  those  who  command ;  nor  can  I  spare  an  of- 
ficer for  that  purpose,  or  recommend  one. 

What  number  of  men  should  be  sent,  and  Avhat  proportion  from  the  Massa- 
chusetts '? 

The  number  necessary  will  depend  upon  the  force  they  will  have  to  oppose,  and 
the  assistance  they  would  derive  from  the  islanders  ;  the  proportion  from  the  Massa- 
chusetts on  the  will  of  the  legislature,  or  voluntary  engagement  of  the  people  in  the 
service. 

What  artillery  should  they  have  ? 

I  am  of  opinion  the  artillery  would  be  subject  to  loss,  without  any  gi-eat  advan- 
tage resulting  from  it. 

They  also  asked,  whether  any  frigates  should  be  sent,  &c. 

As  the  enemy  have  now  the  free  and  entire  command  of  the  Sound  ;  and  in  any 
ships  of  war  in  it,  they  will  be  much  more  liable  to  be  taken,  than  they  would  have 
been  some  time  ago,  and  when  it  was  proposed  by  Governor  Trumbull  to  make  an 
attempt  upon  the  ships  above  Hell  Gate.  In  this  instance,  however,  I  do  not  con- 
ceive myself  at  liberty  to  say  any  thing  peremptory  one  way  or  the  other,  having  no 
power  over  the  frigates. 

I  am  sensible  of  the  force  of  your  observation,  that  the  common  cause  might  be 
benefitted  by  the  several  states  receiving  early  and  authentic  inteUigcnce  of  every 
material  occurrence.  Permit  me  at  the  same  time,  to  assure  you,  that  I  often  regret 
my  incapacity  in  this  instance ;  and  that  the  neglect  does  not  arise  from  want  of  in- 
clination or  through  inattention,  but  from  the  variety  of  important  matters  that  are 
always  pressing  upon,  and  which  daily  surround  me. 

Before  I  conclude,  I  shall  take  this  opportunity  to  inform  you,  that  having  received 
certain  information  that  the  enemy's  plan  of  operations  was  to  pass  from  Long  Island 
and  land  in  our  rear  with  their  army,  to  cut  off  all  communication  with  the  country, 
and  for  which  they  were  making  every  possible  disposition  ;  a  council  of  general  of" 
ficers  determined  last  week  on  a  removal  of  the  army  from  the  city,  in  order  to  pre" 
vent  the  fatal  consequences  which  must  inevitably  ensue,  if  they  could  have  exe- 
cuted their  scheme  ;  resolving  at  the  same  time,  that  every  appearance  of  defence 
should  be  kept  up  till  our  sick,  ordnance  and  other  stores  could  be  removed. 

This  was  set  about  with  the  greatest  industry,  and  as  to  the  sick,  was  completely 
effected ;  but  on  Sunday  morning,  before  we  had  accomplished  the  removal  of  all 
of  our  cannon,  provisions  and  baggage,  they  sent  the  ships  of  war  up  the  North 
River,  whereby  the  water  carriage  was  totally  stopped,  the  ships  anchoring  not  far 
above  the  city ;  and  about  eleven  o'clock,  those  that  were  laying  at  Turtle  Bay,  or 
rather  below  it,  in  the  East  River,  being  six  or  seven  in  number,  besides  some  trans- 


1776.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  625 

ports,  began  and  continued  for  some  time  a  most  severe  and  heavy  cannonade,  to 
scour  the  ground,  and  cover  the  landing  of  their  troops. 

I  had  gone  the  night  before,  to  the  main  body  of  the  army,  which  was  posted  on 
the  plains  and  heights  of  Harlem,  apprehending  from  many  uncommon  and  great 
movements  among  the  enemy,  that  they  meant  to  make  an  attack  then,  that  night 
or  to  land  on  the  east  side  of  Harlem  liiver. 

As  soon  as  the  firing  began,  I  rode  with  all  possible  despatch  towards  the  place  of 
landing,  where  breast-works  had  been  thrown  up,  and  to  my  great  surprise  and 
mortification,  found  the  troops  that  had  been  posted  in  the  fines,  retreating  with  the 
utmost  precipitation  and  disorder ;  and  those  ordered  to  support  them,  notwithstand- 
ing the  exertions  of  their  Brigadiers  Parsons  and  Fellows  to  form  them,  running 
away  in  the  most  disgraceful  and  sliameful  manner ;  nor  could  my  utmost  efforts 
rally  them,  or  prevent  their  fiight.  This  scandulous  conduct  occasioned  a  loss  Of 
.several  tents  and  other  baggage,  which  otherwise  would  have  been  easily  secured 
The  remainder  of  the  troops  that  were  in  the  city,  got  out,  and  the  retreat  of  the 
whole  was  effected  with  the  loss  of  but  very  few  men ;  not  more  than  three  or  four, 
that  I  have  heard  of,  were  made  prisoners,  and  only  one  or  two  killed, 

I  am  now  encamped  on  the  heights,  abovementioned,  which  are  so  well  caculated 
for  defence,  that  I  should  hope,  if  the  enemy  make  an  attack,  and  our  men  will  be- 
have with  tolerable  resolution,  they  must  meet  with  a  repulse,  if  not  a  total  defeat. 

They  advanced  in  sight  yesterday,  in  several  large  bodies,  but  attempted  nothing 
of  a  general  nature  ;  though  in  the  forenoon,  there  were  some  small  skirmishes  be- 
tween some  of  their  parties  and  detachments  sent  out  by  me,  in  which  I  have  the 
pleasure  to  inform  you  our  men  behaved  with  bravery  and  intrepidity,  putting  them 
to  flight  when  in  open  ground,  and  forcing  them  from  posts  they  had  seized  two  or 
three  times.  From  some  of  their  wounded  men  which  fell  into  our  hands,  the  ap- 
pearance of  blood  in  every  place  where  they  made  their  stand  ;  and  on  the  fences 
they  passed,  we  have  reason  to  believe  they  had  a  good  many  killed  and  wounded^ 
though  they  did  not  leave  many  on  the  ground. 

In  number,  our  loss  was  very  inconsiderable  ;  but  in  the  fall  of  Lieut.  Col.  KnoL 
ton,  I  consider  it  as  great,  being  a  brave  and  good  officer ;  and  it  may  be  increased 
by  the  death  of  Major  Leitch,  of  the  Virginia  regiment,  who  unfortunately  received 
three  balls  through  his  side. 

Having  given  you  a  summary  account  of  the  situation  of  our  affairs,  and  in  such 
manner  as  circumstances  will  admit  of,  I  have  only  to  add,  that— 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  with  sentiments  of  the  highest  esteem,  sir, 
Your  most  obedient  servant, 

GEORGE  WASHINGTON. 

To  Governor  Cooke. 

P.  S.  The  committee  have  expressed  their  apprehensions  of  being  obliged  to 
abandon  the  island  of  Rhode  Island  and  Newport,  and  requested  my  opinion.  At 
present,  I  can  see  no  cause  for  it ;  and  the  propriety  of  the  measure,  must  depend 
upon  circumstances.  But  I  should  suppose  they  ought  to  be  very  pressing,  and  the 
necessity  great,  before  they  ought  to  be  given  up.  Most  certainly  no  imaginary  ilia 
or  necessity  should  lead  to  such  a  measure.  At  this  time,  the  danger  can  only  be 
ideal ;  and  if  the  enemy  persevere  in  their  plans  here,  and  our  men  behave  as  they 
should  do,  I  am  persuaded  they  will  not  have  an  opportunity  to  employ  their  atten- 
tion elsewhere,  this  campaign. 

VOL.  VII.         79 


GENKRAL  INDEX 


Aborn,  Anthony 248 

John    458 

Samuel 44,  105,  534 

Adams,  John 297 

Samuel 230,  293,  297 

Adqueneset 452 

Albro,  James 363,  366,  442 

Aldrich,  Caleb 4,  12,  26 

Jacob 257 

Thomas 41 

William    328 

Alexander,  Henry 599 

Aln.y,  Gideon 250,  511 

John    3,  11,  25,  43,  204,  453 

Joseph 359 

Allegiance,  act  of,  to  the  King  of  Great 

Britain,  repealed  ...    522 

Governor  Cooke's  letter  to  General 

Washington,  relative  to    545 

act  relative  to,  passed  in  1776 566 

Allen,  George 366 

George  B 576 

John 489 

John,  son  of  Jonathan 27 

Mathew   322,438 

Noel 857 

Paul 20,  207,  285,  404 

Samuel 4,  12,  50,  279 

Samuel,  2d    6,26 

Ihomas,  205,  241,  244,  279,  308,  351, 
479,  519 

Viall    351,  866,  519 

William,  son  of  William 366 

Amadown,  Philip 256 

Andrews,  John, 44,  149 

letter  relative  to  the  Gaspee 156 

deposition  relative  to  do 171 

Zephaniah 6,  284 

Angell,  Daniel 351,  519 

Enoch 39 

Israel 322 

Jesse 519 

Hope 39,244 

John,  son  of  Stephen 558 

John 323,436 

Col.  James 273,  310,  415,  466 

Job   591 


Angell,  James,  Jr 598 

Nathan 175 

Anthony,  Abraham 576 

Burrington    349,  359 

Joseph .346,  852 

Aplin,  Joseph 36^  197,  468 

Appeals  to  Great  Britain,  from  judg- 

menls  of  court,  forbidden 33 

act  regulating,  repealed : .  . . .  355 

Arms,  committee  to  take  an  account  of 

all  in  the  colony 856 

act  for  purchasing 477 

Army  of  observation,  secretary  of 889 

rules  and  orders  of 340 

to  be  under  the  command  of  the 
commander  in  chief  in  Massachu- 
setts   355 

Arnold,  Aaron    350,  517 

Benjamin 31 ,  248,  478,  520 

Caleb    2U5,  394 

David   439 

James 4,  25,  243,  812,  510,  516 

James,  son  of  Elisha 6 

Col.  James,  Jr 402,  577 

Josiah  381 

Jonathan  . .  .20,  205,  282,  285,  473,  582 

Joseph,  son  of  Caleb 324 

Luke     359 

Oliver 5.  242,  398,  520 

Peleg 359 

Philip,  son  of  James 436 

Stephen 4,  11 

declaration  relative  to  riot  in  Provi- 
dence   303 

Samuel  G.,  note  from  his  history  of 
Rhode  Island,  relative  to  the  Gas- 


pee  - 


.69 


Thomas 410,  446,  600 

Welcome 44,  475,  494,  576 

William 52,  359,  366,  393,  420 

Ashe,  John 301 

.A.ston,  Jeremiah    591 

Atwell,  Amos 20,  363,  510,  515 

Aylworth,  Judiah 511,  562 

Auchmuty,  Kobert     108,  123 

Austin,  Daniel 57*"> 

David   556 


628 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Austin,  Jeremiah 850,  359 

Babcock,  Gideon 349,  536 

Col.  Hfnry 446,  490 

dispute  concerning  rank 468 

conduct  to  be  investigated 473 

to  be  continued  in  command  . .  .477,  498 

instructions  to 498 

dismissed  from  his  command 537 

Ichabod 562 

James 241,  322 

Joshua,  204,  240,  313,  852,  478,  511, 
514 

Oliver,  Jr 518 

Peleg .♦. 359 

Samuel 44,  51 1 

Bacon,  David 516 

Elijah 6 

Badger,  Jonathan 20 

Bailey,  Lemuel 367,  437,  599,  600 

Richard 277,  363,  511 

Richard,  Jr 313 

Samuel 366 

William 518 

Balch,  Joseph 322 

Balfour,  Andrew  431 

Ballou,  Benjamin    600 

Ezekiel 278 

Levi 351 

Reuben 600 

Simeon    517 

Bancker,  Gerard 287 

Bancroft,  George,  furnishes  documents 

relative  to  the  Gaspee 57 

Bannister,  John 58,  474,  565 

Baptists  in  Cranston,  lottery  to  build  a 

meeting  house      21 

in  Providence,  authorized  to  sell  land,  222 

Barber,  Caleb 205,  241 

Daniel 4,  12 

Daniel,  Jr 575 

John 379 

M-oses 5.  18,  27,  45,  206,  242 

Nathan 591 

Barberry  bushes,  act  to  destroy 64 

Bardin,  Charles 97 

Barker,  Elisha    266 

James 43,  204 

John 4,  244,  308,  356,  490,  601 

Joshua 44,  611 

Peleg 239 

Barnes,  Samuel 391 

Barrington,    act    to    incorporate    the 

town  of 15 

petition  of  inhabitants  of,  to  be  set 

ofifto  Warren 28 

lottery  granted  to  repair  Congrega- 
tional meeting  house  in    49 

proceedings  of,  relative  to  the  duty 

imposed  on  tea 279 

Bartlett,  Josiah 300 

John    438,570,  599 

John,  Jr 456 

Rufus   479 

Barton ,  Joseph    324 

William 359,  366,  403 


Barton,  William,  resigns  his  command,  49l 

major  of  brigade 519,  538,  600 

.committee  of  inquiry  on 561 

Bates,  Jonathan 575 

Jonathan,  Jr 324 

Nathan 350 

Battey,  William 381 

Beale,  Richard 569,  603 

Beaver  Tail,  fort  to  be  built  at 513 

Belcher,  Joseph 13,  366,  510,  576 

Joseph,  Jr 436 

William   437.  600 

Belknap,  Abraham 5 

Jeduthun    241 

Beneficent  Congrega'l  Society,   Provi- 
dence, charter  of 20 

Bennett,  Abel 244 

Asa    518 

Asaph 366 

Christopher 323 

Job    3 

J.  C 176 

Berry,  Peleg 403,  599 

Beverly,  John    12 

Biddle,  Edward 301 

Bills  of  credit,  see  paper  money. 

Bissell,  Samuel    324 

Thomas,  Jr 349 

Black,  Samuel 323,  590 

Blackraar,  Nathaniel 325,  456,  600 

Bland,  Richard 226 

Bliss,  Brenton 600 

Bliven,  Isaac  Ross 632,  600 

Joshua 436 

William   , 349,616 

Block  Island,  see  Neto  Shoreham. 
Blodget,  William,  secretary  of  the  ar- 
my of  observation    339* 

Brt-mm,  Simon    287,  298 

Bollan.  William 307 

Bonamy,  Peter    , , 493 

Borden,  Benjamin 591 

Ichabod 2& 

Joseph,   deposition   relative    to    the 

Gaspee 135 

Stephen    349,  437 

Borland,  John    377,  394,  556 

Boston  port  bill,  resolutions  relative  to,  249, 
257 
proceedings  of  Newport,  relative  to.  .281 
Providence        "        280, 
282 
correspondence  of  committee  of  va- 
rious towns,  in  relation  to . .  289  to  295 
subscription  for  the  relief  of  the  peo- 
ple of 303 

Bosworth,  Edward 60,  279,  612,  641 

Benjamin,  315,  356,  369,  373,  387,  615, 
666 

Samuel 361,  438 

Boundary   line    (northern),    memorial 

of  Moses  Brown  on 8 

committee  to  draw  up  a  state  of  the 

case  of 34 

Bourn,  Benjamin 600 

Shearjashub   453,  611,  601 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


629 


Bours,  John 240 

Samuel    53 

Bowen,  Aaron    1^7,  45,  206 

Benjamin   20 

Ephraim 20,  39,  823 

narrative  of  the  destruction  of  the 

"         Gaspee 68 

Israel 205,  240,  453 

Jabez,  20,  40,  241,  314,  871, 417,  514, 601 

Joseph 600 

Smith 351,  618 

William 20 

Bowdoin ,  James 297 

Bowers,  Jerathneel 230 

Bowler,  Aaron 93,  98,  136 

Charles 356 

Metcalfe,  4,  11,  25,  43,  99,  190,  204, 
240,  241,  856,  389,  409,  431,  478, 
511,519. 

letter  to  the  commissioners 132 

letter  to  Virginia 227 

letters  to  Governor  Wanton 334 

chief  lustice 601 

Boyer,  Stephen 500,  520 

Bradfield,  Francis 412 

Bradford,  Daniel 15 

William,  44,    190,  205,  240,  313,  347, 
426,441,452,491,510,549 

Brayton,  David 245 

Brenton,   Benjamin,  estate    of,   to  be 

taken  possession  of 376,  394,  468 

estate  of,  restored 414 

Jahleel,  estates  taken  possession  of,  376, 
394 

James 124 

deposition    relative    to    the   Gaspee 

aifair 126 

Briggs,  Aaron 93,  98 

deposition  relative  to  the  Gaspee 136 

Cornelius    437 

Bristol,  proceedings  of,  relative  to  the 

duty  imposed  on  tea 274 

British  Parliament,  resolution  relative 
to  the  taxes  on  the  colonies,  im- 
posed by 246 

documents  relative  to  the  resistance 
to   the    act  imposing  a   duty   on 

tea,  etc 272  to  287 

proceedings  of  the  people  of  Provi- 
dence relating  to 272 

proceedings  in  Newport 274 

Bristol    274 

"  llichmond 276 

"  New  Shoreham    277 

Cumberland 278 

"  Barrington 279 

"  Providence 280 

Parliament,  correspondence  with,  and 
proceedings  of  the  colonies,  on  the 

encroachments  of 287,  298 

proceedings  of  New  York  on    287 

"  New  Jersey  on 288 

letter  from  the  committee  of  corres- 
pondence of  New  Jersey,  relative 

to 289 

resolution  relative  to  acts  of 324 


British   Parliament,  address  from,   to 
the    King,   on    the   state    of    the 

colonies  in  America    329 

answer  of  the  King  to  the  same 330 

resolution  of  the  House  of  Commons. .  330 
resolutions  desiring  a   restoration  of 

harmony  with 368 

British  ships  to  be  supplied  with  provi- 
sions    438 

Brown,  Abial,  to  have  a  lottery  grant,  242, 
850,  363,  416,  517 

Abijah 242 

Beriah    5,206,241,512 

Chad,  5,  13,  27,   206,   241,   314,   511, 
514 

David    4 

Elisha 12 

George 149, 155,  172 

Godfrey 323 

Ichabod  44 

James 27^,285 

James,  Jr 323 

John,  6.  27,  45,  71,  149,  175,  248,  273, 
386,  385,  406,  417,  510,  540,  542, 
574,  584. 

sheriff 206,241 

John,Jr 404,476,516 

Joseph,  44,   149,   248,   371,   396,   402, 

406,  409,  417,  426,  440 

Moses,  3,  6,  11,  14,  25,  190,  196,  202, 

228,  :248 

memorial  of,  on  northern  boundary ....  8 

Nicholas   175,  248,  249,  543 

report  relative  to  cannon 417,  464 

Nathaniel 308,  315,  479,  514 

Robert 315,  378,  416,  514 

Rowland 638 

Thomas 468 

Zephaniah 516,  599 

Brownell,  Jonathan,  44,  204,  828,  436,  600 

Joseph 240 

Thomas H,  25,  313,  511,  541 

Bruce,  George 256 

Bucklin,  Joseph    71,  285 

Sylvanus 404 

Burlingame,  William 517 

Benjamin   403 

Peter 808 

Bull,  William 437,  600 

Buller,  J 165 

Burdick,  Jesse 591 

Weight   591 

Burnett,  Bishop 274 

Burr,  Ezekiel 20,  412,  576 

Shubael    308,352 

Burrill,  Joseph 255 

James 516 

Burroughs,  Benjamin 599 

Burton.  John,  Jr 479 

Cahoone,  Daniel 248 

James 470 

Cannon,  report  of  com.  on  the  price  of.  .417 
report  on  distribution  of 583 

Caple,  AVilliam  J.,  aflBdavit,  relative  to 

the  Gaspee 79 


630 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Card,  Jonathan 516 

Carder,  James,  Jr 591 

Carey,  Archibald 22(1 

Silas 242 

Carpenter,  John    21 

Daniel 381 

Ephraim 258 

Nathaniel 351,  518 

Carr,  Benjamin 380 

Benjamin,  Jr 366 

Caleb    403,456,  599 

Caleb,  Jr 575 

Dabney 226 

Eleazer. 850,  359 

Edward 880 

Edward,  Jr 591 

James   380 

James,  Jr 380 

John 366,  436,  600 

Nicholas   380 

Samuel 3,  11,  380,  511,  588 

Samuel,  Jr 591 

Carter,  John  .327,  338,  852,  420,  495,  586 

Case,  Joseph 476 

Joseph ,  Jr 404 

Nathaniel 468 

Casey,  Samuel 22 

Silas : 454,493,568 

Cattle,  act  relative  to  diseases  of 24 

to  be  removed  from  Block  Island 362 

to  be  removed  from  all  islands  in  the 

ci.lony 373 

Census  of  1 774,  report  on 254 

table  of  population 299 

1776,  committee  to  take 562 

report  of  committee  on .616 

Chace,  Aaron 399 

Abraham 381 

Daniel 576 

John    438 

Samuel,  of  Maryland 235 

Chaloner,  Walter.  .5,  13,  26,  206,  241,  569 

Champlin,  Christopher 350 

Christopher,  Jr 453 

George 314,  453 

Hazard 600 

Jesse  240j  315,  472,  515 

Jabez 314,  356,  470,  475,  512,  540 

Crandall,  Joseph 243 

Chancing,  William 366 

Chapman,  John 240,  308 

Charlestown,  militia  in,  to  be  divided.  .403 
Checkley ,  William,  relative  to  the  Gaspee,  87 
Cheever,  Bartholomew,  affidavits  rela- 
tive to  the  Gaspee 78,  169 

Child,  Cromel...4,  313,  421,  453,  489,511 

James,  2d ...  323 

Sylvester 44,  205,  241,  409,  441,  511 

Christie,  Andrews 593 

Church,  Benjamin    487,  499 

Edward 559 

Israel    323,  605 

Nathaniel 322,  456 

Peter     403 

Thomas,  4,  12,  44,  205,  240,  244,812. 
322,  376,  414,  462,  510,  601 


Clarke,  Daniel 39 

Ethan  358,  365 

James 124,458 

John  Innis 39,  314 

John    518 

Joseph  ...  .5,  13,  26,  206,  241,  420,  512 

Joseph,  Jr 4 

Joshua 5 

Jeremiah 555 

Oliver 324 

Phineas      26,  44 

Simeon   378 

Simeon,  Jr 859,  fl8 

Thomas 849,516 

Clarke  and  Nightingale 497 

Cleveland,  Ambrose,  declaration  of  ... .  395 

Clinton,  George 287 

Coddington,  John 511,  541,  562 

William 243,  281.  562 

Cod-fishery,  vote  relative  to 218 

Coffin,  Ebenezer 412 

Coggeshall,  Daniel    562,  583 

Joseph 597 

Thomas 4,  12,  26,  457 

Thomas,  Jr 518 

Cole,  Ebenezer 12 

Edward,    petition    and    declaration 

of 375,  382,  552 

to  he  arrested 558 

John,  149,  157,  190,  320,  866,  420,  494, 
528 

deposition  relative  to  the  Gaspee 170 

John,  Jr 516 

Thomas 849,  358 

Collins,  John,  199,  239,  274,  290,438,  510, 
568 

Joshua 324 

William 517 

Colvill,  Benedict   517 

Peleg 508 

Colwell,  John 515 

John,  Jr 314 

Commins,  Daniel 220 

Committee  of  safety,  to  make  estimates 

for  troops    827 

acts  and  proceedings  of 327 

Comstock,  Adam 538,  599 

Gideon    5,  26 

Job... 511 

Congdon,  James,  8d 420,  475 

Joseph 8,  1 1 

John 25,  26,  48,  204,  289 

Congress  at  Philadelphia,  in  1774,  reso- 
lutions for  calling 246 

proceedings  of,  reported 263 

correspondence  with  the  colonies  re- 
lative to 296  to  802 

of  1775,  with    instructions   to   dele- 
gates to 267 

thanks  of  the  General  Assembly  vot- 
ed to  the  delegates  to 869 

pay  voted  to  delegates 870 

report  on  claims  against 411 

address  of  the  colony  to 424 

of  1776,  memorial  to 550 

resolves  of 618 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


631 


Connecticut,  proceedings  of  the  house 
of  representatives,  on  the  Virginia 

resolutions    231 

correspondence  with,  on  the  Boston 

port  bill 294 

Continental   currency,   orders   relative    to, 
370,  374 
Continental  Congi'ess,  see  Congress. 
Convention  of  colonies  in  1774  ;  reso- 
lution for  calling 246 

proceedings  of,  reported 268 

Cooke,  Abraham   457 

David 351,  518 

Hopkins 52,  146,  558 

Isaac 518 

John,  240,  250,  308,  318,  356,  366,  466, 
511,  514,  519 

Nicholas 284,  287,  312,  335,  383 

Governor   404,  510,  549,  581,  596 

letter  to  Capt.  Wallace  of  His  Maj- 
esty's ship  Rose 338 

letters  to  General  Washington,  443,  444, 
446,  448,  449,  501,  503,  504,  505, 
506,  507,  508,  545.  578,  619. 

letter  to  General  Lee 448 

to  the  delegates  in  Congress,  450,  502, 
626 

to  Thomas  Gushing 544 

to  Lord  Howe. 590 

Oliver 26,  44 

Peter 288 

Pardon    359 

Robert 517 

Silas,  Jr 593 

Walter   244,662 

William 4,5,  12 

Governor  Trumbull   621,  622 

Cooke's  Fountain  Society  chartered. . .  .222 

Cooper,  Isaac 475 

JMoses 12 

William 291 

Corlis,  George 285,  463 

Cornell,  Benjamin 591 

Ezekiel 44,  240,  283,  308,  822 

Corey,  Isaac 250 

Philip   51S 

Thomas 206,  441  i 

Council  of  war  appointed 883,  442 

general  appointed 601,  548 

Courtain,  Thomas,  act  to  naturalize. . . . 
Coventry,  militia  in,  to  be  divided,  358,  354 

Cowen,  John 600 

Cozzens,  Charles 201 

Matthew. 593 

Crane,  Benjamin,  declaration  of 895 

John 308,  322,399 

Stephen 288 

Crandall,  Caleb 350,  617 

John 5,  18,  27 

Joseph 469 

Cranston,  Thomas 26,  48,  204,  240 

Crary,  Archibald 194,  324 

Crooke,  Richard  Cunningham 234 

Cruger,  John 280,  288,  298 

Cumberland,   proceedings  of,   relative 
to  the  duty  on  tea 278 


Cundall,  Joseph 44 

Currie,  David 391 

Cushing,  Benjamin,  Jr 36 

Thomas 230,  262,  298,  297,  644 

letter  to  Gov.  Cooke 645 

Cutts,  Samuel    302 

Daniels,  David,  Jr 256 

Dartmouth,  Earl  of,  letter  from 54 

relative  to  the  destruction  of  the  Gaspee, 
103,  186 

letters  to 222,  238 

letters  from 805,  306 

on  the  troubles  in  the  British  colonies,  331 

Davenport,  Samuel 576 

Davis,  Benjamin 808 

Jeremiah 51 7 

John    600 

Joseph 278,  850,  517 

Joshua 815 

Jeremiah 850 

Oliver   360 

William    470,  665 

AVilliam,  Jr 487 

Day,  Samuel 866,  517,  600 

Dayton,  Isaac 5,  45,  206,  241 

Benedict 460,  473 

Deane,  Silas 294,  295 

Timothy 849 

Deblois,  Gilbert 886,  406 

Declaration  of  Independence,  approved 

of  by  the  General  Assembly 581 

proceedings  relative  to    582 

DeLancey,  James    287,  298 

Delaware,    proceedings   of,  relative   to 

the  Virginia  resolutions 285 

letter  from,  relative  to  a  congress  . .  .302 

Demont,  John 369 

Denoyellis,  John 287 

Dennison,  Joseph,  2d 387 

Dennis,  John,  memorial  of,  relative  to 

supplies  furnished  the  enemy 399 

petition  of,  relative  to  the  same 401 

Thomas 399 

Depliance  M 443 

Derby,  Richard,  Jr 230 

Desertion ,  act  to  prevent    358 

Deval,  Jonathan 851 

Jonathan,  Jr 403,  599 

Daniel,  Jr 618 

Dexter,  David,  Jr 323,  486 

David 600 

James   t ,  278 

John,  12,   26,   44,  205,  241,  244,  278, 
876,  420,  475,  511,  562 

John  Singer 324 

Knight 5,  6,  18,  27,  46,  206 

Samuel   600 

Stephen 20 

William   20,44 

Diamond,  Benjamin 437,  599 

Dickens,  Thomas 379 

Dickinson,  William,  affidavits  relative 

to  the  Gaspee 82,  166 

Digges,  Dudley 226,  292 

Dillingham,  WUliam 577 


632 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Dimon,  Benjamin 323  ' 

Disorderly  houses,  act  relative  to 24 

Dodge,  Hezekiah   379 

Don-ance,  George,  Jr 271 ,  323 

George 517  i 

Disaifected  persons,  see  royalists.  i 

Downing,  William 575 

Draper,  Joseph 609 

Di-itt-ways,  act  relative  to    54 

Drown,  Solomon 3,  11,  25,  43,  204 

Drowne,  William    256,  436,  456 

Duckett,  John   235 

Dudingston,  Lieut,,  letter  to  Governor 

Wanton,  relative  to  the  Gaspee 61 

letters  to  Admiral  Montagu 64 

relative   to    the   destruction   of   the 

Gaspee   86,  99 

Dudley,  Charles,  letter  from 92 

Dunbar,  Robert 575 

Duncan,  Martha 458 

Elizabeth 458 

Mary 458 

Dunham,  Daniel 13,  19,  45,  206,  241 

Dunn,  Benjamin 72 

Samuel 4,75 

Durfee,  Benjamin 351,  518 

Job    313 

Oliver 591 

Dyer,  Charles.  . .  .349,  366,  403,  575,  516, 
590 

Christopher 436,  600 

Samuel   25,  43,  204,  312 

Earle,  Catharine   46 

John    442 

Thomas 516 

Patrick 97,  141 

William 284 

East  Greenwich  Congregational  Church 

in,  chartered    271 

sends    relief    to    the  inhabitants  of 
Boston 303 

Eastlick,  Isaac 437 

Easton,  Nicholas,  3,  11,  25,  205,  240,  479, 

511 

Jonathan 577 

Eddy,  Bernard    285 

David    517 

John 350,517 

Richard 205 

Eldred,  John 12,  380 

James   442 

Ellery,  Benjs^in 453 

Christopher   12,  26 

William,  5,  274,  409,  439,  463,  471,474, 
492. 

delegate  to  Congress   53H 

letter  to  Gov.  Cooke 577 

Elliott,  Robert 472,  500,  571,  600 

Ellis,  Jonathan 6,  20,  520 

John   247 

Eslick,  Isaac 391 

Fales,  Nathaniel 15 

Farr,  Thomas,  Jr 232 

Farrish,  Joseph 421,  461,  593 


Fast  day  appointed   309 

Faukner,  Samuel 173 

Fenner,   Arthur,    letter    to    Governor 

Wanton,  relative,  to  the  Gaspee    .  .154 

Arthur,  Jr 284,  600 

Arthur,  son  of  Edward 436,  456 

Edward 241,  244,  308 

James    518 

Jeremiah    511 

John      511 

Richard,  Jr 351,  517 

Field's  Fountain  Society,  charter  of 54 

Field,  John 323 

Nathaniel 324 

Samuel   350 

Thomas 591 

William 313,  351,  518 

Fisher,  Hendrick 288 

Fisheries,  acts  relative  tojin  W^arwick.  .222 

Point  Judith  Pond 222 

Fisk,  John 49,  278,  515 

Peleg    350,  517 

Squire   403,  501,  599 

Flagg,  Ebenezer 347,  357 

Folsom,  Nathaniel 300 

Forrester  John 27,  45,  206,  241,  322 

Fort  George,  relative  to 207,  230,  262 

Foster,  Jedediah 230 

John 260,  501 

John,  Jr 20 

Theodore 562 

Fowler,  Abel    350 

Samuel    290,510,  541 

Thomas 341 

Franklin,  Abel 379 

Asa   247 

Benjamin   307 

George 379 

Nathan 568 

Uriah 568 

Freebody,  Andrew 605 

Thomas,   3,  11,  25,  40,  204,  240,  308, 
438,  510 

Freeborn,  Jonathan H,  25,  313 

Frost,  James 557 

Frothingham,  Nathaniel 20,  359 

Fry,  Benjamin 403,  456 

Joseph    26,  206 

Richard   440,  558 

Gage,  General    27 

Galloway,  Joseph 301 

Richard 234 

Gardner,  Benjamin 373,  441 

Caleb 201,  403,  456,  599 

Christopher    324 

Ezekiel    4,  12,  26,  453 

Ezekiel,  Jr 359 

James 324 

Job 313,466 

John   26,  44,  205,  538 

John,  son  of  John   242 

Nathan  465 

Nathaniel 350 

Nicholas 402 

Sylvester,  5, 13, 313, 356,373,421,511,576 


GENERAL    INDEX. 


633 


Gardner,  Thomas 45,  20G,  203 

Capt.  Thomas 230 

Gaspee,   schooner,   history  of  the  de- 
struction  of,   with   accompanying 

documents 55  to  192 

royal  commission  of  inquiry  relative 

to 108 

instructions  to  commissioners 110 

proceedings  of  the  commission 120 

report   of  the  commissioners  to  the 

King,  relative  to 1 78 

Virginia  resolutions  relative  to 220 

Gavet,  John 349,  516 

George  3d,  proclamation  relative  to  the 

schooner  G  :spee 107 

Georgia,  procedings  of,  and  acts  rela- 
tive to  the  Virginia  resolutions,  233, 
237 

Gerry,  Elbridge 230 

Gerrald,  James 516 

Gibbs,  George 213 

Josiah,  Jr 437,  452,  599 

Samuel    593 

Giddinge,  John 228,  300 

Gitiord,  David 349,  458,  516 

Gilbert,  Thomas 395 

Gladding,  John 180 

Nathaniel 600 

Timothy    20 

Glazier,  John 591 

Glocester  Light  Infiintry  chartered 261 

God<l;ird,  John 57G 

Nicholas 52 

Gorton,  Benjamin    53,  350,  591 

Richard 358 

Samuel    52 

Thomas,   44,    205,    240,  313,  356,  436, 
452,  600 

AViUiam,  Jr. 576 

Gould,  Nathaniel    600 

Governor,  the  office  of,  declared  vacant,  392 

Gracie,  George 421 

Grant,  Gilbert, 600 

Gray,  Edward 26,  205,  240,  250 

Paivlon   515 

Samuel   351 

Thomas    27,  206,  315,  357,  515 

Gi'eat  Britain,  agent  appointed  to 30 

act  punishing  persons  for  holding  a 
traitorous    correspondence,    with , 

etc 388 

act  of  allegiance  to,  repealed 522 

see  British  Parliament. 
act  to  punish  persons  who  shall  ac- 
knowledge the  King  of,  to  be  their 

sovereign 585 

Greene,  Abel 350 

Amos,  Jr 405,  51 7 

Benjamin,  11,  25,  44,  204,240,244,359, 
517 

Christopher    7,  25,  44,  322 

David    480 

Elisha 68 

Elisha,  Jr 22,  31 

Griffin 7,52 

forge  of,  to  be  re-built  by  lottery 212 

VOL.  VII.  80 


Greene,  Isaac -.13 

Jacob,  25,  44,  68,   204,   240,  313,  322, 
441,511 

James 20,  39,  207 

Job 568 

John 7,  52 

John,  son  of  David ...  .245 

Nathaniel 7,  12,  312,  364,  538 

Nathaniel,  Jr 26,  44,  262,  313,  322 

Paul    11 

Philip 4,11 

Perry 68 

Rufus,  Jr.,  deposition  relative  to  the 

Gaspee  afllxir 145 

Sylvester , 558 

Stephen    350,  591 

Thomas,.  .6,  43,  175,  368,  898,  410,  475 

William,  41,  52,  204,  240,  441,453,  511, 

582,  600 

Grenell,  Capt 

Greenjimelk,  James 239 

Gre<'nleaf,  Jonathan 230 

Grimes,  .John 347,  361,  410 

Gully,  Stephen,  deposition  relative  to 

the  Gaspee 133 

Gunpowder,  act  for   encouraging   the 

manufacture  of 428 

Hacker,  Joseph 20 

Haile,  Amos 351,  518 

Coomer  446 

Haliburton,  John 593,  610 

Hall,  Benjamin    4 

Daniel 245 

John,  of  Maryland 235 

Levi 20,399,538 

William 41,  350,  591 

Hamilton,  George    461 

Hamman,  Jonathan    6 

Hammett,  Benjamin 575 

Malachi 359,  403,  599 

Hammon,  Benjamin    235 

Paine 380 

Hancock,  John 230 

president  of  Congress,  letters  to  Gov. 

Cooke     507,619 

resolves  and  letter  from 618,619 

Handy,  Charles 53 

Jl)hn 437,599 

Harding,  Eleazer 20 

Hargill,  Christopher 593 

Harris,  Andrew 360,  453,  511,  601 

Caleb 205,418,479 

Charles 26,  211 

David 3,  11,  25,  43,  204 

Gideon 284 

James   26 

John    351 

John,  Jr 518 

Jonathan    194 

Joseph 358 

Henry  5 

Harrison ,  Benjamin    226 

Harry,  Christopher 46 

Hazard,  George 25,  43 

John   239,309 


634 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Haszard,  Jonathan    363,  511 ,  541  l 

Joseph     25 

Oliver    4 

William    4,  12 

Hazard,  Hassard,  Carder,  240,  313,    ■  G8, 
601 

Geor2;e 3,  25,  43,  204,  240,  601 

Joseph 3,  11,18,  312 

Jonathan    243,  562,  577,  582 

Stephen 4 

Hawkins,  Isaiah 38 

John    356 

Joseph,  Jr 558 

Nathaniel 243,  324 

William 360 

Hawley,  Joseph 230,  293 

Hay  ward,  Ichabod 256 

Heath,  Peleg 403,  456 

William    230,293 

Helme,  James 5,  215 

deposition  relative  to  the  Gaspee 172 

Rouse  J 36,  538 

Henry,  Patrick 189,  226 

Herrenden,  Simeon 517 

Thomas 1 94 

Herring,  Newman 404 

Herrington,  Paul 437 

ITewes,  Joseph 301 ,  453 

Hewitt,  Robert 600 

Hicks,  Samuel    599 

Highways,  act  for  the  repairing  of.  .41,  222 

Hopkins,  Alexander 427 

Hill,  Caleb   52 

James    405 

Samuel 366 

Hillsborough,  Earl  of,  letters  from  .  .10,  24 
to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island,  rela- 
tive to  certain  outrages  at  Newport,  35 

Gov.  Wanton's  letter  to 44 

Hilyard,  David 515 

Hinchman,  John 288 

Hitchcock,  DanU,149,157,  262,308, 322, 399 

Hix.  Weston 3,  11 

Holden,  Anthony 256,  349,  516 

Charles 453,  562 

Charles,  Jr 511 

John    600 

Thomas 31,  313,  324,  558 

William 156 

Holloway,  Joseph ^24 

Daniel 439 

Holmes,  John     26 

Hollingsworth,  Mr .  .551 

Holroyd,  AVilliam 249 

Honeyman,  James 564 

Hoockey,  Daniel  W .470,  605 

Hood,  Samuel 103 

Hooper,  William 301 

Hopkins,  Alexa  nder    591 

Eseck,  26,  45,  205,  376,  386,  391,  396, 
405,  466,  550,  614 

Henry    427 

Isaac 350,  517 

Jeremiah,  lottery  granted  to,  to  aid 

in  making  tire-arms 271 

JohnB ..272 


Hopkins,  Joseph 591 

Rufus.  .49,  205,  240,  243,  283,  346,  417 

Tibbitts 427 

Samuel,  Jr 26 

Stephen.  ...  11,  13,  25,  43,  204,  240,  313 

report  on  Narragansett  Indians 18 

chief  justice 206,  241,  314 

delegate  to  the  colonial  convention  in 

1774 246,255 

makes  report  of  proceedings 263 

expenses  as  delegate  to  be  paid 265 

delegate    to    Congress    ot    the   10th 

May,  1775 267 

instructions  to 267,  526 

thanks  of  Assembly,  to 370 

pay  voted  to,  as  delegate 372 

Gov.  Cooke's  letter  to 450,  502 

letters  to  Gov.  Cooke 577 

Capt.  Stephen 599 

Zebedee 26 

Zebedee,  Jr 243,  562 

Hoppin,  Benjamin 436,  600 

Hopkinton,  certain  highways  in,  to  be 

altered  '. 193 

Horesmanden,  Daniel,  commissioner  on 

the  Gaspee  atfair 108, 123 

report  of 1 82 

letters  to  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth  182,  li-6 
letter  to  Gov.  Tryon 188 

Hostilities  with  the  British,  committee 

to  prepare  an  account  of 407 

Howard,  Martin  Jr 196 

report  of  committee  on  damages  to, 

in  Newport  riot    216 

William 517 

Howe,Lord,letter&  proclamation  from,  579 
answer  of  Gov.  Cooke  to 590 

Howland,  Isaac 380,  466 

John 191,308,380 

John,  Jr 194 

Rowland's  Ferry,  battery  to  be  erected  at. 440 

Hoxie,  Benjamin,  Jr 44 

Gideon 4,  12,  362,  403 

.John 324,  350,  575 

Joseph 308,  313,601 

Peleg 404,600 

Stephen 26 

Hudson,  Stukeley 359 

Hull,  Benjamin 359 

Edward   240,  453,  464 

Humphrey,  Charles 301 

Josiah 26,  50,  279 

Hunter,  William 593,  602 

Hutchinson,  Go'v.  Thomas,  letter  from,  37, 

102, 103 

estates  taken  jDOSsession  of 376 

Hyers,  John    466 

Ingraham,  Jeremiah 351,  518 

Joshua 462,  577 

Inhabitants  in  the  colony,  in  1774,  re- 
port on 253,  299 

Inman,  Ralph 207,  387 

Intestate  estates,  act  relative  to 24 

Irish,  George 373,  438,  472,  514 

Isaacs,  Jacpb 608 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


635 


J<ames,  Thomas 518 

Jaraulcl,  James    349 

Jauncey,  James 287,  298 

Jetferson,  Thomas 189,  22G 

Jenekes,  Daniel 3,  11,  25 

Capt.  Eleazer 351,  519 

John,  43,  204,  240,  313,  386,  441,  467, 
496,  510 

Jonathan 562 

Jonathan,  Jr 45,  512 

Joseph 404,  479 

Stephen 46,  241 

Thomas 366,517 

Jepson,  John.  .44,  204,  240,  312,  473,  601 

Jillson,  Stephen 457 

Johnson,  Augustus,  claims  of,  fov  dam- 
ages by  Newport  riot 197,  200,  593 

renort  of  committee  on    218 

Allen 313,  350,  356,  359,  591 

Edmund 324 

Isaac    4 

John,  relative  to  the  Gaspee 79 

Samuel 238,  555 

Samuel,  of  North  Carolina 301 

William 194 

Johnston,  militia  companies  in,  to  be 

divided 339 

Jones,  William    436,  600 

Kasson,  Archibald 315,  359j  515 

Keech,  Amos,  Jr 199 

Stephen 603 

Keeler,  Robert 118,  166 

Keene,  Charles 20,  207 

Kelton,  John    410 

Kentish  Guards  chartei-ed 260 

officers  of 558 

Kimball,  Asa 356,  436,  613 

Stephen 323,  350 

King,  John,  Jr.  . , 351 

Kingstown  Reds  chartered 383 

oflBcers  of 537 

Kinnicutt,  Daniel 34,  366,  519 

Kinsey,  James 288 

Kissam,  Daniel 287 

Kiiiyon,  Joseph 366,  517 

Phineas 575 

Samuel , 44,  SVS 

Knight,  Edward 351 ,  518 

Jonathan,  Jr 517 

Joseph 314,  516 

Knowles,  Hazard 381 

Knox,  Colonel 508 

Ladd,  William 322 

Langley,  Lee    575 

Larcbar,  John,  Jr 500 

Larkin,  John 479,  512 

Lasell,  John 367 

Lapham  Abner 49 

Lawton,  Jeremiah 4 

Lawrence,  David 285,  516 

Joseph 6,418 

Lawton,  John 428 

Robert 587 

Lechmere,  Anthony 593 


I  Lechmere,  Nicholas 569 

1  Lee,  Arthur 307 

I      General  Charles  ....   428,  444,  446,  448 

Richard  Henry 189,  226 

[  Leonard,  Daniel 230 

Lewis,  Beriah 359,  404,  517 

Elijah    324 

Richard    350,517 

Thomas 46 

Lillibridge,  Robert,  Jr 99 

Thomas 277 

Lindsay,  Capt.  Thomas 69 

Linzee,  Capt 94,  98 

Lippitt,    Christopher,   205,  271,  314,  432, 
474,  538,  599 

letter  to  Gov.  Cooke 595 

John 53 

William 516 

Lisburne 165 

Little,  Fobes,  Jr 518 

Littlefield,  Caleb 277 

John 204,  210,  379 

Henry   377 

Nathaniel    379 

Nathaniel,  Jr 380 

William 349,  516 

Loyd,  Edward    235 

Lock  wood,  Abraham 349 

Amos 576 

Lopez,  Aaron 213,  462 

Lottery   granted    to   build   a  meeting 

house  for  Baptists  in  Cranston 21 

to  pave  Main  street,  Providence 36 

to  repair  road  in  Smithfield 38 

to  build  a  steeple  to   the   Episcopal 

church  in  Providence    39 

to  build  parsonage  for  Presbyterian 

church  in  Providence    39 

to  pave  King  street,  in  Newport 48 

to  repair  bridges  in  Smithfield 49 

to    repair    Congregational     meeting 

house,  in  Barrington 49 

to  repair  Baptist  meeting  house,  in 

East  Greenwich 52 

to  build  wharf  in  Warwick  harbor. . .  .53 

to  pave  Pelham  street,  Newport 53 

to  build  Presbyterian  church,  in  East 

Greenwich 193 

to  build  bridge  in  Glocester 194 

to  finish  meeting  house,  in  Johnston.  .195 
to    pay   for   steeple    and   clock    for 

King's  church,  Providence 195 

to   repair  road    from    Uxbridge    to 

Providence   199 

to    repair    Presbyterian   church,  in 

Providence   206 

to  build  Baptist  church,  in  Coventry,  220 
to  Abial  Brown,  to  buy  new  furniture 

for  his  house 242 

to  build  school  house  in  East  Green- 
wich    242,  245 

to  aid  in  re-building  the  forge  of  the 

Greenes,  in  Coventry 242 

to  build  parsonage  house  for  Baptist 

church,  Pawtuxet   2 18 

to  Baptist  church,  in  Providence 248 


636 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Lottery  granted,  to  Gideon  Almy,  to 
re-iniburse  him  for  the  loss  of  his 

sloop  Silly 250 

to  repair  dam  on  Pawtuxet  river '256 

to  re-imbarse  Nathaniel  Stoddard  for 

his  loss  of  the  Sally 2G3 

to  Jeremiah  Hopkins,  to  aid  him  in 

making  tire-arms 271 

Lovett,  James 6,  SO,  1 75 

Low,  Anthony 576 

John,  204,  240,  242,  243,  313.  480,  515, 
605 
Lowndes.  Raw.,  letter  from,  relative  to 

the  Virginia  resolutions 232 

Luther,  Martin    452 

Lyndon,  Josiah 45,  241,  453,  512 

Samuel,  Jr 19 

Macomber,  Jonathan 350,  517 

Ebenezer 599 

Malbone,  Francis 453 

John    199,  314,  450 

Man,  Benjamin 11,  25,  40,  204,  281 

Manchester,  Christopher  . . .  .351,  403,  599 

Gilbert 323 

Joseph 571 

John 349,516 

Mathew 12 

Philip    518 

Manning,  Joseph 20 

Manton,  Daniel    26 

Marchant,  Henry,  appointed  agent  to 

Great  Britain 29,  197 

attorney  general,  45,  206,  241,  376,  426, 
471,  512 

Martin,  John    381 

Luther 360 

Nathaniel,  27,  45,  205,  241,  453,  490, 
514 

Philip    600 

Simeon   436,600 

Martindale,  Capt 425 

Sion  S23 

Marvin,  Richard 501 

Maryland,  letter  from  the  speaker  of 

the  house  of  representatives  of 237 

Mason,  Aaron 285 

Benjamin 207 

Mary 014 

Mason,  Noah   6 

Massachusetts,  proceedings  and  reso- 
lutions, relative  to  the  Virginia 
resolutions,  and  the  encroachments 

of  Great  Britain 229 

correspondence  with,    in  relation  to 

Parliamentary  acts 293 

letters  and  resolutions  from,  relative 

to  a  continental  congress 296 

Matthews,  Caleb  bOO 

Mathewson,  Abel,  2d 350 

Daniel 350,  517 

John. .240,  247,  308,  313,  417,  441, 478 

John,  Jr 350,  359 

Josiah 350,  591 

Jonathan 427 

Richard 394,  453 


Matteson,  William 6 

Mawdfley,  John 274,  453,  460 

M,iwne3',  John ; 72 

statement  relative  to  the  destruction 

of  the  Gaspee 74 

Maxson,  David 308 

Jesse 5,211,515 

Jonathan 404,  518 

Peter   308 

May,  Peter 151 

Mayes,  Sumuel 350,  359,  517 

McCann,  Daniel 316 

McKeac.  Thomas    236,  302 

M'Kinley,  John 236,  302 

Mehelm,  John .288 

Melville,  David 600 

Metcalf,  Nathaniel    20,  207 

Mias,  Nicholas 591 

-Miifflin,  Thomas 301 

Military  defences,  report  of  committee 

on 492 

Military  companies,   petitions  for,  re- 
ferred to  a  select  committee 257 

Militia,    act   fur  appointing    a   major 

general 269 

act  to  regulate    269 

quota  of,  for  the  several  colonies 577 

Miller,  Nathan,  44,  205,  2i0,  368,  403,  440, 
571 

William 562 

WMlliam  Turner 244,  322 

Millman,  Bryant 437 

Milward,  Stephen 349 

Squire 516 

Mitchell,  Jeremiah 379 

John 379 

Jonathan 379 

Joseph 379 

Thomas 379 

Moffiitt,  Dr.  Thomas 196,  200 

report  of  committee  on  his  claims  for 

damage  by  riot  in  Newport 200 

estate  of,  taken  possession  of. . .  .377,  556 

Moore,  Charles 301 

Montagu,    Admiral,   letters    to,    from 

Gov.  Wanton    47,  62 

letters  to  Gov.  Wanton  relative  to  the 
destruction  of  the  Gaspee,  62,  82,  88, 
93,101,  113,  118 
letters  to  Lord  Hillsborough  relative 

to  do 89,  94 

letter  to  the  Gaspee  commissioners,  130, 
140,  143,  15  ,  165, 167 

Morin,  Joseph 476 

Morton,  John 301 

Moss,  Philip 469,  540 

Mott,  Daniel 380 

John 379 

Mowry,  Elisha 314 

Elisha,  Jr 356,515 

Daniel,  Jr.,  4, 12,26,205,243,313,511,562 

John 404 

Mumford,  A 303 

Benjamin 368 

Gideon 194,  30»,  368,  398,  410,  464 

Nathaniel 199,  366,  398,  410,  540 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


637 


Mumford,  Paul 370 

Peter 352 

Thoma-^.  . '. 418 

Stephen 519 

Muuro,  Hezekiah 351,517 

Naval  matters,  "vessels  to  be  charterer!,  2ii), 
365,  383,  405 

pay  of  officers  fixed 347 

officers  apppointed  for  service 347 

resolution    urging  on    Congress   the 

construction  of  a  fleet 360 

re-c?.pture  of  the  sloop  Polly 391 

brig  commanded  by  Capt.  Martindale 

taken 425 

acts   for  fitting  out   armed  vessels,  453, 

481,   590,   535,  578,   582,   58b,   588, 
603 
see  also  row  galleys. 
Narragiinsett  Indians,  report   of    Ste- 
phen Hopkins  on    17 

certain  lands  of  Ninegret's  to  be  sold  .  .46 
petition  from,  relative  to  their  debts 

and  lands 214 

resolution  relative  to  lands  of 215 

Nash,  Joseph 258 

Negroes,  act  to  prevent  the  importation 

of,  in  the  colony 251 

Negus,  John 458 

New   Hampshire,    resolutions    relative 

to    the    encroachments    of   Great 

Britain 228 

proceedings    relative  to    Continental 

Congress '299,  30'3 

New  Jersey,  letter  from  the  committee 

of  correspondence  of 289 

Newman,  Augustus,  naturalized 271 

Newport,  act  relative  to  negro  servants 

and  slaves  in 24 

Second    Congregational  church   in, 

chartered 33,  41 

letter  from  Lord  Hillsborough,  rela- 
tive to  outrages  at 35 

new  jail  to  be  built  in 40,  46 

lottery    granted    for    paving    King 

street  in 48 

lottery  granted  to  erect  new  hospital 

at  Coaster's  Island 199 

Light  Infantry  chartered    260 

First  Congregational  church  in,  chai-- 

tered 271 

proceedings  of,  relative  to   the   duty 

on  tea,  imposed  by  Parliament  . . .  .274 
proceedmgs   of,  on  the  Boston  port 

bill 281 

correspondence  of  committee  on  Bos- 
ton port  bill 290,  291 

permitted   to   furnish   British   ships 

with  provisions 381 

prices  of  cartage  and  wharfage  in,  to 

be  fixed  by  a  committee 383 

watch  to  be  raised  for 469 

Light  Infantry,  officers  of 510 

officers  of  militia  in  (1776) 575 

New  Shoreham,  petition  from,  for  aid 

to  make  a  harbor 208 


New   Shoreham,   report   of   committee 

relative  to 212 

proceedings  of,  relative  to  the  duty 

imposed  on  tea,  by  Parliament. . .  .277 

cattle  and  sheep   to  be  brought  off,  362, 

372, 455 

account  of  stock  taken  from 379 

resolutions  relative  to .^.63 

News  Neck    569 

New  York,  proceedings  of  the  colony  of, 
on  the  encroachments  of  Parlia- 
ment     287 

letter  from  the  speaker  of,  on  do 288 

committee  of  correspondence  to  com- 
mittee of  Connecticut 297 

Newman,  Augustus 469 

Newton,  John 576 

Nichol,  John 569 

Nicholas,  Robert  Carter 226,  292 

Nichols,  David,  Jr 277 

Jonathan ,  Jr ; 517 

William    12,  2u,  44,  205,  313 

Nightingale,   Joseph,    20,    175,    2i;2,    316, 
3h3,  538 

S;imuel 20,  39,  453 

Samuel,  Jr 207 

Niles,  James 46 

Paul    ' 5,  12 

Samuel 46 

Silas 377,489,556 

Ninegret,  Thomas 9,  23,  202 

North  Carolini,  acts   and  proceedings 

of,  on  the  Virginia  resolutions  . . .  .238 

letter  from 301 

North   Providence,    authorized    to   tax 

certain  lands 23 

North  Providence  Rangers  chartered. .  .268 

officers  of 55"^ 

Northup,  John,  4,    12,  26,  44,    205,  313, 

3-i2,    357,   441,   488,   511,  519,  520, 

566.  # 

Noyes,  Joseph,  315,  408,  458,  511,   514, 

641 

Oliver,  Andrew,  estates  of,  taken  pos- 
session of 376 

Peter .,..108,  123 

Oiney,  Christopher 323,  538 

Charles    457 

Charles,  Jr 351 

Coggeshall 323 

Emor    314,  351,  519 

Esek 609 

Jeremiah 271 ,  323 

Job 5,  351,  360 

Joseph 12,  199,  314,479 

Samuel 401,  519 

Stephen 323 

Simeon  H 74 

Thomas 5,  205,  241,  314,  453,  512 

Thomas,  Jr 558 

Oneida  Indians  to  be  written  to 356 

Ormsbee,  Ezra 866,  flS 

.John 851 

Otis,  Nathaniel 35'' 

Overing,  John  Henry 608 


'638 


GENERAL    INDEX. 


Owen,  Daniel Sl'^,  453,  Gil  j 

Solomon '205  | 

Thomas   '1  j 

Paca,  William 235 

Packard,  Rhodes 6i)0 

Packwood,  Captain    59 

Piige,  Ambrose,   175,   281,   312,  366,  3U2. 
415,  467 

Benjamin 72,  403,  41U,  438 

Simeon 510 

Paine,  Arnold 308,  453 

John 379 

Robert  Treat 2;)7 

Stephen 350,  437,  517 

Palmer,  Philip 59!) 

Walter 403,  599 

Paper  money,  acts  relative  to,  and  for 

the  issuing  of.  24,  320,  353,  389,  418, 

419,  474,  533,  534,  586,  611 

act  making  it  a  legal  teii.ler  (1776) .  .584 

act  to  prevent  the  depreciation  of. . .  .591 

Parker,  James    319,  517,  600 

Elisha   599 

William 228 

Parliament,  see  British  Parliament. 

Pawtujket  river,  bridge  over 38 

Pawtucket  bridge,  appiopriation  for  ...  .46 
Pawtucket  Falls,   allowing  rocks  to  be 

blown  up  at 222,  248 

Pawtuxet,  petition  for  a  new  town  of. . .  .31 

Pawtuxet  river,  fish  ways  in 7 

bridge  on  the,  re-budt 31 

Pawtu  vet  Rangers  chartered 260 

Pearce,  Benoni 3,  260 

George 12,  26,  44,  515 

Jeremiah 456 

Job    103 

John 599 

Lorins 600 

Nathfiliel   511 

Preserved    205,  240,  303,  393 

Samuel,  Jr 366 

Stephen 600 

William 12,  26,  240,  303 

Pease,  Simon 53,  199,  400 

Peck,  Jonathan    472 

Loring 436 

Peckham,  Barber 350,  517,  600 

Henry 565 

John    26 

Ruth 576 

Thomas 12,  366,  518 

William 404 

Pendleton,  Ephraim 440,  516 

Edmund 226,  546 

Joseph 349,  363,  401,  516 

Joshua 349,  404,  516 

John 404,  440 

William 575 

Pennsylvania,  acts  and  proceedings  on 

the  Virginia  resolutions 234 

proceedings  of,  relative   to  a  conti- 
nental congress    300 

Perry,  Edward 5,  26,  44,  277 

Joseph 357 


Perry,  Simeon 601 

Stephen : 205 

Peters,  Andrew 256 

Phetteplace,  Ezekiel    850,  517 

Philbrook,  Elias 351,  359 

Phillips,  Frederick 287 

Peter,  44,  2i!5,  240,  243,  312,  322,  510, 
520,  537 

Samuel,  Jr 437,  599 

Thomas 324 

AViUiam 230 

Phillipse,  Fred'k 298 

Pierce,  Benjamin 436 

George,   244,   313,   315,  356,  359,  3  3, 
479,  511 

Giles 379 

Isaac    380 

Jonathan 418 

Job     493 

Nicholas    240 

Preserved 4,  12 

William 4,  12,243 

Pickering,  John 228 

John,  Jr 300 

Pilots  forbidden  to  pilot  any  but  colo- 
nial vessels   364 

Pitcher,  Benjamin 258 

Pitman,  John 576 

Plainfield  road  to  be  re-surveyed 211 

report  of  committee  on 335 

Pojack  I'oint 492 

Post  offices  to  be  established 352 

rates  of  postage -'52 

Potter,  Anthony 351,  51S 

Caleb 12,517 

Christopher 511,  562 

James 453,  466 

John 240,313,478 

Josiah 351,  518 

Joseph 351,  518 

Robert 242,  349 

Samuel  517,  591 

Samuel,  Jr 404 

Simeon,  4,  6.  13,  27,  44,  205,  240,  313, 
491,  510 

Smiting 404,  518 

Stephen 4,  Pi,  356 

Thomas    240,  244,  538 

AVilliam,  son  of  Ichabod 436 

William,  son  of  John 436 

William,  4,   26,  239,  245,  308,  323,  350, 
360,  465,  510,  520 

William  (Scituate) 591 

protests  against  the  raising  of  troops,  591 

explanation  of  his  protest 348 

explanation  accepted,  and  he  is  re- 
instated  349 

William,  son  of  Ichabod 324 

Powder,  report  of  the  committee  to  ap- 
portion   309,  542 

Power,  Nicholas 249,  284,  370,  605 

Prenet,  Mons 443 

Prentice,  Ichabod    456,  600 

Prescott,  James 230 

Price,  Robert  Friend 288 

Prisoners  of  war 520 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


V    639 


Privateers,  act  for  fitting  out 481,  535 

see  naval  matters. 
Providence,   briclv   scliool  house   to  be 

built  in 6 

Beneficent  Congregational  Society  in, 

charter  of 20 

Episcopal   (now   St.  John's)  church 

in,  lottery  to  build  a  steeple  to,  39,  195 
King's  (now  St.  John's)   church  in, 

incorporated 198 

Presbyterian  church  in,  lottery  to  alter 

and  repair 206 

Light  lutiintry  chartered 2-i7 

ofHcers  of 247 

Baptist  church  in,  lottery  gi-auted  to,  248 

Grenadier  Company  chartered 260 

Train  of  Artillery  chartered 263 

Providence  Fusileers  cliartered 2f)4 

Cliaritable  Baptist  society  chartered.  .271 

Artillery  Company  chartered 271 

Providence  Gazette,  extracts  from,  rela- 
tive to  the  Gaspue    Ill,  113 

proceedings  of  town  meeting,  relative 
to  the  tax  on  tea,  etc.,  by  Parlia- 
ment   .' 272 

proceedings  of,  relative  to  the  Boston 

portbiii 280,282 

proceedings  of,  relative  to  a  riot 2^2 

proceedings  of  committee  of  corres- 
pondence of 284,  285 

report  of  committee  of  inspection  ....  285 
United  Company  of  the  Train  of  Ar- 
tillery chartered 309 

Captain  General's  Cavaliers  char- 
tered   383 

Providence  United  Artillery,  officers 

of '. 399 

Episcopal  church,  lands  belonging  to, 

exchanged 523 

Providence  Cadets,  officers  of 538 

Providence  Artillery  Company  offi- 
cers of  '.537 

Prudence  Island,  cattle  to  be  removed 

from 373 

PuUen,  William 000 

Putnam,  Colonel 492 

Quacompaug  Pond 403 

Quansett 493 

Ramsdale,  Samuel 146 

Pumdall,  Job 4,  283,  349,  516 

Jonathan 3,  25,  43,  204,239,510 

John 324 

Matbew 351,518 

Nehemiah 436 

Randolph,  Peyton 189,  292 

letter  from,  with  Virginia  resolutions, 225 

Rapaljo,  John 287,  298 

Rathbun,  Samuel    ,. .  349,  379 

8amuel,  Jr 516 

AV alter 240,  277,  379 

Rawson,  Wilson 437 

William 600 

Razey,  Joseph,  Jr 518 

Read,  Geo.,  of  I*elawtne 236,  302 


Read,  John 204,  210,  383 

Joseph 600 

Jieubeu 517 

William    3,  11,  25 

Real  estates  of  disaffected  persons  let 

out 556 

Ralph,  Nathan    350,  517 

Remington,  Gershom 381 

Reynolds,  Elisha 22 

Henry    575 

John 242,  324 

Joseph,  Jr 600 

'i-!amuel 350 

William 22,  33,  349 

Zacheus ...  205 

Rhode    Island   college,   petition    from, 

relative  to  loan 607 

Rhoades,  Samuel 801 

James,   12,  25,    44,  100,  204,  356,  362, 
363 

Joseph    51,  240,  437 

Nehemiah    248 

Robert   243 

Sylvester 520 

William 347,  516 

Rice,  Henry.  .  .5,  13,  27,  45,  206,  2J1,  512 

John 4,  313 

Thomas 4 

Thomas,  son  of  Thomas 349,  359,  516 

Richmond,  proceedings  of  the  town  of, 

on  the  duty  imposed  on  tea    276 

militia  company  in,  to  be  divided.  . .  .387 

Richmond,  Barzillai. 150 

Ebenezer 487 

David    323,  520 

Gilbert 436,  600 

Peres 359,  479 

William,  25,  204,  239,  322,  408,   456, 

599 

William,  .Jr 3,  11,  43 

Riggs,  Abimeleck    500,  599 

Robinson,-  Elihu 20,  399 

Matthew    23 

Rowland 12,  26,  43,  204,  465,  556 

Sylvester  . , 9,  26,  205,  2-10,  601 

Thomas 236,  302 

Hodman,  Daniel 205,  562,  601 

Samuel 12 

Rodney,  Cesar 236,  302 

Rogers,  John   403,  437 

Thomas    12 

Rome,  George,  his  property  taken  pos- 
session of,  376,  394,  421,  499,    520, 
549 

Rose,  Ezekiel 880 

John 41,  205 

Tormut    380 

Rose  man  of  war 306 

Ross,  David 461 

George 301 

Isaac 350,  5 1 7 

William 194 

Row  gallies  to  be  built 367,  392 

enlistments  for 466,  410 

officers  of 412,  415 

Roy,  AVilliam 517 


640 


GENERAL    INDEX. 


Royalists,  pi-operty  and  estates  of,  taken 

possession  of 370,  o8u,  3^7,  J02 

transfers  of  estates  by  them,  declared 

invalid 394 

removed    593,  597 

resolutions  relative  to.  .569,  603,  610,  611 

Russell,  Jonathan 20,  352,  510 

Joseph 285 

William 36,  248,  3G4,  538 

Sabin ,  James 69 

letter  relative  to  the  Gaspee 154 

Thomas 577 

Sachem,  Esther    9 

petition  of 15 

Thomas - 15 

Salt  to  be  imported 441 

bounty  allowed  on    541 

repoi't  of  committee  on 553 

division  of,  to  towns 564,  616 

Sampson,  Alexander 20 

Sands,  Edward 379 

Edward,  Jr 277,  562 

John,  204,  210,  243,  277,  349,  356,  379, 
516,  591 

.Joshua   277,  379,  455 

Ray 352,  404,  517,  590,  609 

Sandwich,  Earl 165 

Saunders,  Edward 4 

Stephen 240,  516 

Stephen,  Jr 349 

Sayer,  Joshua 437,  600 

Sayles,  David 437 

John 376 

John,  Jr 239,  312,  510 

Sylvanus 199 

Scallion,  Mathew 598 

Schuyler,  General  P 509 

letter  to  Gov.  Cooke 547 

Scituate  Hunters  chartered 261 

Scituate,  proceedings   of  the  town  of, 

relative  to  the  Boston  port  bill,  etc.  283 
military  companies  in,  to  be  divid- 
ed  337,  372 

Seabury,  Benjamin 323,  347 

Seagar,  Samuel 349,  511,  516,  541,  590 

Seaman,  Benjamin 287 

Zebuhm 287 

Martin 516,  562 

Sarles,  David   600 

Sears,    George,  462,  463,    510,    514,   544, 
562,  582 

Sewall,  Samuel 377,  402,  536 

Searle,  James 194 

Nathaniel,  Jr 4,  12 

Richard 5,  205,  31 3,  356 

Sessions,  Darius,  3,  11,   20,  43,    146,  204, 
239,  244,  312 
letters  to  Gov.  Wanton,   relative   to 

the  Gaspee 61,  78,  80,  151 

deposition  of Vi8,  1 74 

protests  against  the  raising  of  troops,  311 
memorial,  explaining  his  protest  . . .  .398 

Shattuck,  John    46 

Shaw,  Sylvanus. . .' 323 

Sheape,  Jacob 228 


Shearman,  Eber 350,  575 

John 240,243 

Benjamin 576 

Sheffield,  Benjamin 379 

Ezekiel 37^» 

George 359,  362,  363 

Thomas 350,  517,  562 

Sheldon,  Caleb 520 

Christopher 248 

James    520 

Roger 457 

Stephen 263,  51 7 

Stephen,  Jr 283 

Shepperdson,  Nathaniel 205,  241 

Sherburne,  Benjamin 5 

John 228 

Sherwood,  Joseph 27 

Shippee,  Thomas  511 

Shoemaker,  Jacob 280 

Silliman,  Ebenezer 231 

Simpson,  .John 387 

Jonathan 387 

William  Brooks 32 

Simmons,  George 351,  518 

Gideon 518 

Ephraim    518 

Edward 576 

Jonathan 323,  575 

Peleg,  Jr 5.19 

Slack,  IJenjamin 4,  283,  431 

Slaves,  see  negroes. 

Slocura,  Ebeuezfr 351,  518,  591 

Peleg 436 

Samuel 44,  205 

Small  pox,  act  permitting  the  inocula- 
tion of 559 

hospitals  for 608 

Smith,  Calvin 256 

Christopher 358 

Edmund  A 456,  599 

Isaac 44,  205,  2M 

Jaaies 322,  366,  437,  517 

Job 3,175 

Jesse    517 

John 6,  39,  204,  240,  441,  510 

Jonathan 323 

Martin 520 

Nehemiah 517 

Oziel 350,  517 

Richard,  of  New  Jersey 288 

Richard    5,  244,  373,  512,  6ii5 

Rufus    4,  12 

Royzel ^03,599 

Simon 350,  577 

Stephen    351,  518,  600 

Turpin 72 

AVilliam 528 

Smithfield  and  Cumberland  Rangers  . .  .519 

Smythe.  Frederick 109.  123 

Snow,  Joseph,  Jr 402 

James 516 

Soldiers,  see  troops. 

South  Carolina,  resolution   of,  relative 

to  the  resolutions  of  Virginia 232 

South   Kingstown,    militia    companies 
in,  to  be  divided 378 


GENERAL    INDEX. 


641 


Soiithwick,  Samuel 576 

William 358 

Spalding,  Edward 437,  488 

Spencer,  Ebenezer 350,  591 

Job     243 

Michael 350,  437,  591 

Spink,  Eldred 442 

Spooner,  Charles 19,  540 

Samuel 540 

AVing ■ 575 

Sprajue,  Daniel,  Jr 351,  518 

Ebenezer 314,  363 

Reuben 358 

Springer,  Joseph 599 

Spurr,  John 323 

Staflbrd,  Daniel   517 

Stutely 516 

Stukely,  Jr 349 

Stanton,  Augustus 359,  403,  436 

Enoch 457 

Joseph 12,  479 

Joseph,  Jr 356,  441,  511,  519,  590 

Robert 12,  44,  205,  241,  244 

Robert,  Jr 200 

Staples,  Nathaniel 279 

Steeve,  Richard 511 

Stelle,  Thomas  Gordon , . .  53 

Benjamin 599 

Sterry,  Cyprian 323 

Stevens,  Samuel 599 

Stewart,  Gilbert 461 

Elizabeth 461 

Stillman,  Joseph 359 

Still  well,  Daniel 399,  538 

Sterling,  Henry   20 

Stoddard,  Nathaniel j  lottery  granted,  to 
re-imburse  him  for  tlie  loss  of  his 

part  of  the  sloop  Sally 264 

Robert 53 

Stone,  Joseph 22 

Streeter,  George 517,  600 

Sullivan,  John 300 

General 548 

Suuderlin,  Daniel 4 

Swan,  Capt.  of  Bristol,  poem  on   the 

Gas) :ee  affair 191 

Sweet,  George 350 

George,  Jr 575 

Martha    512 

Nehemiah    20 

Sylvester 25,  41,  512,  516 

Thomas   35H 

William 427 

Sweeting,  Job 285,  453 

Talbot,  Silas 358 

Tallman,  Benjamin 403,  599 

Tanner,  Abel 5,  12,  26,  44,  313,  356 

Taxes,  acts  for  the  levying  of  35,54,212,258 

Taylor,  Edward 288 

Job 4 

Philip .....26,  453 

Robert 899,  538 

William 349,  366,  516 

Tazewell,  John 547 

Teffi,  Jeremiah 518 

VOL.  VII.  81 


Tcfft,  Oliver    

1      Samuel 

I      Thomas 

i      William  

Tenant,  George 

!  Test  of  allegiance 

i      required  to  be  taken  before  voting  . . . 

!  Tew,  George 26, 

I      James,  Jr 436^ 

Paul 5,  13,  27,  206,  241, 

Thomas    

Thayer,  Increase 

Simeon 

William 

Thomas,  Alexander    436, 

General 

Samuel,  Jr 

Charles 

Thompson,  David 

Ebenezer 6,  39,  327,  364,  515, 

Elias - 

I      Samuel,  Jr 

Thomas  

Thornton,  Richard 

Thomas   

Thurber,  Benjamin 

Edwai'd  

Martin 

Thurston ,  Edward 

Edward,  Jr 

report  on  the  enumeration  of  the  in- 
habitants of  the  colony 

George,  Jr 351 , 

John 

Peleg 

Samuel 

Tilghman,  M:ithew   235, 

Tillinghast,  Benj 4, 

Charles 359, 

Daniel 248,  308,  322,  416,  519, 

Joseph 

Nicholas  Paris 

Nicholas 

Pardon 453, 

Samuel 

Thomas 44,205,511, 

Tompkins,  Samuel    95,  455, 

Topham,  John 

Toppan,  Chi'istopher 228, 

Tories,  see  royalists. 

Tourtellot,  Abraham 324, 

Tower,  Benjamin 21 

Levi 323,  351, 

Townsend,  Solomon,  Jr 

Trade,  act  to  regulate 

Trask,  Ebenezer 

Treby,  Wilkins 

Tripp,  Isaac,  Jr 

Stephen 

William 

Ti'oop,  Amos 

Thomas 

William     

Troops,  order  to  enlist  fifteen  hundred. . 

protest  of  Governor  Wanton  against 
the  vote 


358 
511 
404 
479 
323 
567 
589 
380 
599 
512 
323 
256 
323 
146 
600 
547 
476 
454 
236 
538 
363 
516 
349 
351 
324 
248 
248 
516 
582 
243 

251 
518 
511 
..3 
.95 
238 
240 
576 
538 
.74 
431 
260 
566 
308 
515 
596 
323 
300 


450 
,38 
358 
•i80 
571 
517 
576 
242 
323 
575 
.20 
.15 
600 
310 

310 


642 


GENERAL    INDEX. 


Troops,  act  for  embodying  fifteen  hun- 

di'ed  men 317 

votes  relative  to .327,  410,  415,  432 

vote  regulating  pay  of 328 

act  for  enlisting  minute  men 358 

act  fur  enlisting  live  huudred  men  . . .  384 

ordered  to  Long  Island (i06 

Truman,  Thomas 247,  576 

Trumbull,  Jonathan,  Governor  of  Con- 
necticut, letters  to  Gov.  Cooke,  G20,  621 

Tucker,  Samuel    288 

Tuckey,  Joseph 46 

Turner  Peter 575 

Turtellot,  Abraham 600 

Two  Follies,  sloop,  taken  by  the  Span- 
iards, proceedings  relative  to 259  1 

report  of  committee  on '-260 

Tyler,  Moses 270  ! 

Isaic    476 

•\Villiam 437 

Underwood,  Benj.,  243,  356,  380,  470,  511, 

601 

Joseph 380 

Updike,  John 6,  196  ; 

Usher,  Hezekiah 431 

Vail,  Edward   301 

Varnum,  James  Mitchell 257,  322 

Vars.  John 457,  518,  591 

Vaughan,  Benjamin 13,  27,  45,  206 

Caleb 205,240, 

Daniel    148* 

Jonathan 45,  206,  242,  359  j 

Joshua 576 

Joshua,  Jr 476 

Vernon,  Samuel 412 

Thomas  56^,  603  ' 

William 213,  290,  383,  412  ' 

Vessels  ordered  to  be  chartered. . .  .346,  365  I 

Viall,  Samuel 410,  476 

Virginia,  passes  resolutions  relative  to  ' 
the  royal  commission  on  the  Gaspee,  189 
proceedings  and  resolutions  of  house  , 
of  burgesses,    relative  to  the  en- 
croachments of  Great  Britain 226  \ 

proceedings   of,  and   correspondence  | 

with,  the  colonies,  relative  to  the 

Virginia  resolutions 227  to  239 

correspondence  with 292  } 

proceedings  of  convention  of,  relative  j 

to  declaration  of  independence  ....  546  ] 

Waite,  John 359 

Yelverton 359,  415 

Waldron,  John 453 

Wales,  Major    443 

Wallac-e,  Capt.  of  His   Majesty's   ship 

Rose,  letter  to  Admiral  Graves  . . .  .306 

correspondence  with  Gov.  Cooke 338 

to  be  supplied  with  provisions.  .381,  389, 
459,  460,  46],  513 

James 403,  437,  576,  599 

Wallen,  Jonathan 403,  456,  599 

Walton,  Jacob 287,  298 

Wanton,  Gideon 562,  601 


Wanton,  John.  .3,  11,  25,43,  204,  240,  510 

John  G 199,  420,  474,  534,  608 

Joseph,  Governor,   3,   11,    25,  43,  123, 
204,  239,  312 
letter  of  agency  to  Great  Britain,  to 

Henj-y  Mai'chant 30 

letters  to  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough 42 

letters  to  Capt.  Dudingston    61,  62 

letters  to  Admiral  Montagu,  relative 
to  the  GasjDee,  63,  85,   100,  115,  117, 
118 
letters  to  the  Earl   of  Hillsborough, 

relative  to  the  Gaspee 06,  99 

proclamation  relative  to 81 

letter  to  Capt.  Linzee 98 

letters  to  the  royal  commissioners.  . .  .116  • 
deposition  of,  relative  to  the  Gaspee.  .160 
letter  to  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth.  .222,  233 
protests  against  the  raising  of  troops,  311 
resolution   relative   to   acts   of,   and. 
oath  of  office  forbidden  to  be  given 

to 325 

does  not  attend  the  Assembly 326 

message  to   the    General  Assembly, 
with  Lord  Dartmouth's  letter  and 

papers  from  Parliament 333 

the  speaker's  letter  to,  notifying  him 

of  his  election  as  Governor 334 

the  speaker  iuquii-es  if  he  will  sign 

commissions    334 

reply  to  the  speaker 334,  335 

letter  to  the  General  Assembly 336 

act  suspending  him  from  acting  as 

Governor,  continued 355,  372 

office  as  Governor,  declared  vacant. .  .392 

resolution  relative  to   393 

sheriff  directed  to  take  the   charter 

and  papers  from 452 

dismissal  of 460 

shei-iff  takes  his  papers  in  his  absence,470 

Joseph,  Jr 18,  25,  43,  24a,  598 

Joseph,  son  of  Gideon    19 

Peter    403 

Ward,  Henry,  5, 13,  26,  190,  199,  206,  241, 
228,  274,  290,  389, 394,  426,  490,  612, 
552, 601, 

empowered  to  sign  commissions 326 

to  answer  letter  to  Lord  Howe 589 

Samuel,  a  delegate  to  the  convention 

of  1774 246 

reports  proceedings  of 263 

delegate  to  the  congress  of  1775,  and 

instructions  to 267 

letters  from,  at  Philadelphia,  thanks 

of  Assembly  to 369 

pay  voted  to 372 

Gov.  Cooke's  letter  to 450,  502 

dies  in  Philadelphia 529 

biographical  sketch  of 529 

certain  bills  of,  paid 565 

Samuel.  Jr 324 

Warner,  Nathan 516 

Oliver  Ring 40,  43,  208 

AVarren,  petition  to  divide,  continued  ...  13 

Warren,  James 293 

John 200,  462 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


64: 


Warren,  Joseph   280 

Washington,  Gen.,latters  fromOov. Cooke 

to,  443,  444,  445,  446.  448,  501,  502, 

503,  504,  505,  506,  507,  508,  578,  619. 

letters  to  Gov.  Cooke,  443,  444,  440,  448, 

441),  503,  505,  506,  509,  545,  023 

memorial  of  the  General  Assembly  to,  471 

committee  sent  to 471  i 

vote  of  thanks  to 554  ' 

Waterman,  Abraham 44  I 

Andrew 323,  359,  436,  511  i 

Elisha 21 ,  38,  351 ,  359,  363,  51 1  : 

.James 308 

John..O,  13,  45,  200,  242,  467,  511,  514  j 

Joseph 360  j 

Laban 351,  519  i 

Eufus 614  ■ 

Zuriel 511,  541,  562 

Watson ,  Job 358 

Moses 599 

Weare,  Mesheck 300  ' 

Weatherhead,  Enoch 351  ' 

Weaver,  Joseph 350,  591 

Langford  518  > 

Webb,  George 270,  308,  313,  350  | 

Weeden,  Daniel 381  ! 

Daniel,  Jr 240,  380  , 

John 453  I 

John,  son  of  Daniel,  Jr 591  I 

Wells,  Barker    351,  518  ' 

Elnathan 351,  518 

James 517  i 

John 359  I 

Randall 351,  518  1 

Stephen 324 

Thomas .562,  601 

.Thomas,  Jr.,  5, 12,  26,44,240,244,473,512 

Thomas,  2d 363,  403 

Thomas,  3d 313,  360,  599 

Wentworth,  John 228,  300 

West,  B(;njamin 20,  437 

William,  26,  205,  282,  456, 467,  479,  51 1 , 
514,  562 

letter  to  Gov.  Cooke 468 

Westcott,  Gideon 518 

Westcoat,  Ephraim    408,  479,  511,  562 

Samuel 412 

Zerubabel 22,  403,  603 

Westerly,  correspondence  of  committee 

of,  in  relation  to  Boston  port  bill  .  .289 

taxes  of 459 

Westgate,  George 491 

West  Greenwich,  riot  in 427 

Wetherhead,  Enoch 518 

Wetherell,  John 288 

Whaley ,  Joseph    476 

Wheaton,  Ephraim 248 

James 516 

Nathaniel 248,  285,  528 

Whipple,  Abraham 72,  371,  401 

appointed  commodore 347 

Amos   . . . .' 600 

Benajah    350,  517 


Whipple,  Christopher 250,  347,  301 

Enoch li>4 

George 256 

Jeremiah 4,  38,  31-3 

Joseph 366,  517 

John 528 

Otis    256 

Stephen 313,  453 

Thomas    26 

White,  Artemas    257 

Whitford,  Nicholas 517 

Simon 427 

Whitman,  Jacob 39 

Wickes,  John 25,  250 

Sylvester 349 

Thomas. . .  .3,  11,  43,  204,  2.39,  311,  453 

AVickham,  Benjamin 255 

Wightman,  George,  Jr 397 

Jacob 20 

Reuben' 349,  359,  510 

Stephen 575 

Wigneron,  Stephen   431,  457 

Wilbur,  Daniel 205,  240,  511 

Samuel 350, 59 1 

AVilliam 404 

Wilcox,  Cooke 516 

George 575 

Hopson 26 

Isaac    350 

Jeffi-ey    44,205,  313 

Wiles,  Henry    575 

Wilkinson,  Benjamin 351,  453,  518 

Israel  240 

Philip 576 

Willard,  Levy 256 

Williams,  Daniel .349,  517 

Frederick 351,  518 

.Jacob 436,  600 

James .350,  358,  517 

Peleg 45,  511 

Silas    240,  313 

Willis,  Henry 379 

Henry,  Jr 379 

Wilkins,  Isaac 287 

Wilkinson,  David    327,  495 

Wilmarth,  Timothy,  Jr 520 

Wilson,  Daniel 244,  250 

Winsor,  Aaron 859 

Abraham  ..  .5,  13,  26,  45,  206,  350.  517 

Anan 437 

Stephen 350,  51 7 

William 240 

Wonscut  Road  to  be  repaired 199 

Wood,  George 308 

Thomas    44 

Woodniansie,  John 358 

Wright,  John,  of  New  Shoreham,  to  be 

arrested . .  540 

Wyatt,  Stukely 575 

Wythe,  George 226 

Young,  Thomas    591 

William,  of  Georgia 237 


