imw 


mmmm 


liliiijiiiliii 


MiM 


^ilUU*ltl«it 


<^c  I  M.  L.. 

974.5       I 

R.34b  

v.V  OENEALOGY  COLLECTION 

1151583 


ALLEN  COUNTY  PUBLIC  LIBRARY 


3  1833  01145  8160 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2010  with  funding  from 

Allen  County  Public  Library  Genealogy  Center 


http://www.archive.org/details/recordsofcolonyo05rhod 


(To  h  Y)  i  6    I 

RECORDS 


COLONY   OF    RHODE  ISLAND 


PKOYIDENCE  PLANTATIONS 


NEW    ENGLAND 


PRIiSlTED  BY  ORDER  OF  THE  GENERAL  ASSEMBLY. 

EDITED    BY 

JOHN  RUSSELL  BARTLETT, 

SECRETARY    OF    STATE. 

VOL,  V. 


1741  TO  1756. 


PROVIDENCE: 

KNOWLES,   ANTHONY    &   CO.,    STATE    PRINTERS. 

1860. 


1151583 

>  PREFACE. 

[  

The  present,   or  fifth  volume   of  the   Colonial  Records  of 

-  Rhode  Island,  includes  but  sixteen  years  of  its  history.  It 
commences  in  1741,  closes  with  1756,  and  is  chiefly  devoted 
to  that  portion  of  its  annals  which  includes  the  wars  between 
Great  Britain  and  France.  These  wars  were  the  beginning 
of  the  great  struggle  for  empire  in  North  America.  At  the 
commencement  of  this  struggle,  the  British  colonies  were  con- 
fined to  a  narrow  belt  of  territory,  scarcely  reaching,  at  its 
broadest  point,  three  hundred  miles   from  the  Atlantic  coast. 

^Part  of  New  England,  the  greater  portions  of  New  York,  Pennsyl- 
vania and  Virginia,  as  well  as  all  the  vast  region  to  the  west  of 

k  these  colonies,  were  then  included  in  Louisiana,  or  New  France  ; 
while  the  Spanish  possessions  crowded  close  upon  Georgia  and 

^the  Carolinas,  under  the  general  name  of  Florida,  and  ex- 
tended nearly  to  the  Mississippi.     The   New   England  colo" 

Miies  and  New  York  were  the  most  prominent  in  these  wars, 
but  none  of  them  more  so  than  Rhode  Island.  The  ships 
fitted  out  by  her  and  sent  against  the  enemy,  were  more  nu. 
merous  than  those  of  either  of  the  other  colonies ;  while  her 
soldiers  were  prominent  in  all  the  expeditions  for  the  reduction 
of  Canada,  and  other  portions  of  the  French  empire,  in  America. 
In  the  expeditions  sent  against  Louisburg,  Cape  Breton,  Crown 
Point,  Ticonderoga,  Oswego,  Quebec  and  other  places,  her 
troops  or  ships  took  part ;  and  the  correspondence,  in  this  vol- 
ume, of  her  Governors  with  the  home  government,  the  British 
admirals  and  generals,  as  well  as  with  the  Governors  of  the 
other  English  colonies,  show  the  position  which  she  held,  and  the 
aid  she  offered  in  the  struggle  for  supremacy  on  the  continent. 


1\'.  rilKi'AOJ'. 

In  the  war  between  Great  Britain  and  Spain,  Rhode  Island 
also  furnished  her  contingent,  by  sending  troops  to  Cuba,  as 
the  proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  and  the  correspond- 
ence accompanying  will  show. 

The  issuing  of  bills  of  credit,  or  paper  money,  to  a  vast 
amount,  by  the  English  colonies,  which  was  absolutely  necessa- 
ry, to  enable  them  to  meet  the  heavy  expenditures  required  of 
them  to  carry  on  their  several  campaigns,  is  another  prolific 
subject  for  discussion  in  this  volume.  The  numerous  acts  for 
the  emission  and  calling  in  of  this  paper  money,  the  several 
objects  for  which  the  emissions  were  made,  the  correspondence 
Avith  the  other  colonies  in  relation  to  the  same,  and  with  the 
British  government,  in  its  efforts  to  curtail  and  check  the  enor- 
mous emissions,  are  given  at  length.  Among  these  documents, 
the  official  report  of  Governor  Ward  to  the  lords  commissionei's 
of  trade  and  plantations,  written  in  1740,  giving  a  full  history 
of  the  paper  money  emissions  from  1710  to  1740,  the  causes 
of  these  issues,  the  exertions  and  sacrifices  made  by  the  colony 
to  assist  the  mother  country  in  her  foreign  wars,  will  be  found 
of  great  interest. 

The  originals  received  by  the  colony,  of  all  the  orders  of  the 
King  and  council;  Ihe  letters,  commissions,  instructions  and 
other  documents,  printed  or  referred  to  in  this  volume,  are 
among  the  archives  of  the  secretary  of  state's  office,  in  Provi- 
dence, chronologically  arranged  and  bound  in  volumes,  where 
they  may  be  conveniently  referred  to.  Besides  these,  there  are 
among  the  archives,  many  military  returns,  and  other  papers 
connected  with  the  French  wars,  showing  the  names  of  the  of- 
ficers and  men  of  the  Bhode  Island  regiments,  with  a  variety 
of  original  letters  and  documents  of  a  private  nature,  belonging 
to  the  period  embraced  in  this  volume,  which  are  not  printed. 

Providence,  January,  1860.  J.  R.  B. 


RHODE  ISLAND  RECORDS. 


EHODE   ISLAND   RECORDS 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  FJiode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  WarvncJc,  the  2^ith  day 
of  January,  1741. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  lion.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  the  more  effectually  putting  the  colony  in  a  proper 

posture  of  defence. 

Whereas,  there  is  an  absolute  necessity  of  putting  the  colo- 
ny, and  particularly  the  town  of  Newport,  in  a  better  posture 
of  defence,  not  only  in  regard  to  the  present  war  with  Spain ; 
but,  more  especially,  as  all  advices  from  abroad  suppose  a  war 
with  France  inevitable  in  the  spring : 

And  whereas,  it  hath  been  found  vastly  prejudicial  to  this 
colony,  the  act  empowering  the  freemen  and  soldiers  to  choose 
their  own  military  officers ;  and  as  the  fines  already  stated  by 
law,  on  soldiers'  neglecting  their  attendance  on  military  duty, 
have  been  too  small ; — 

All  which  being  duly  considered,  be  it  enacted  by  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly,  and  by  the  authority  thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that 


4  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1741 

tlio  aforesaid  act  empowering  the  freemen  and  soldiers  choosing 
their  military  officers,  be,  and  it  is  hereby  repealed,  and  de- 
clared null  and  void  ;  and  that  for  the  future,  the  General  As- 
sembly, annually,  at  their  session  holden  in  May,  choose  and 
elect  the  military  officers  in  this  government,  and  to  be  com- 
missioned by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  as  usual ;  and  that  the 
military  officers  already  elected  be  continued  in  their  respec- 
tive ofhces  till  the  first  Wednesday  in  May  next. 

And  l3e  it  fuither  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
for  the  future,  the  council  of  war  shall  consist  of  the  Governor, 
and  so  many  of  the  council  for  the  time  being  as  are  then 
present,  the  field  officers,  and  the  captains  of  each  company 
(and  the  lieutenant  in  the  absence  of  the  captain),  and  no  oth- 
ers ;  who  are  hereby  empowered  to  appoint  such  other  days  as 
may  be  necessary,  to  discipline  the  militia,  and  make  them  ex- 
pert in  the  use  of  their  arms,  over  and  above  the  four  training 
days  by  law  appointed  in  war  time ;  and  that  every  soldier 
neglecting  to  give  his  attendance  and  do  his  duty  in  that  ser- 
vice, shall  be  obliged  to  pay  as  a  fine,  the  sum  of  ton  shillings, 
and  forty  shillings  for  each  day's  neglect  on  an  alarm  ;  which 
fines  shall  be  appropriated  towards  the  maintaining  a  magazine 
for  the  public  use  in  each  county,  after  the  necessary  charge 
of  each  company  is  defrayed. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
there  be  two  more  companies  made  in  the  town  of  Newport,  and 
proper  officers  appointed  over  them  by  the  General  Assembly. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  lower  battery,  at  Fort  George,  be  repaired  and  enlarged, 
so  as  to  mount  ten  or  more  cannon  ;  and  that  a  committee  be 
appointed  for  that  purpose,  and  to  make  all  necessary  altera- 
tions and  reparations  at  said  fort  and  battery. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
there  be  a  magazine  or  powder  house,  of  brick,  erected,  not  ex- 
ceeding twenty-four  feet  in  diameter,  in  some  convenient  place 
in  the  town  of  Newport,  to  contain  the  powder  that  may  be  im- 
ported into  this  colony  ;  and  that  there  be  ten  barrels  of  pow- 
ord  procured  at  the  colony  charge,  and  for  their  use  ;    and  also 


1741.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  5 

a  suitable  quantity  of  ball,  to  be  lodged  in  said  magazine ;  and 
the  same  quantity  from  time  to  time  to  be  there  kept ;  and 
that  there  be  three  barrels  of  powder  and  a  suitable  quantity 
of  ball  procured  for  the  county  of  Providence  ;  and  the  same 
quantity  of  each,  for  the  county  of  Kings  county,  all  for  the 
use  of  the  colony,  to  be  under  the  care  of  the  field  officers  of 
each  county  ;  and  that  ten  field  pieces  be  procured  for  the  use 
of  the  colony,  to  be  kept  in  the  county  of  Newport ;  and  a 
committee  to  be  appointed  for  the  purposes  aforesaid. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
all  persons  making  solemn  engagement  before  the  Governor  or 
any  magistrate,  in  the  respective  counties  where  an  alarm 
is  made,  that  its  against  their  conscience  to  bear  arms  at  all? 
shall,  on  an  alarm,  appear  at  the  Governor's  or  magistrate's,  as 
aforesaid,  either  with  horses  (though  without  arms),  to  be  em- 
ployed as  scouts,  messengers,  watches,  &c. ;  or  else,  if  they  ap- 
pear on  foot,  that  they  be  divided  into  companies,  and  obey  the 
Governor's  or  magistrate's  order,  to  remove  women  and  chil- 
dren, or  sick  persons  out  of  immediate  danger ;  or  to  watch 
against  or  extinguish  any  fires  that  may  bo  kindled  at  such 
times,  either  by  design  or  accident ;  and  to  do  any  other  duty 
consistent  with  their  religious  principles ;  and  any  person,  as 
aforesaid,  not  appearing,  shall  be  obliged  to  pay  the  sum  of 
forty  shillings  for  each  day's  neglect. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
one  field  officer,  with  the  commissioned  officers  of  each  compa- 
ny, are  appointed  a  court  martial  to  punish  or  fine  any  soldier 
under  arms,  for  any  offence  by  him  committed,  agreeable  to 
the  nature  and  circumstances  thereof 

Yoted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  John  Cranston,  Col.  John 
Gardner  and  Major  Hezekiah  Carpenter,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  consider  in  what  manner  two 
companies  more  be  made  in  the  town  of  Newport,  and  do  what 
is  necessary  to  be  done  at  the  fort,  according  to  the  afore-writ- 
ten act ;  and  that  Peter  Bours,  Esq.,  Messrs.  William  Ellery 
and  Ezbon  Sanford,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  com- 
mittee to  build  a  magazine  at  Newport,  and   procure  powder 


6  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1741. 

and  ball,  agreeable  to  the  said  act ;  and  that  the  said  commit- 
tee draw  money  out  of  the  general  treasury  for  the  purposes 
aforesaid. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Honorable  William  Greene  and 
Ezeldel  Warner,  Esqs.,  Messrs.  Daniel  Abbott,  John  Jenkins 
and  Ishmacl  Spink,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  com- 
mittee, they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  to  examine  whether  the 
boundary  marks,  in  the  line  between  this  colony  and  the  colo- 
ny of  Connecticut,  at,  or  near  the  south-west  corner  of  War- 
wick Purchase,  be  removed,  and  make  report  to  the  next  ses- 
sion of  this  Assembly. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  with 
those  of  his  council,  living  upon  Rhode  Island,  or  the  major 
part  of  them,  procure  a  suitable  vessel  and  send  to  Annapolis 
for  the  commissioners  appointed  to  settle  the  boundaries  be- 
tween this  colony  and  the  Province  of  the  :Massachusetts  Bay, 
&c.,  in  such  manner  as  may  be  agreeable  to  the  dignity  of  those 
gentlemen  ;  and  for  that  purpose,  that  they  draw  money  out  of 
the  general  treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  appointed  to  take 
care  of  the  colony  sloop,  procure  the  same  to  be  rigged  and 
graved,  by  the  last  day  of  March  next  ensuing. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  James  Martin,  sec- 
retary, amounting  to  £-40  10^.  10(7.,  being  for  his  time,  trouble, 
horse-hire,  expenses,  &c.,  in  going  to  Boston,  to  fetch  the  com- 
mission (and  copies  thereof),  for  settling  the  boundaries  between 
this  colony  and  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  be  al- 
lowed, and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury. 
God  save  the  King. 

Ldtcrsfmn  the  Board  of  Trade,  reMive  to  paper  money. 

Whitohall,  July  5,  1739. 
Gcntlemon  :   Wo   send  you,  liercwitli,  copies  of  two  aililrcsses  from  the  House  of 
Lords,  and  likewise  two  u.ldresses*  from   the  House    of   Commons,  to  His  Majesty, 
of  the'lSth  of  the  last  month,  and  desire  that  you  will  forthwith  prepare  and  trans- 


«  The  addresses  hero  referred  to,  are  not  among  the  luiblic  archives. 


1741.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS. 


mit  to  us,  as  soon  as  possible,  the  several  accounts  therein  required,  that  the  same 
may  be  laid  before  the  respective  Houses,  at  the  next  meeting  of  Parliament. 
So  we  bid  you  heartily  farewell ;  and  are 

Your  very  loving  friends  and  humble  servants, 

MONSON,  R.  PLUMER, 

EDWARD  ASHE,  M.  BLADEN. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Whitehall,  May  20,  1 740. 
Gentlemen  :  In  pursuance  of  an  address  of  the  House  of  Commons,  to  His  Maj- 
esty, on  the  25th  April,  1 740,  and  of  His  Majesty's  commands,  signified  to  us  by 
His  Grace,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  in  his  letter,  dated  the  30th  April,  you  are  im- 
mediately to  prepare,  and,  as  soon  as  possible,  transmit  to  us,  in  order  to  be  laid 
before  the  House  of  Commons,  at  their  next  meeting,  an  account  of  the  tenour,  and 
amount  of  the  bills  of  credit  which  have  been  created  and  issued  in  your  govern- 
ment, that  are  now  outstanding,  with  their  respective  times  when  such  bills,  so  out- 
standing, were  issued ;  with  the  amount  of  said  bills  in  money  of  Great  Britain,  both 
at  the  time  such  bills  were  issued,  and  at  the  time  of  preparing  your  account. 

You  are  likewise  to  send  therewith  your  opinion  what  will  be  the  most  easy  and 
effectual  manner  of  sinking  and  discharging  all  such  bills  of  credit,  with  the  least 
prejudice  to  the  inhabitants  of  your  government,  and  interruption  of  the  commerce 
of  this  kingdom. 

And  we  desire  you  will  use  all  possible  despatch  in  this  matter,  that  we  may  have 
your  returns  early  enough  for  us  toconsider  thereof  before  the  beginning  of  the  next 
session.     So  we  bid  you  heartily  farewell ;  and  are 

Your  very  loving  friends,  and  humble  servants, 
MONSON,  M.  BLADEN, 

R.  PLUMER,  JA.  BRUDENELL. 

EDW.  ASHE, 
To  the  Governor  and  Company,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Whitehall,  August  19,  1640. 
Sir  :  We  send  you,  herewith  enclosed,  the  copy  of  an  address  to  the  House  of 
Commons,  to  His  Majesty,  in  the  last  session  of  Parliament,  by  which  you  will  per- 
ceive how  much  they  apprehend  the  commerce  of  Great  Britain  to  have  been  af- 
fected by  the  large  and  frequent  emissions  of  paper  currency  in  His  Majesty's  colo- 
nies, in  America,  in  which  Rhode  Island  has  had  too  large  a  share.  And  His  Maj- 
esty, in  pursuance  of  said  address,  having  sent  circular  instructions  to  the  several 
colonies  more  immediately  under  his  government,  not  to  pass  any  more  bills  for  the 
issuing  of  paper  money,  without  a  clause  therein,  as  proposed  by  the  said  addresss, 
to  suspend  the  execution  till  His  Majesty's  pleasure  shall  be  signified  thereupon. 
We  think  proper  to  acquaint  you  therewith,  and  at  the  same  time  to  admonish  and 
idvise  you  to  pay  all  due  regard  to  His  Majesty's  intentions,  and  to  the  sense  of 
the  House  of  Commons,  upon  this  occasion. 
So  we  bid  you  heartily  farewell ;  and  are 

Your  very  loving  friends,  and  humble  servants, 
MONSON,  M.  BLADEN, 

CROFT,  JA.  BRUDENELL. 

!    John  Wanton,  Esq.,  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 


RECORDS   OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1741. 


PicpoH  of  Governor  Ward,  to  iJie  Board  of  Trade,  on  paper  money. 

Newport,   January,  the  9tb,  1740. 
To  the  Right  Honorable  the  Lords  and  Commissioners  of  Trade  for  the  Foreign 

Plantations : 

May  it  please  your  Lordships  :  We  have  received  your  Lordships's  letter  of  the 
20th  of  May,  with  the  votes  of  the  Honorable  House  of  Commons,  of  the  2oth  of 
April  last,  respecting  the  emission  of  paper  money  in  the  plantations,  and  now 
transmit  your  Lordships  an  account  of  the  several  emissions  made  by  this  colony ; 
but  before  we  enter  on  that  business,  we  humbly  ask  leave  to  premise  to  your 
Lordships,  that  it  is  now  but  an  hundred  years  since  the  English  came  into  this 
colony,  then  a  hideous  wilderness,  and  inhabited  b}'  Indians  only ;  of  whom  the 
land  was  purchased  from  time  to  time,  as  opportunity  and  circumstances  would 
permit. 

And  as  the  first  settlers  were  not  of  the  wealthiest  sort,  nor  overstocked  with  ser- 
vants, the  greatest  part  of  their  money  was  unavoidably  swallowed  up  in  procuring 
provision,  clothing  and  utensils  for  husbandry  and  labor,  to  subdue  and  cviltivate 
the  soil ;  whence  it  came  to  pass,  that  although  there  be  several  commodious  har- 
bors within  this  colony,  and  a  part  of  the  Atlantic  ocean  makes  our  southern  boun- 
dary, yet  little  or  no  navigation  was  carried  on  till  about  the  beginning  of  the 
present  century  ;  necessity  engaging  the  inhabitants  to  employ  the  whole  of  their 
time  and  care — -some  to  bring  to,  and  manure  the  land,  others  to  follow  such  trades 
and  occupations  as  they  were  most  capable  of,  for  the  support  of  themselves  and 
those  who  depended  on  them.  Indeed,  they  had  a  small  matter  of  money,  but  that 
was  chiefly  the  remains  of  what  they  and  their  fathers  had  brought  into  the 
country. 

In  the  year  1710,  we  had  orders  from  Her  Majesty,  the  late  Queen  Ann,  to  raise 
and  c(juip  a  number  of  soldiers,  to  assist  in  an  expedition  designed  against  the 
French  and  Indian  enemies,  which  we  cheerfully  performed,  but  could  not  effect, 
without  striking  off  a  quantity  of  paper  money,  to  supply  the  want  ol  silver  and 
gold  (then  exceeding  scarce).  Seven  thousand  pounds  in  bills,  were  therefore 
emitted,  and  put  into  the  treasury,  for  discharging  the  debts  that  the  government 
had  contracted,  by  raising  aud  equipping  those  soldiers.  These  bills  amounted  to 
about  £4,593  15s.,  and  passed  equal  to  silver  at  eight  shillings  per  ounce,  and 
were  to  remain  outstanding  for  the  space  of  five  yeai-s. 

Anno  1711,  the  war  continuing,  and  the  government  too  plainly  seeing  the  afore- 
said £7,000  were  not  sufficient  to  answer  the  bonds  for  which  they  were  emitted, 
added  £.0,300  to  the  former  emission,  which  likewise  passed  equal  to  silver  at  eight ; 
shillings  per  ounce,  and  amounted  to  about  £4,134  7s.  6f/. 

We  have  already  observed  to  your  Lordships,  that  husbandry  and  mechanical 
arts  were  the  only  employ  of  tlw  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  till  about  the  beginnin<r 
of  the  present  century  ;  in  consequence  of  which,  a  small  medium  of  exchange  was 
sufficient  till  other  emergencies  reipiired  a  larger.  The  colony  had  been  obliged 
to  assist  in  sundry  expeditions,  for  reducing  Port  iloyal  aud  Canada  ;  and  were  un- 


1741.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS. 


der  an  inevitable  necessity  of  frequently  taking  the  merchants'  vessels  and  fittin"- 
them  out  at  the  public  charge;,  to  defend  us  against  the  insults  and  depredations 
threatened  by  the  enemy,  who  were  almost  every  year,  during  the  last  war,  hover- 
ing about  our  coast ;  by  which  means,  the  government  was  greatly  involved,  and 
much  in  debt,  notwithstanding  the  aforesaid  emissions. 

The  fort,  likewise,  which  we  had  built  at  our  own  expense,  was  very  much  out 
of  repair,  and  destitute  of  stores  and  ammunition.  And  there  being  also  a  necessi- 
ty of  a  public  jail  in  Newport,  the  metropolis  of  the  colony,  we  were  compelled  to 
make  an  emission  of  £40,000  in  bills  of  credit,  Anno  1715,  which  was  issued  on 
loan,  at  live  per  cent.,  to  the  inhabitants,  for  ten  years,  upon  land  security,  taken 
to  double  the  value  of  the  money  hired  by  each  particular  person ;  the  interest 
thereof,  was  applied,  part  to  sink  the  two  former  banks,  part  to  pay  off  the  public 
debts,  part  to  defray  the  expenses  of  repairing  the  fort  and  furnishing  it  with  stores 
and  the  other  part  to  the  building  and  support  of  the  jail,  aud  to  defray  the  other 
incidental  charges  of  the  government. 

Silver  was  worth  twelve  shillings  per  ounce  at  the  time  of  making  these  last  bills, 
and  their  whole  amount  was  about  £17,500. 

1721.  As  the  little  trade  of  our  colony  (which  was  almost  stagnated  in  the 
long  war  with  France),  had  begun  to  revive  upon  the  peace  made  at  Utrecht,  the 
merchants  found  themselves  in  a  capacity  of  rendering  it  more  extensive,  through 
the  assistance  of  that  medium  they  were  furnished  with,  by  the  emission  of  paper 
bills.  Anno  1715,  they  accordingly  built  more  vessels,  and  generously  advanced  into 
a  much  larger  trade,  and  every  thing  among  us  seemed  to  be  in  flourishing  circum- 
stances. 

But  the  merchants  of  Boston,  annually  receiving  vast  quantities  of  goods  from 
Great  Britain,  and  not  having  a  sufficiency  of  the  product  of  this  country  to  make 
proper  remittances  home,  bought  up  all  the  gold  and  silver  they  could  lay  their 
hands  upon,  in  this  and  the  neighboi'ing  governments,  in  order  to  pay  their  debts 
in  England.  This  rendered  those  commodities  very  scarce,  and  our  bills  having  ob- 
tained a  currency  amongst  our  neighbors  in  the  adjacent  governments,  became 
scarce  likewise. 

Our  trade  was  nevertheless  still  increasing,  and  the  fort  wanted  a  further  repair . 
all  which  obliged  us  to  emit  another  £40,000,  A.  D.  1721,  which  was  let  out  upon 
loan,  at  five  per  cent.,  on  land  security  (as  the  bills  in  1715  had  been),  for  the  term 
of  five  years.  And  that  the  industrious  might  have  a  suitable  encouragement,  the 
treasurer  was  ordered  to  receive  the  interest  thereof  in  good  merchantable  hemp 
and  flax,  from  such  persons  as  should  tender  it,  at  such  prices  as  should  from  time 
to  time  be  set  by  the  General  Assembly ;  which  interest  hath  been  appropriated  to 
the  use  of  the  public.  Silver  was  worth  about  sixteen  shillings  per  ounce  at  the 
time  of  making  those  bills;  and  their  whole  amount  was  about  £13,125. 

The  time  fixed  for  paying  in  the  £40,000  of  1715,  being  come,  the  government 
were  made  sensible  that  many  people  who  had  taken  those  bills,  having  laid  out  the 
greatest  part  thereof  in  building  houses,  and  otherwise  improving  their  estates,  were 
not  in  a  capacity  of  paying  the  same  in  one  entire  sum  as  they  had  received  it ;  and 
considering  they  had  all  along  punctually  paid  their  interest,  to  prevent  the  utter 
ruin  and  destruction  of  many  industrious  families,  continued  that  bank,  out  upon  in- 
terest, for  three  years  further,  viz. :  until  the  year  1 728,  at  which  time,  the  same  was 
ordered  to  be  sunk  by  ten  annual  payments  of  one  tenth  part  of  the  whole,  which 
halh  been  done  accordingly. 
VOL.  V.  2 


10  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1741. 

The  surprising  rrrowth  of  our  commerce,  occasioned  in  a  great  measure  by  tlie  mer- 
chants' being  sa[)plied  with  a  medium  of  exchange,  from  the  emissions  of  paper 
bills  in  1715  and  1  721,  invited  people  of  all  sorts  and  conditions  to  come  from  all  parts 
and  settle  among  us.  This  made  our  colony  populous,  furnished  us  with  mechan- 
ics of  everykind,  and  helped  us  to  make  a  further  progress  in  trade  and  navi- 
gation, which  refjuired  a  larger  medium  than  we  had. 

Therefore,  Anno  1728,  seeing  that  the  merchants  of  Boston  still  persisted  in  buy- 
ing up  the  silver  and  gold,  that  £4,000  of  the  bills  then  extant,  were  to  be  sunk 
annually,  and  that  the  ibrt  was  so  far  gone  to  decay,  that  to  build  a  new  one  more 
regular,  strong  and  larger,  was  conceived  to  be  most  advantageous  and  beneficial, 
the  General  Assembly  emitted  £40,000  more,  in  bills  of  public  credit,  which  was 
hired  out  upon  the  same  loan,  for  thirteen  years,  upon  the  like  good  security,  with 
the  bills  fbnnerly  emitted  ;  the  interest  whereof,  hath  been  appropriated  to  the 
building  of  a  new  fort  and  other  public  uses.  Silver  was  at  eighteen  shillings  per 
ounce  at  the  striking  off  of  these  bills,  and  their  total  amount  about  £ll,t;GG 
13.S-.  4(/. 

Fre(iuent  experiments  had  convinced  several  of  our  farmers  and  husbandmen 
that  the  soil  of  the  colony  was  very  suitable  for  the  production  of  hemp  ;  but  it  be- 
ing a  new  undertaking,  they  petitioned  the  General  Assembly  that  proper  en- 
couragement might  be  given  them  to  raise  a  commodity  which  would  not  only  be 
very  serviceable  to  us,  but  might  in  time,  prove  of  advantage  to  Great  Britain 
itself 

It  was  also  considered  that  the  Provinces  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay  and  New 
Hampshire  had  been  very  successful,  and  served  themselves  in  an  eminent  manner, 
by  the  whale  and  cod  fishery  ;  and  that  this  colonj-  was  well  situated  to  carry  on  so 
valuable  a  branch  of  trade. 

The  (ieneral  Assemiily  thereupon,  Anno  1731,  passed  an  act  for  the  emitting  of 
£  GO, 000  in  bills  of  public  credit,  of  the  same  tenor  and  on  the  same  establishment 
with  the  former  banks ;  the  interest  whereof,  to  be  applied  to  the  following  uses  :  a 
premium  or  bounty  was  granted  of  nine  pence  per  pound,  on  all  good  water-rotted, 
M'cll  manufactured  hemp  that  should  be  raised  within  this  colony  ;  five  shillings  per 
barrel  on  whale  oil,  one  penny  per  pound  on  whale  bone,  and  five  shillings  per 
([uintal  on  good  merchantable  cod  fish,  taken  in  any  vessels  belonging  to  this  colony, 
bilver  was  worth  twenty-two  shillings  jier  ounce,  when  these  bills  were  emitted,  and 
their  amount  was  about  £14,218  3s,  Id. 

In  the  year  1 733,  the  colony  having  made  some  progress  in  the  fishing  business, 
perceived  all  tlieir  endeavors  that  way  would  certainly  prove  ineffectual,  unless  a 
convenient  harbor,  nearer  the  fishing  ground,  than  that  of  Newport  (being  the 
nighest),  were  found  out.  They  therefore  formed  a  scheme  of  making  an  harbor 
on  Block  Island,  fit  to  receive  our  fishing  vessels  and  the  coasters  of  this  and  the 
neighboring  governments.  At  the  same  time,  we  had  just  finished  a  very  handsome, 
regular  fort  of  stone  and  mortar,  and  as  this  fort  is  much  larger  than  the  former,  and 
hath  a  large  battery  on  the  west  side  more  than  the  other  had,  a  number  of  can- 
non, carriages,  &e.,  were  wanting,  and  could  not  be  obtained  without  money. 

On  this,  therefore,  and  the  aforeinentioned  occasion,  the  General  Assembly  made 
another  bank  of  £104,000  in  bills  of  public  credit,  part  of  which  was  expended  in  pur- 
chasing cannons,  carriag(;s  and  other  military  stores  for  the  fort,  and  the  remiaiuler 
exhibited  upon  loan  in  the  same  manner,  and  on  the  like  good  security  with  the  for- 
mer banks;  i)art  of  the  interest  money  ari^ing  thereon  ai)[n-o])riated  to  build  a  pier 


1741.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  11 

ami  make  the  harbor  on  Block  Island,  and  the  rest  of  the  said  interest  to  the  use 
of  the  public.  Silver  was  worth  at  the  emission  of  those  bills,  twenty-five  shillings 
per  ounce  ;  and  their  total  amount  about  £21,840. 

1738.  We  emitted  $100,000  more,  on  the  like  security  with  the  former  banks, 
the  interest  to  be  appropriated  to  the  building  of  a  large  brick  state  house,  for  the 
colony's  use,  and  to  erect  a  light  house  for  the  benefit  of  our  navigation,  and  to  ren- 
der it  more  easy  and  secure.  The  cause  of  this  emission,  also,  was  the  want  of  a  suf- 
ficient medium  of  exchange.  For  the  colony  of  Connecticut  carries  on  but  a  small 
trade,  and  that  chiefly  with  the  produce  of  their  own  soil,  as  wheat,  Indian  corn, 
peas,  beans,  onions,  beef;,  pork,  and  such  like  commodities,  and  therefore  stand  in 
need  of  a  very  small  medium,  which,  with  a  quantity  of  our  bills  passing  there,  bath 
rendered  it  unnecessary  for  them  to  make  any  large  emissions  of  bills  of  credit ;  and 
the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  having  their  hands  so  tied  up,  that  notwith- 
standing a  great  number  of  our  bills  is  circulating  among  them,  the  merchants  of 
Boston  have  been  forced  to  emit  a  round  sum  of  negotiable  notes  of  hand,  to  supply 
the  want  of  money,  and  prevent  business  from  stagnation.  Silver  was  at  about 
twenty-seven  shillings  per  ounce,  when  these  bills  were  emitted ;  and  their 
amount  about  £  19,444  8.?.  lOd. 

1740.  As  the  King's  Most  Excellent  Majesty  had  engaged  in  a  just  and  neces- 
sary war  against  Spain,  on  account  of  the  repeated  depredations  and  unheard  of 
cruelties  by  that  nation  exercised  on  our  fellow-subjects,  the  General  Assembly,  at 
their  session  last  winter,  calling  to  mind  the  great  danger  we  were  constantly  ex- 
posed to,  in  the  late  war  with  the  French,  by  being  unprovided  with  avessel  of  war  of 
our  own,  and  so  frequently  obliged  to  take  the  vessels  of  private  persons,  and  equip 
them  in  haste  to  go  out  and  fight  the  enemy,  as  they  came  to  infest  our  coast,  re- 
solved, and  accordingly  built,  early  the  last  spring,  a  fine  sloop,  of  the  burthen  of 
one  hundred  and  fifteen  tons,  mounted  her  with  twelve  carriage  and  twelve  swivel 
guns ;  and  furnished  her  with  small  arms,  pistols,  cutlasses,  &c.,  to  defend  us  against 
the  enemy,  should  we  be  attacked. 

In  the  former  part  of  the  current  year,  we  received  His  Majesty's  royal  instruc- 
tions, directing  us  to  raise  as  many  able  bodied,  effective  men  in  this  colony  as 
would  voluntarily  enlist  in  his  service,  on  an  expedition  intended  against  some  of 
the  King  of  Spain's  territories  in  the  West  Indies.  In  obedience  to  which,  the 
General  Assembly  immediately  appointed  three  captains,  and  passed  an  act  granting 
a  bounty  of  £3,  and  other  encouragement  to  every  such  man  that  should  voluntarily 
enter  into  the  aforesaid  service.  This  zeal  in  the  Assembly,  animated  the  common 
people  to  such  a  degree,  that  two  of  the  captains  had  completed  their  companies, 
each  consisting  of  one  hundred  men,  within  the  space  of  two  months;  the  third  had 
collected  above  seventy  soldiers,  and  would  have  made  up  his  company  in  due  time, 
had  the  government  been  honored  with  another  of  the  royal  commissions. 

These  soldiers  were  billeted  out,  at  the  charge  of  the  public  (from  the  time  of 
their  being  enlisted,  till  they  were  disbanded,  about  the  16th  of  August);  and  so 
were  the  other  two  companies,  till  the  middle  of  September,  when  they  embarked 
for  New  York,  in  two  transports,  hired  by  the  colony,  tor  that  purpose,  having  first 
received  blankets  and  other  necessaries,  as  a  further  gi'atuity  from  the  government ; 
all  which  extraor.linary  expenses,  and  the  incident  charges  of  government,  greatly 
augmented  by  the  war,  made  it  absolutely  necessary  to  emit  more  bills  of  public  credit. 
Upon  which,  the  Assembly  have  this  year,  1740,  passed  an  act  for  issuing  out 
£20,t>00  in  paper  bills,  equivalent   to   silver,  stated  at  six  shillings  and  nine  pence 


12  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE    ISLAND  [1741. 

per  ounce,  to  be  let  out  at  four  cent,  upon  loan  (on  such  lanj  security  ns  bath  been 
heretofore  taken),  for  ten  years,  and  then  to  be  sunk  by  ten  equal  annual  payments. 
Silver  is  now  worth  twenty-seven  shillings  per  ounce,  and  the  whole  of  this  bank 
amounts  to  about  £15,555  lis.  Id. 

And  now,  may  it  please  your  Lordships,  having  given  you  an  exact  account  of 
the  several  emissions  of  our  paper  bills,  their  amount,  &c.,  as  was  required,  we  en- 
treat your  Lordships  to  consider  that  this  colony  was  first  purchased,  then  settled, 
and  hath  been  at  all  times  defended  by  its  inhabitants  at  tlieir  own  proper  costs  and 
charges,  as  well  against  the  Indian  natives  in  former  times,  as  against  foreign  ene- 
mies of  latter  years ;  and  that  without  ever  becoming  chargeable  to  our  mother 
country,  or  repining  at  the  expense  ;  for,  although  we  were  not  rich,  yet  poverty 
was  a  stranger  among  us,  till  the  year  1710,  when  we  were  called  upon  to  appear 
in  the  field  for  the  honor  and  interest  of  Great  Britain.  The  vast  expense  of  that 
and  other  expeditions,  in  the  war,  reduced  us  to  a  low  ebb ;  yet  we  manfully 
struggled  through  our  difficulties,  and  upon  the  restoration  of  peace,  boldly  ventured 
upon  enlarging  our  trade,  which  God  Almighty  hath  crowned  with  so  great  a  suc- 
cess, that  we  follow  the  same  path  to  this  day. 

We  have  now  above  one  hundred  and  twenty  sail  of  vessels  belonging  to  the  in- 
habitants of  this  colony,  all  constantly  employed  in  trade  ;  some  on  the  coast  of  Af- 
rii'a,  others,  in  the  neighboring  colonies,  many  in  the  West  Lidies,  and  a  few  in 
Europe. 

Besides  the  two  hundred  soldiers  raised  for  His  Majesty's  immediate  service,  the 
merchants  of  the  town  of  Newport  have  equipped  five  privateers,  with  crews 
amounting  in  the  whole,  to  near  four  hundred  men,  who  are  now  cruising  against 
the  Spaniards. 

Our  fort  is  provided  with  thirty-six  cannon,  well  mounted,  and  furnished  with  a 
suitable  quantity  of  military  stores;  by  which,  and  our  having  a  privateer  able  to 
figlit  a  hundred  men  on  her  deck,  and  ready  upon  all  emergencies,  we  are  become 
the  barrier  and  best  security  of  the  New  England  trade. 

These,  may  it  please  your  Lordships,  are  matters  of  the  utmost  importance  to 
us ;  for  navigation  is  one  main  pillar  on  which  this  government  is  supported  at 
jircsent ;  and  we  never  should  have  enjoyed  this  advantage,  had  not  the  govern- 
ment emitted  bills  of  credit  to  supply  the  merchants  with  a  medium  of  exchange, 
always  proportioned  to  the  increase  of  their  commerce  ;  without  this,  we  should 
have  been  in  a  miserable  condition,  unable  to  defend  ourselves  against  an  enemy, 
or  to  assist  our  neighbors  in  times  of  danger. 

In  short,  if  this  colony  be  in  any  respect  happy  and  flourishing,  it  is  paper  money, 
and  a  right  application  of  it,  that  hath  rendered  us  so.  And  that  we  are  in  a  flour- 
ishing condition,  is  evident  from  our  trade,  which  is  greater  in  proportion  to  the  di- 
mensions of  our  government,  than  that  of  any  colony  in  His  JIajesty's  American 
dominions. 

Nor  have  we  served  ourselves  only,  liy  engaging  so  deeply  in  navigation.  The 
neighboring  governments  liave  been  in  a  great  measure,  supplied  witli  rmn,  sugar, 
molasses  and  other  West  India  goods  by  us  brought  home  and  sold  to  them  liere. 
Nay,  Boston,  itself,  the  metropolis  of  the  Massachusetts,  is  not  a  little  obliged  to  ns 
for  rum  and  sugar  and  molasses,  which  they  distil  into  rum,  for  the  use  of  iheir  fish- 
ermen, &c. 

The  West  Indies  have  likewise  reaped  great  advantng'"  from  our  trade,  by  being 
supplied  whh  luiulxM-    of  all  sorts,  suitable    li'i-    Imilding  liouses,  sngai-  works   and 


1741.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  13 


making  casks ;  beef,  pork,  flour  and  other  provisions,  we  are  daily  carryinfr  to  tlicm 
with  horses  to  turn  their  mills,  and  vessels  for  their  own  use ;  and  our  African 
trade  often  furnishes  them  with  slaves  for  their  plantations.  To  all  this,  we  be^ 
leave  to  add,  that  the  merchants  of  Great  Britain,  have,  within  these  twelve  months, 
or  thereabouts,  received  seven  or  eight  sail  of  ships  from  this  colony,  for  "oods  im- 
ported here  of  late,  and  sold  to  the  inhabitants. 

On  the  whole,  your  Lordships  will  perceive  that  the  various  emissions  of  bills  in 
this  colony  were  made  to  answer  good  and  generous  intentions ;  that  the  intevest 
arising  on  the  several  banks,  together  with  part  of  some  of  the  principal  sums,  have 
been  applied  to  the  necessary  defence  and  support  of  the  colony,  building  ot  piers 
and  harbors,  for  promoting  the  fishing  business,  and  to  encourage  the  raising  and 
manufacturing  of  hemp,  &c. 

And  although  the  sums  emitted,  are  large  in  sound,  yet,  when  the  whole  of  what 
we  have  outstanding,  to  wit :  £340,000,  is  reduced  to  sterling  money,  it  will  not 
amount  to  more  than  £88,074  I65.  lO^d.,  a  very  small  sum  to  answer  for  a  medium 
of  exchange,  considering  the  extent  of  our  trade,  the  number  of  inhabitants,  and 
their  improvements ;  and  that  those  bills  answer  the  same  end,  and  are  the  major 
part  of  the  currency  in  the  neighboring  governments,  and  the  banks  emitted  in 
1728  and  1731,  will  begin  to  be  sunk  the  ne.xt  year. 

Your  Lordships  will  doubtless  observe,  that  paper  bills,  have  from  the  time  of 
their  being  first  made,  sunk  in  value,  till  of  late  years,  the  cause  whereof  (which 
common  experience  hath  taught  us),  we  humbly  take  leave  to  suggest  to  your 
Lordships,  it  is  supposed  by  many  that  the  frequent  emissions  of  those  bills  hath  ef- 
fected their  depreciation.  But  the  contrary  may  be  saffely  averred.  For  they  al- 
wa}S  passed,  and  were  received  equal  to  silver,  at  so  much  per  ounce,  till  the  mer- 
chants of  Boston,  having  large  quantities  of  goods  from  Europe,  and  supplying  all 
the  governments  of  New  England  therewith,  could  find  no  way  to  make  sufficient 
remittances,  but  by  buying  up  all  the  silver  and  gold  they  could  purchase.  This 
put  those  commodities  on  the  same  level  with  common  merchandize ;  and  so  they 
who  wanted  it  most,  bid  higher  and  higher,  till  gold  and  silver  arrived  to  the  price 
they  now  bear,  always  taking  care  to  rate  their  goods  in  proportion  to  what  they 
last  gave  for  sterling  money.  And  this  is  the  only  true  way  of  accounting  for  that 
misfortune  ;  and  what  confirms  it  is,  that  the  colony  of  Connecticut  have  not,  at  this 
time,  above  £13,000  or  £14,000  extant,  in  bills  of  credit;  and  yet  it  takes  as  much 
of  their  money  to  purchase  an  ounce  of  silver,  as  it  does  of  the  iilassachusetts.  New 
Hampshire  or  ours.  Hereto,  we  beg  leave  to  add,  that  within  the  space  of  about 
six  or  seven  years,  several  of  the  merchants  of  Newport  have  contracted  a  corres- 
pondence in  London,  procured  goods  to  be  sent  to  them,  and  thereby  so  well  sup- 
plied our  shop-keepers,  that  our  dependence  on  Boston  hath  been  in  some  measure 
taken  off.  In  return  for  those  goods,  our  merchants  have  remitted  to  their  corres- 
pondents, ships  of  our  own  building,  logwood  fetched  from  the  Bay  of  Honduras,  in 
our  own  vessels;  bills  of  exchange  purchased  of  the  planters,  in  the  West  Indies, 
and  other  commodities,  in  such  quantities,  that  for  these  six  years  last  past,  bills 
have  continued  be  equal  to  silver,  at  twenty-seven  shillings  per  ounce. 

We  are  required  to  give  our  sentiments  with  regard  to  the  easiest  method  of 
sinking  the  bills  of  credit  now  outstanding.  In  answer  thereto,  we  can  only  assure 
your  Lordships,  that  after  our  utmost  efforts  to  do  our  money  justice  and  save  llic 
inhabitants   from  inevitable   ruin,  we  have  not  been  able  lo  find  out  a  hcUvv  way 


14  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1741. 

than  to  sink  the  several  banks  by  ten  0(iual  annual  payments.     AVe  have  learnt  from 
experience  that  this  is  a  safe  course,  and  therefore  pursue  it. 

To  conclude,  we  are  humbly  of  opinion,  that,  considering  the  good  foundation  on 
which  our  bills  have  been  emitted,  and  the  substantial  security  taken  (according  to 
the  several  acts)  for  paying  in  the  same,  no  damage  can  possibly  accrue  from 
those  emissions,  which  encourages  us  to  hope  that  your  Lordships  and  the  honora- 
ble inspectors  into  those  affairs  will,  from  what  little  has  been  offered,  view  the  state 
of  this  colony  in  a  true  light,  and  find  that  we  have  acted  such  a  part  as  has  ren- 
dered this  government  strong  and  secure  against  our  enemies,  without  any  charge 
to  Great  Britain,  and  a  barrier  to  that  very  Province  that  is  always  reviling  us  for 
the  loss  of  their  trade,  as  well  as  advanced  ourselves  to  be  not  the  most  inconsider- 
able of  His  Majesty's  plantations  in  America. 

We  are,  may  it  please  your  Lordships, 

Your  most  obedient  and  very  humble  servants, 
RICHARD  WARD,'  Governor, 
For  the  company  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c. 


PrweccUngs  of  the  General  Assemhli/  held  for  ilie  Colon//  of 
Rhode  Island  and  ^Providence  Plantaiions,  at  Providence,  the 
first  Wednesday  of  April.  1741. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  lion.  Williuni  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

^Vith  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act   fur  incorporating  the  west  end  of  the  town  of  East 

Greenwich  into  a  town.ship,  and  the  same  to  be  distinguished 

and  known  by  the  name  of  West  Greenwich. 

Wliereas,  several  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  aforesaid  town  of 
East  Greenwich,  by  petition  to  this  Assembly,  did  set  forth  the 
great  disadvantage  they  labor  under,  on  account  of  the  great 
extent  of  said  town  ;  and,  as  it  is  conceived,  it  will  be  more  for 
tlie  ease  and  benefit  of  all  its  inhabitants  in  transacting  and 
negotiating  the  prudential  affairs  thereof,  to  have  a  division 
maile  ; — r 

r>e  il  therefore  iMiacted  by  tho  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  autiioiity  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  from  the  westerly  line 


1741.]  AND    PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  15 

of  the  old  township,  unto  the  colony  line,  he  set  off  and  incor- 
porated a  township,  and  the  same  to  be  distinguished  and 
known  by  the  name  of  West  Greenwich  ;  and  that  the  in- 
habitants thereof,  from  time  to  time,  shall  have,  and  enjoy  the 
like  benefits,  liberties,  privileges  and  immunities  with  other 
towns  in  this  colony,  according  to  our  charter. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
John  Spenser,  Esq.,  a  justice  of  the  peace,  living  within  the 
aforesaid  new  town,  remain  in  his  office  till  the  first  Wednes- 
day in  INIay,  next ;  and  that  he  grant  forth  a  warrant  to  call  in 
the  inhabitants  of  the  said  town  together  on  the  third  Tuesday 
of  this  instant  April,  to  elect  such  town  officers  as  they  shall 
have  occasion  for,  and  the  law  directs ;  and  to  appoint  the  time 
of  their  town  meeting,  and  the  places,  and  to  choose  and  elect 
two  deputies,  to  represent  them  at  the  next  General  Assembly, 
and  so  on,  as  by  the  charter  is  directed. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesai^;!,  that 
said  town  shall  send  one  petit  juror  to  the  superior  couit  of 
judicature,  court  of  assize  and  general  jail  delivery ;  and  one 
grand  and  one  petit  juror  to  the  inferior  court  of  common 
pleas  and  general  sessions  of  the  peace. 

And  it  is  also  further  enacted,  that  there  be  two  trustees 
appointed  for  the  said  new  town,  for  the  letting  out  of  its  pro- 
jjortionable  part  of  the  £20,000,  ordered  to  be  emitted. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  John  Spenser,  Esq.  and  jMr.  John 
Greene,  be  committee  men  for  the  town  of  West  Greenwich,  to 
let  out  their  proportionable  part  of  the  bank  money. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Peter  Bours,  Samuel  Clarke,  Tho^. 
Spenser,  William  Jenckes,  Stephen  Hopkins,  Daniel  Abbott, 
Francis  Willett,  Henry  Bull,  Daniel  Updike,  James  Honey- 
man,  Jr.  and  Thomas  Ward,  Esqs.,  or  any  four  of  them,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  represent  and 
manage  the  affairs  of  this  colony  before  the  commissioners  to 
hear  and  determine  the  boundary  between  this  colony  and  tlic 
Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay  ;  and  they  are  hereby  fully 
empowered  to  employ  one   or  more  attorney  or  attornics,  and 


16  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1741. 

to  do  all  ;iiicl  every  thing  else  lawful  aud  necessary  for  prose- 
cuting said  affiiir  to  effect. 

And  also,  that  Ezekicl  Warner  and  George  Brown,  Esqs., 
both  of  Providence,  in  the  county  of  Providence,  in  said  colony, 
be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  and  chosen  the  two  public 
oificers  in  this  colony,  pursuant  to  the  commission  for  settling 
the  boundary  between  this  colony  and  said  Province  of  the 
Massachusetts  Bay. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  attorney  general  sue  to  the 
next  inferor  court  of  common  pleas,  to  be  held  at  Newport,  all 
the  committees  of  the  several  towns  in  this  colony,  who  have 
not  made  return  of  the  mortgages  and  bonds  to  the  grand  com- 
mittee, and  bonds  for  interest  to  the  general  treasurer,  which 
they  took  for  the  proportionable  part  of  the  last  bank,  and  the 
former  banks,  belonging  to  each  town,  to  account  for  the 
same. 

An  Act  (or  equipping  the  colony  sloop,  and  sending  of  her  out 

to  cruise,  &c. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  Gener,al  Assembly,  that  the  committee 
who  procured  the  colony  sloop  to  be  built,  forthwith  equip  and 
fit  her  with  ammunition,  stores  and  all  other  necessaries  suita- 
ble for  a  cruise. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authoritty  aforesaid,  that 
Ilis  Honor,  the  Governor,  and  so  many  of  his  council  as"  shall 
be  present,  together  with  the  aforesaid  committee,  be,  and  they 
arc  hereby  empowered  and  directed  to  appoint  forthwith  a 
t-aptain,  lieutenant,  master,  gunner,  boatswain,  carpenter,  cook 
and  twelve  other  men,  upon  the  best  terms  they  can,  to  be- 
long to  said  sloop  constantly,  until  orders  from  the  Assembly 
to  the  contrary. 

And  be  it  enacted  l^y  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  Ilis 
Honor,  tlie  Governor,  with  the  advice  of  such  of  his  council  as 
.shidl  be  present,  from  time  to  time,  upon  news  of  an  enemy 
being  updii  tlie  coast,  shall  (if  they  think  proper  to  send  out 
said  sloop)  immediately  order  the  captain  to  beat   up  for  vol- 


1741.]  AND   PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  17 

unteers,  and  enlist  to  the  number  of  one  hundred  men  with 
them  before  belonging  to  said  sloop,  and  send  her  out  with  the 
greatest  expedition. 

And  if  at  any  time  there  does  not  a  sufficient  number  of 
men  enlist,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be,  and  he  is  hereby 
directed  and  fully  empowered  to  give  out  his  warrant  for  im- 
pressing so  many  men  as  there  shall  be  a  necessity  of,  to  make 
up  the  complement ;  and  that  the  volunteers,  as  well  as  those 
impressed,  be  under  pay  from  the  colony  from  the  time  they 
enter,  or  are  impressed,  till  they  are  discharged. 

Whereas,  James  Greene  and  others,  did,  by  petition  to  this 
Assembly,  set  forth  that  there  is,  on  the  south  branch  of  Paw- 
tuxet  river,  within  the  township  of  Warwick,  a  very  convenient 
place  for  the  erecting  of  works  for  the  refining  of  iron,  and 
which  it  is  conceived,  will  prove  of  great  advantage  to  the  public, 
in  clearing  land,  &c. ;  and  as  the  same  cannot  be  accomplished 
without  building  a  dam  across  said  river,  and  which,  according 
to  a  late  law  of  the  colony,  must  be  left  open  from  the  10th 
day  of  April  to  the  20th  day  of  May,  annually,  which  would 
entirely  frustrate  the  good  design  of  the  petitioners,  therefore 
prayed  that  they  might  have  the  liberty  of  building  their 
works,  and  erecting  a  dam  across  said  river,  for  the  purpose 
aforesaid,  without  being  obliged  to  leave  said  dam  open  within 
the  time  aforesaid  ; — 

Which  being  duly  considered,  be  it  enacted  by  the  General 
Assembly,  and  by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the 
petitioners  have  liberty  to  build  iron  works  on  the  south  side 
of  Pawtuxet  river,  and  adjoining  to  their  land,  for  the  purpose 
aforesaid,  and  to  erect  a  dam  across  said  river,  without  being 
obliged  to  leave  open  the  same  within  the  time  aforesaid. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £5  be  allowed  and  paid 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  George  Taylor,  Esq.,  a  justice  of 
the  peace,  in  the  county  of  Providence,  for  his  service  in  ad 
ministering  the  oaths  of  allegiance  from  a  company  of  soldiers 
raised  within  the  said  county  of  Providence,  to  go  in  the  ser 
vice  of  His  present  Majesty,  on  an  expedition  against  the 
Spaniards. 

VOL.  V.  3 


18  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1741. 

Whereas,  William  Jenckes,  of  Providence,  in  the  county  of 
Providence,  Esq.,  did  present  to  this  Assembly  a  copy  of  the 
record  of  the  laying  out  an  open  highway  from  Pawtucket 
bridge  on  the  other  side  thereof,  to  the  country  road,  to  the 
satisfaction  of  said  Assembly  ; — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  William 
Jenckes  draw  out  of  the  general  treasury  the  £50  granted  him 
at  the  last  October  session,  towards  building  one  half  of  said 
bridge. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £30  be  allowed  and 
paid  out  of  the  general  treasury  to  William  Jenckes,  Esq.^ 
which,  together  with  the  sum  of  £50  already  ordered  to  be 
paid  him  by  this  Assembly,  is  in  full  satisfaction  for  the  build- 
ing one  half  of  Pawtucket  bridge. 

An  Act  for  laying  an  embargo  on  vessels  (bound  to  sea)  upon 

any  emergent  occasion. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 
by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  His  Honor,  the  Gov- 
ernor, with  such  of  his  council  as  shall  be  present,  be,  and  they 
are  hereby  empowered  to  lay  an  embargo  upon  all  or  any  ves- 
sels in  this  colony,  from  time "  to  time,  as  they  shall  think 
needful. 

God  save  the  Kino-. 


Procccdinrjs  of  the  General  AsscmU//,  held  for  the  Colony  of  liliode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Nciqmri,  the  Uh 
day  of  May,  17-11. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  AVilliam  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 


1741.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  19 


ASSISTANTS. 

Capt.  Benjamin  Elleiy,  Mr.  John  Dexter, 

Mr.  Ezekiel  Warner,  Mr.  Philip  Arnold, 

Mr.  Richard  Fenner,  Mr.  John  Wickes, 

Mr.  Gideon  Cornell,  Mr.  Christopher  Phillips. 

Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins,  speaker. 
Mr.  Josias  Lyndon,  clerk. 

Voted,  that  the  following  be  admitted  freemen  of  this 
colony : 

Of  Newport,  Mathew  Pate,  Oliver  Arnold,  John  Jepson, 
Philip  Wilkinson,  Jonathan  Conklin,  Edward  Church,  Joshua 
Lyon,  William  Pinnegar,  Abraham  Borden,  Charles  Wickham, 
Jonathan  Easton,  Jr.,  Benjamin  Pitman,  Thomas  Melvil,  John 
Clarke,  shoemaker  ;  George  Gibbs,  William  Weeden,  Jr.,  Chris- 
topher Bennett,  William  Edmonds,  Abner  Coffin,  Walter  Rod- 
man, Henry  Taggart,  Philip  Wanton,  John  Goddard,  Israel 
Chapman,  Charles  Davenport,  Clement  Stanton,  Samuel  Hunt, 
Thomas  Brewer,  George  Cornell,  Jr.,  Peleg  Carr  and  Caleb 
Carr. 

Of  Providence,  Jonathan  Knight,  Jr.,  Silas  Field,  John  War- 
ner, Mathew  Manchester,  Phineas  Brown,  Thomas  Fenner,  son 
of  Joseph  ;  Richard  Fenner,  Jr.,  Charles  Atwood  and  William 
Borden. 

Of  Portsmouth,  Timothy  Lawton  and  William  Cogges- 
hall,  Jr. 

Of  Warwick,  Charles  Rhodes,  Anthony  Goff,  Samuel  Wales, 
Moses  Blanchard  and  Joseph  Wickes. 

Of  Westerly,  Ichabod  Pressor,  John  Lewis,  son  to  John 
Lewis,  Jr.,  Stephen  Lewis,  Jedediah  Irish  and  Peter  Cran- 
dalL 

Of  New  Shoreham,  Robert  Hull,  Nathaniel  Rathbun  and 
Samuel  Dun. 

Of  North  Kinffstown,  Simon  Smith,  Bber  Shearman,  son  of 


20  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1741. 

William ;  William  Draper,  Joseph  Rodman,  William  Reynolds 
Jeremiah  Gardner,  Jr.  and  Jonathan  Allen. 

Of  East  Greenwich,  James  Lewis,  John  WeUs,  Ehenezer 
Mattason,  John  Nichols,  son  of  Stephen  ;  William  Clarke,  Sam 
Rogers  and  Griflfen  Sweet. 

Of  Jamestown,  John  Eldred,  Joshua  Bill,  Thomas  Eldred 
and  Nathaniel  Church. 

Of  Smithfield,  Benjamin  Bufium,  Joseph  Buffum,  Philip 
Loja,  Ahiah  Angel,  Elisha  Arnold,  William  Whipple  and  Sam 
Irons. 

Of  Scituate,  Joseph  Berry,  David  Daley,  William  Collins, 
Thomas  Bennett,  Jr.  and  David  Young. 

Of  Glocester,  Benjamin  Smith. 

Of  Charlestown,  James  Rogers,  Jr.  and  Amos  Greene. 

Of  West  Greenwich,  Abraham  Mattason,  Samuel  Wilcox 
and  Samuel  Rogers,  Jr. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assenibly, held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  first 
Wednesday  of  May,  1741. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

DEPUTIES. 

For  Neivport.  For  Providence. 

Mr.  George  Goulding,  Mr.  John  Potter, 

Mr.  Daniel  Gould,  Col.  Jabez  Bowen, 

Col.  John  Cranston,  Mr.  Robert  Gibbs, 

Mr.  Joseph  Whipple,  Capt.  Jonathan  Randall. 
Capt.  Ezbon  Sanford. 


1741] 


AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


21 


For  Portsmouth. 
Mr.  Stephen  Brownell, 
Mr.  Gideon  Freeborne, 
Mr.  Daniel  Howland, 
Mr.  Robert  Lawton. 

For  Wanvick. 
Major  Joseph  Stafford, 
Mr.  William  Holdon, 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Lippett, 
Capt.  Abel  Potter. 

For  Westerly. 
Mr.  Thomas  Hiscox, 
Mr.  William  Champlin, 
For  New  SJioreJiam. 
Capt.  Simon  Ray, 
Mr.  Henry  Gardner. 

For  North  Kingstown. 
Mr.  Job  Tripp, 
Mr.  John  Reynolds. 

For  South  Kingstown. 
Capt.  Robert  Hassard, 
Capt.  Ichabod  Potter, 


DEPUTIES. 

For  Fast  Grecmvich. 
Mr.  Thomas  Spencer, 
Capt.  Thomas  Nichols. 

For  Jamestown. 
Capt.  Benjamin  Sheffield, 
Mr.  John  Martin. 
Smithficld. 
Mr.  Resolved  Waterman, 
Mr.  John  Sayles. 
Scitiiate. 
Mr.  Job  Randal], 
Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Jr.  Glocester. 

Mr.  Edward  Mitchell, 
Mr.  Richard  Steere. 

For  Charlestotvn. 
Mr.  Samuel  Perry, 
Mr.  Joseph  Clarke. 

West  Greenwich. 
Mr.  John  Greene, 
Mr.  Joseph  Slocum. 


Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins,  speaker. 
Mr.  Josias  Lyndon,  clerk. 

The  following    officers    were    declared    elected,    and  duly 
engaged. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 


Capt.  Benjamin  Ellery 
Mr.  Peter  Bours, 


ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Ezekiel  Warner, 
Mr.  Richard  Fenner, 


22  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1741. 


ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Gideon  Cornell,  Mr.  John  Wickes, 

Mr.  John  Dexter,  Mr.  Christopher  Phillips, 

Mr.  Philip  Arnold,  Mr.  Rouse  Ilelme. 

SECRETARY.  GENERAL  TREASURER. 

Mr.  James  Martin.  Mr.  Gideon  Wanton. 

An  Act  for  the  better  sccnrity  of  the  inhabitants  at  Block 

Island. 

Whereas,  in  the  present  war,  now  subsisting  between  His 
Sacred  Majesty,  the  King  of  Great  Britain  and  the  King  of 
Spain  :  the  inhabitants  at  Block  Island  (being  few  in  number) 
lie  very  much  exposed  to  the  depredations  of  the  enemy ; — 

For  preventing  whereof,  be  it  enacted  by  the  General  As- 
sembly of  this  colony,  and  by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted, 
that  the  field  officers  of  each  of  the  respective  counties  of  Provi- 
dence and  Kings  county,  be  empowered  to  impress  and  enlist 
ten  good  able  men  out  of  each  of  said  counties,  as  soldiers,  to 
be  sent  to  New  Shoreham,  forthwith  ;  and  as  soon  as  conven- 
iently may  be,  to  be  transported  at  the  charge  of  the  colony, 
and  there  to  remain  in  Ilis  Majesty's  service  for  the  space  of 
six  months,  for  the  assistance  and  protection  of  the  inhabit- 
ants of  said  island  against  the  enemy ;  which  soldiers  shall  be 
under  the  care  and  command  of  the  captain  of  said  island,  and 
such  lieutenant  as  shall  be  appointed  under  him,  by  His  Honor, 
the  Governor ;  and  such  soldiers  shall  be,  by  said  captain,  bil- 
leted out,  at  the  charge  of  the  inhabitants  of  said  island,  and 
shall  for  their  reward  and  service  be  entitled  to  receive  £o  per 
month,  out  of  the  General  Treasury,  by  a  certificate  under  the 
hand  of  the  said  captain,  duly  obtained. 

An  Act  for  appointing  and  erecting  a  court  of  equity,  to  hear  and 
determine  all  appeals  in  personal  actions  from  the  judgment 
of  the  superior  court. 
Whereas,  the  trial  uC  appeals  by  the  General  Assembly,  from 


1741.]  AND    TROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  23 

judgments  given  at  the  superior  court  of  judicature,  have,  hy 
long  experience,  been  found  prejudicial,  as  well  to  the  parties 
having  their  causes  determined  there,  as  well  as  to  the  govern- 
ment in  general,  by  the  public  business  being  neglected ; — 

For  remedy  whereof,  for  the  future,  be  it  enacted  by  the 
General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted 
that  the  act  regulating  the  appeals  from  the  judgments  of  the 
superior  court  to  the  General  Assembl}^,  be,  and  it  is  hereby 
repealed,  and  declared  null  and  void. 

And  that  for  the  future,  there  be  a  court  of  equity  appointed 
and  established,  to  consist  of  five  judges,  to  be  chosen  annually, 
by  the  General  Assembly,  and  to  be  commissionated,  any 
three  of  whom,  to  be  a  quorum ;  who  are  hereby  empowered 
and  authorized  to  hear  all  appeals  from  the  judgments  of  the 
superior  court,  in  personal  actions,  and  to  give  a  determination 
on  said  appeals,  by  affirming,  reversing  or  altering  the  judg- 
ments of  said  superior  court,  agreeably  to  law  and  equity,  in 
as  full  and  extensive  manner  as  the  General  Assembly  hath 
been  accustomed  to  do. 

And  that  said  court  be  held  in  Newport,  to  try  the  appeals 
from  the  judgments  of  the  superior  court,  held  at  said  Nev/port, 
the  last  Tuesday  of  March,  every  year,  on  the  fourth  Tuesday 
of  April,  annually  ;  and  at  Providence  and  South  Kingstown, 
by  turns,  to  try  the  appeals  from  the  judgments  given  at  the 
superior  court,  held  the  first  Tuesday  of  September,  as  hath 
been  accustomed  by  the  General  Assembly,  the  second  Tues- 
day of  October,  annually. 

And  for  the  better  regulating  and  governing  the  parties  ap- 
pealing from  the  judgments  of  the  superior  court,  as  aforesaid, 
that  where  an  appeal  is  had,  the  party  appealing,  is  hereby 
obliged  to  give  bond  for  the  prosecution  of  such  appeal ;  and 
to  procure  a  copy  of  the  whole  case,  and  file  his  reasons  of  ap- 
peal, with  the  clerk,  ten  days  before  the  sitting  of  such  court, 
where  the  appeal  is  to  be  heard  and  determined ;  and  that  the 
judgment  and  determination  of  said  court  shall  be  final,  saving 
an  appeal  to  His  Majesty,  in  council,  in  those  cases  wherem 
the  law  hath  already  provided. 


24  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1741. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
there  be  one  clerk  chosen  'and  appointed  for  the  aforesaid 
court ;  who  is  hereby  entitled  to  take  the  same  fees  as  hath 
been  taken  in  the  trial  of  appeals  by  the  General  Assembly. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Samuel  Clarke,  John  Potter,  Wil- 
liam Robinson,  John  Chipman  and  Thomas  Spenser,  Esqs.,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby  appointed  judges  of  the  court  of  equity, 
for  the  hearing  and  determining  of  appeals  from  the  judgments 
of  the  superior  courts  ;  and  that  James  Martin  be,  and  he  is 
hereby  appointed  clerk  of  said  court. 

An  Act  for  hearing  and  determining  all  such  appeals  as  bonds 

have  heretofore  been  given  for,  from  the  judgments  of  the 

superior  courts  of  judicature. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 
by  the  authority  of  the  same  it  is  enacted,  that  all  appeals  from 
the  judgments  of  the  superior  courts  of  judicature,  held  on  the 
first  Tuesdays  in  September,  and  the  third  Tuesda}^  in  March 
last  past,  shall  be  heard  and  determined  by  the  court  of  equity 
appointed  for  the  hearing  and  determining  of  appeals,  at  New- 
port, within  and  for  said  colony,  on  the  thu'd  Tuesday  in  July 
next ;  which  said  court  shall  have  full  power  and  authority  to 
determine  the  same  agreeably  to  law  and  equity,  in  as  exten- 
sive manner  as  the  General  Assembly  of  said  colony  hath  been 
accustomed  to  do  ;  and  that  the  reasons  of  appeal  shall  be  filed 
in  all  the  appeals  from  March  court  past,  ten  days  before  the 
sitting  of  said  court. 

God  save  the  King. 


1741.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  25 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhli/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  fourth  lion- 
day  in  June,  1741. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  trustees  of  Ninegret,  sachem, 
render  an  account  of  their  trust  to  the  next  session  of  this 
Assembly. 

Whereas,  there  was  an  act  passed  by  the  General  Assembly, 
at  their  session  held  in  September  last,  empowering  three  jus- 
tices of  the  peace  to  try  civil  actions  to  the  value  of  £5  • — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  it  was  not  the  intent 
of  said  act,  to  extend  to  bonds  given  to  the  general  treasurer 
and  grand  committee,  for  the  use  of  the  colony,  but  that  all 
actions  brought  for  such  bonds,  be  tried  at  the  inferior  court  of 
common  pleas. 

It  is  also  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  officers  in  this  colony, 
who  shall  serve  any  justices'  warrants,  shall  observe  the  same 
rules  in  respect  to  taking  bail,  as  the  several  sheriffs  are  held 
to  by  the  laws  of  this  colony. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  town  of  Jamestown,  in  the 
county  of  Newport,  be  and  they  are  hereby  empowered  to 
choose  another  warden,  so  as  to  make  three  in  the  whole. 

Whereas,  George  Ninegret,  Indian  sachem  of  the  Narra- 
gansett  Indians,  humbl}^  requested  of  this  honorable  Assem- 
bly to  appoint  George  Wanton,  of  Newport,  in  the  county 
of  Newport,  merchant,  one  of  his  overseers,  he  being 
well  assured  of  his  fidelity  and  justice  in  the  management 
of  his  affairs  ; — 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  ordered,  that  the  said  George 
Wanton  be,  and  he  is   hereby  appointed  a  trustee  or  overseer 

VOL.  V.  4 


26  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1741. 

to  the  said  sachem,  to  have  the  same  power  in  all  respects 
with  the  other  trustees. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  order  of  the  King  in  council, 
directing  the  form  of  prayer  for  the  royal  family,  be  forthwith 
published  in  the  several  churches,  and  other  places  of  public 
worship  in  this  colony;  and  that  the  secretary  send  a  copy  of 
said  order  to  the  minister  or  elder  of  ea'ch  and  every  society  in 
this  colony  immediately,  for  that  purpose. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  procure 
a  new  seal  for  the  colony,  to  be  engraven  with  the  same  motto 
as  the  old  seal  had ;  and  that  the  secretary  procure  the  old 
clasped  book  of  records  to  be  new  bound  ;  and  likeyvise  that 
he  procure  a  new  book  of  six  quires  of  paper,  for  the  records  of 
the  superior  court  of  judicature,  &c. ;  a  new  book  of  eight  quires 
of  paper,  for  recording  all  public  things  that  shall  be  required 
to  be  registered  in  this  colony  ;  and  likewise  a  new  book  of 
three  quires,  for  the  records  of  the  judgments  that  shall  be 
made  up  in  the  court  of  equity ;  and  also  that  the  sum  of  £o 
10s.  be  paid  to  Jacob  Hascey,  Jr.,  for  a  press  made  for  the  files 
of  papers  belonging  to  tlie  superior  court  of  judicature,  &c.,  and 
that  the  whole  charges  be  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

God  save  the  Kinir. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Asscmbfy,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Bhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantuiions,  at  Ncivjmi,  the  third 
Tuesday  in  August,  17 41. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputie*  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  incorporating  the  west  end  of  the  town  of  Warwick 
into  a  township,  and  the  same  to  be  distinguished  and  known 
by  the  name  of  Coventry. 


1741.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  27 

Whereas,  several  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Warwick, 
by  petition  to  this  Assembly,  did  set  forth  the  great  disadvan- 
tage they  labor  under,  on  account  of  the  great  extent  of  said 
town  ;  and  as  it  is  conceived  it  will  be  more  for  the  ease  and 
benefit  of  its  inhabitants  in  transacting  and  negotiating  the 
prudential  affairs  thereof,  to  have  a  division  made ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the 
authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  western  part  of  the 
town  of  Warwick  be  divided  and  set  off  from  the  eastern  part 
thereof,  by  a  north  and  south  line  drawn  from  the  most  western 
bounds  of  the  westernmost  of  the  Cowesset  farms,  and  incorpo- 
rated a  township,  and  the  same  to  be  distinguished  and  known 
by  the  name  of  Coventry ;  and  that  the  inhabitants  thereof, 
from  time  to  time,  shall  have  and  enjoy  the  like  benefits,  liber- 
ties, privileges  and  immunities  with  other  towns  in  this  colony, 
according  to  our  charter. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Peter  Bours,  Esq.,  be,  and  he  is 
hereby  appointed  to  make  an  account  of  the  whole  charges  this 
colony  has  been  at  in  the  controversy  between  said  colony  and 
the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  relating  to  the  eastern 
boundary  of  said  colony,  to  be  examined  by  the  committee  ap- 
pointed to  lay  a  statement  of  said  controversy  before  the  court 
of  commissioners,  before,  the  same  is  put  into  said  court. 

And  that  Peter  Bours,  Stephen  Hopkins,  Thomas  Spenser, 
Daniel  Updike  and  James  Honeyman,  Jr.,  Esqs.,  or  the  major 
part  of  them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee 
to  audit  the  accounts  of  the  several  inn-keepers  and  others,  for 
the  entertainment  of  the  persons  concerned,  and  obliged  to  at- 
tend on  the  said  court  of  commissioners. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  Thomas  Borden, 
amounting  to  £5  14^.  Id.,  for  the  entertainment  of  the  hon- 
orable lieutenant  governor  and  council  of  the  Province  of  the 
Massachusetts  Bay,  at  their  return  from  the  court  held  for  the 
trial  of  the  pirates,  in  October,  A.  D.  1738,  be  allowed,  and 
paid  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  act  passed  at  the  last  April 
session,  restricting  the  custom  house  officers  from  clearing  out 


28  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONS    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1741. 

any  vessels  until  bond  given  for  landing  all  provisions,  &c.,  in 
some  English  port,  be,  and  it  is  hereby  repealed  ;  and  that  this 
colony  govern  themselves  according  to  the  act  of  Parliament, 
against  the  exportation  of  provisions,  and  the  collector  and  na^ 
val  officer  of  this  port  to  be  served  with  a  copy  of  this  vote. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £31,  being  so  much  al- 
lowed of  the  account  of  John  Iloyle,  for  service  done  relating 
to  the  expedition  against  the  Spaniards,  be  paid  him  out  of  the 
general  treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  Col.  Peter  Mawny, 
amounting  to  £53  IO-5.  4d.,  being  for  his  journey,  horse-hire,  ex- 
penses, &c.,  to  and  from  New"  York,  in  order  to  notify  the  com- 
missioners appointed  by  His  Majesty,  for  settling  our  eastern 
boundaries,  of  the  arrival  of  said  commision,  and  to  leave  a 
copy  thereof  with  each  of  them,  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the 
general  treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  Clement  Cooper, 
amounting  to  £22,  being  for  himself  and  horse,  on  a  journey 
to  and  from  New  York,  in  the  service  of  the  commission,  with 
Col.  Peter  Mawney,  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general 
treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  two  accounts  exhibited  by  Col. 
Peter  Mawney,  respecting  the  billeting  of  soldiers,  relating  to 
the  expedition  against  the  Spaniards,  be  allowed,  as  audited  by 
the  committee  appointed  for  that  purpose  ;  said  Peter  Maw- 
ney's  account  amounting  to  £1,135  3s.  lid. ;  and  an  account 
of  Hugh  Battey,  amounting  to  £122  12^.  7d. ;  both  accounts 
amounting  to  £1,257  16s.  Qd. ;  out  of  which,  he  has  already 
received  from  the  general  treasurer  the  sum  of  £1,189, 
Is.  lid.;  so  there  remains  to  be  paid  to  the  said  Peter  Maw- 
ney, out  of  the  general  treasury,  the  sum  of  £68  14s.  7d.,  to 
complete  the  whole  of  said  accounts. 

Whereas,  Gideon  Wanton,  Esq.,  general  treasurer  of  the 
colony,  aforesaid,  did  represent  to  this  Assembly,  the  great 
trou])lc  and  difficulty  he  met  with  in  exchanging  of  £40,000 
in  old  bills,  and  halves  and  quarters  of  bills  in  tlic  years  1738 
and  1739,  of  other  emissions  before,  and  prayed  an  allowance 


1741.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  29 

for  the  same  ;  and  also  set  forth  the  great  increase  of  the  busi- 
ness of  the  general  treasurer,  since  the  salary  was  stated,  occa- 
sioned by  several  large  emissions,  and  the  payment  of  bounties 
on  several  commodities  ;  praying  therefore,  that  the  salary 
might  be  augmented  ; — 

Upon  consideration  whereof,  it  is  voted  and  enacted,  that  the 
said  Gideon  Wanton  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general 
treasury,  the  sum  of  £700,  for  his  trouble  in  exchanging  said 
£40,000  ;  but  that  his  salary  be  not  augmented. 

Whereas,  our  transports  were  discharged  from  His  Majesty's 
service,  sooner  than  they  should  have  been,  by  Ilis  Majesty's 
instructions ; — 

It  is  therefore  resolved,  that  Peter  Bours,  Esq.,  j\lessrs.  Geo. 
Goulding  and  Joseph  Whipple  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appoint- 
ed a  committee  to  examine  into  said  affair,  and  procure  what 
is  necessary,  for  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  to  write  to  our 
agent,  in  Great  Britain,  directing  him  to  apply  to  the  lords  of 
the  admiralty,  or  to  the  proper  board,  for  restitution  in  said 
affair. 

An  Act  granting  power  of  appealing  from  all,  or  any  part  of 
the  judgment  of  the  court  of  commissioners  relating  to  our 
eastern  boundaries. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colon}^,  and 
by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  Peter  Bours,  Sam'l 
Clarke,  Thomas  Spenser,  William  Jenckes,  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Daniel  Abbott,  Francis  Willett,  Henry  Bull,  Daniel  Updike, 
James  Honeyman,  Jr.,  Thomas  Ward  and  William  Bollan, 
Esqs.,  (who  were  appointed  a  committee  to  represent  and  man- 
age the  affairs  of  this  colony  before  the  commissioners  to  hear 
and  determine  the  boundaries  between  said  colony  and  the 
Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay),  bo,  and  they  or  any  four 
of  them,  are  hereby  fully  authorized  and  empowered  to  appear 
at  the  aforesaid  commissioners'  court  upon  their  adjournment 
on  the  4th  day  of  September  next,  at  Providence,  then  and 
there,  in  behalf  of  this  colony,  to  appeal  from  the  Avhole,  or  any 
part  of  the  judgment  of  the  said  commissioners,  pronounced  on 


30  KECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1741. 

the   oOtli  day  of  June  last  past,   as  they,  the  said  commitee, 
shall  think  proper. 
God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhl>/,  held  for  the  Colomj  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  first  Tuesday 
in  October,  1741. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  raising  recruits  to  be  transported  to  the  English 

camp,  on  the  island  of  Cuba. 

Whereas,  this  government  having  received  advice  from  Gen. 
Wentworth,'-'  that  there  is  an  absolute  necessity  of  raising  more 


*  From  the  camp  on  the  river  Humber, 

in  the  island  of  Cuba,  August  12,  1741. 

Sir :  His  Ma  jest}'  having  directed  me  to  use  my  best  endeavors  to  recruit  his  forces 
under  my  command  in  his  colonies,  in  North  America,  I  have  appointed  Capt. 
Hopkins  to  repair,  for  that  end,  to  your  province,  not  doubting  of  your  giving  him 
all  the  assistance  in  your  power,  to  levy  soldiers,  not  only  for  completing  Col. 
Gooch's  regiment,  but  it  practicable,  to  raise  a  greater  number,  either  to  fill  all  va- 
cancies in  the  two  old  corps,  and  in  the  marines,  or  to  form  another  battallion,  as 
it  shall  be  found  best  for  His  Majesty's  service. 

As  I  have  no  means  of  supplying  the  recruiting  officers  with  money,  you  will 
sir,  be  pleased  to  give  the  aforesaid  i.'aptain  credit  for  such  sums  as  may  be  wanted 
for  that  service,  and  to  draw  upon  the  Right  Honorable  Henry  Pelliam,  Esquire, 
the  paymaster  general,  fjr  the  said  use.  As  to  the  particular  sums  to  be  paid  to 
the  said  recruiting  oflicer,  I  refer  you  to  his  instructions,  which  he  will  lay  before 
you. 

All  such  as  shall  enlist  themselves  on  this  occasion,  will  be  entitled  to  the  advan- 
tages offered  by  His  Majesty,  in  his  instructions  on  the  first  raising  Col.  Gooch's 
regiment.  I  don't  doubt,  sir,  but  you  will  take  the  proper  measures  for  (heir  being 
transported   hither,  to  s'lpnort  v  hich  charge,  Klatter  myself  the  respective  prov- 


1741.]        '  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  31 

forces  for  His  Majesty's  service  in  the  present  expedition, 
against  the  subjects  of  the  King  of  Spain,  in  the  West 
Indies ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  col- 
ony, and  by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  a  procla- 
mation be  issued  forthwith  by  the  Governor,  as  an  encourage- 
ment for  soldiers  to  enlist,  to  offer  a  premium  or  a  bounty  of 
the  sum  of  £[)  of  the  old  tenor,  and  a  watch  coat  to  every  sol- 
dier that  shall  enlist,  and  go  in  his  Majesty's  service,  over  and 
above  forty  shillings,  sterling,  allowed  as  the  King's  bounty 
and  the  same  to  be  delivered  to  such  soldier,  on  going  aboard 
the  colony  sloop,  hereby  appointed  for  transporting  such  forces 
as  shall  be  raised,  to  the  island  of  Cuba. 

And  for  the  better  expediting  the  levying  of  the  aforesaid 
forces,  the  colonels  of  the  respective  regiments  within  this  gov- 
ernment, are  hereby  directed  to  call  together  the  soldiers  un- 
der their  command,  at  such  times  as  shall  be  judged  most 
suitable  and  convenient  by  Capt.  William  Hopkins,  for  the 
purpose  aforesaid. 

And  it  is  also  further  enacted,  that  Peter  Bours,  Esq., 
Messrs.  George  Goulding,  John  Cranston  and  Joseph  Whipple, 
be  a  committee  to  put  on  board  the  colony  sloop,  a  sufficient 
number  of  men,  in  order  for  the  security  of  said  sloop,  and  to 
take  a  cruise  after  the  transports  are  landed,  for  the  space  of 
three  months ;  and  the  captain  to  be  commissionated  by  His 
Honor,  the  Governor,  for  that  purpose,  and  to  receive  and  ob- 
serve such  instructions  as  shall  be  given  him  in  said  affair. 

And  the  aforesaid  committee  are  hereby  empowered  to  pro- 
cure all  necessaries  for  transporting  said  forces  at  the  charge 
of  the  colony,  and  to  draw  out  of  the  general  treasury  what 
monies  are  to  be  paid  to  Capt.  William  Hopkins  ;  and  also 
what  is  to  be  paid  to  the   soldiers,  and  to  do  all  and  every 


inces  will  make  a  provision,  as  all  His  Majesty's  dominions  in  the  West  Indies,  are 
particularly  interested  in  the  success  of  this  expedition. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  WENTWORTH. 
To  the  Honorable  Richard  Ward,  Esq.,  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 


32  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLOXT    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1741. 

thing  that  shall  he  found  necessary  for  transporting  said 
forces  ;  and  that  as  the  enlisted  soldiers  shall  be  sent  to  New- 
port, and  delivered  to  the  aforesaid  committee,  they  shall  be 
put  on  board  the  colony  sloop,  and  there  subsisted  at  the 
charo:e  of  the  o'ovcrnment. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  colony  sloop  sail  as  soon  as  so  many  men  present,  as  the 
vessel  will  carry  (exclusive  of  the  sailors),  or  as  soon  as  the 
above  said  committee  find  that  all  the  persons  have  enlisted  and 
embarked,  as  are  willing  to  go  in  the  service. 

And  the  aforesaid  committee  are  hereby  directed  to  supply 
Capt.  William  Hopkins  with  a  sufficient  sum  of  money,  to  be 
by  them  drawn  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  pay  the  £4,  al- 
lowed to  the  recruiting  officer,  for  each  mau  he  shall  enlist^ 
agreeable  to  General  Wentworth's  letter  to  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  and  said  Hopkins's  instructions  ;  and  that  the  said 
William  Hopkins  draw  bills  of  exchange  upon  the  paymaster 
general,  in  England,  for  the  same  ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  endorse  said  bills  in  behalf  of  the  colony,  to  any  per- 
son wlio  shall  offer  to  buy  the  same. 

And  bo  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  sum  of  £2,000  of  the  new  tenor,  be  forthwith  struck  ofij  in 
order  to  answer  the  present  exigency,  and  the  same  to  be  im- 
pressed by  Col.  John  Coddington,  and  to  be  signed  by  the 
grand  committee,  as  usual ;  and  when  finished,  to  be  lodged  in 
the  hands  of  the  general  treasurer,  for  the  purpose  aforesaid, 
wliich  sum,  if  not  sufficient,  the  cummittee  are  hereby  empow- 
ered to  draw  out  of  the  general  treasury  what  interest  money 
is  paying  in,  as  their  occasions  for  the  purpose  aforesaid  may 
require  ;  and  that  such  new  bills  as  shall  be  made,  shall  be 
paid  out  of  the  interest  money,  as  the  same  shall  be  p^aid  in 
in  order  to  be  burnt. 

Whereas,  several  of  the  eonuuittee  appointed  by  the  General 
Assembly,  to  attend  on  His  Majesty's  court  of  commissioners, 
for  settling  the  eastern  boundaries  of  this  colony,  made  appli- 
cation to  this  Assembly,  for  some  allowance  for  their  time  and 
service  in  said  ailUir  ; — 


1741.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  33 

Upon  consideration  whereof,  it  is  voted  and  ordered,  that 
there  be  allowed  out  of  the  general  treasury,  the  following  sums 
to  the  persons  hereinafter  named,  for  their  time  and  service  in 
the  above  mentioned  affiiir,  viz. : 

To  Col.  Daniel  Updike,  the  sum  of  £125 ;  to  Mr.  James 
Honeyman,  Jr.,  the  sum  of  £125  ;  to  Capt.  Henry  Bull,  the 
sum  of  £80  ;  to  Mr.  Thomas  Ward,  the  sum  of  ]25;  to  Mr. 
Stephen  Hopkins,  the  sum  of  £73  10^, ;  to  Mr.  Thomas  Spen- 
ser, the  sum  of  £40 ;  and  to  Peter  Bours,  Esq.,  the  sum  of 
£110. 

Voted  and  ordered,  that  Col.  Daniel  Updike,  Mr.  James 
Ploneyman,  Jr.  and  Mr,  Thomas  Ward,  be,  and  they  are  hereby 
appointed  a  committee,  to  draw  up  a  statement  of  the  case  of 
the  controversy  between  this  colony  and  the  Province  of  the 
Massachusetts  Bay,  relating  to  the  eastern  boundaries  of  this 
colony,  and  present  the  same  to  the  next  session  of  this  As- 
sembly," in  order  to  be  sent  home. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £10  be  allowed  and 
paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  Joshua  Bertrand,  one  of  the 
soldiers,  who  has  lost  an  arm  in  the  King's  service,  in  order  to 
enable  him  to  travel  to  Boston,  or  elsewhere,  to  get  a  passage 
home  to  England. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhlt/,  held  for  the  Colomj  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kingstoum,  the 
last  Wednesday  of  October,  1741. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  George  Brown,  Esq.,  re-deliver  to 
His  Honor,  the  deputy  governor,  the  duplicate  of  the  charter, 
taking  a  receipt  for  the  same. 

VOL.  V.  5 


34  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1741. 


RepoH  upon  the  Conneciicut  Boundary. 

"Whereas,  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  at  their  session,  held  on  the  third 
Tuesday  in  June  last  past,  did  appoint  the  Hon.  William  Greene,  Esq.,  Ezekiel 
Warner,  Esq.,  Me.ssrs.  Daniel  Abbott,  John  Jenkins  and  Ishmael  Spink,  or  the 
mijor  part  of  them,  to  examine  whether  the  boundary  marks  in  the  line  between 
said  colony,  and  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  at,  or  near  the  south  west  corner  of 
Warwick  Purchase,  be  removed,  and  make  report  thereof,  which  they  did  in  the 
followiiij^  manner,  viz. : 

Therefore,  in  obedience  to  the  Honorable  Assembly,  we  proceeded,  and  on  the 
7lh  day  of  July,  A.  D.  1741,  went  to  the  place  -where  Warwick  south-west  corner 
was  made  in  the  year  A.  D.  1728  (and  revised  in  the  year  1739),  which  place  three 
of  us,  viz.:  William  Greene,  Daniel  Abbott  and  Ishmael  Spink  well  remember;  we 
all  being  present  when  the  commissioners  of  both  governments  made  said  corner  in 
the  year  1 728,  and  helped  make  the  same  at  the  place  where  said  commissioners 
then  ordered  ;  and  we,  together  with  John  Jenkins,  were  at  the  revising  said  corner, 
in  the  year  1739 ;  and  we  all  well  remember  the  place,  it  being  remarkable  where 
said  corner  was  made  ;  it  being  a  large  heap  of  stones,  in  the  edge  of  a  swamp  • 
ami  said  Ezekiel  Warner  being  now  present,  with  the  rest  of  the  committee,  and 
sundry  other  persons,  who  declared  that  they  were  at  the  making  and  revising  said 
corner,  and  ilid  all  show  said  Warner  the  place  where  said  corner  was  made  ;  and 
also  several  trees  round  about  it,  that  were  marked  with  sundry  letters,  .some  of 
which  are  now  on  said  trees ;  and  some  appear  to  be  cut  out.  Now  we  found  the 
said  heap  of  stones,  to  be  all  removed  and  gone  from  said  place;  but  found  the  two 
first  mile  monuments  northward  and  southward  of  said  corner,  to  be  both  standing 
in  their  proper  places,  where  they  were  first  made  ;  and  we  found  a  large  lieap  of 
stones,  made  about  two  rods  and  a  half,  or  something  more,  to  the  eastward 
of  the  place,  where  said  Warwick  corner  was  made,  near  in  the  course  of  Warwick 
line,  and  upon  the  upland,  u]x>n  a  sort  of  knoll,  and  near  the  east  side  of  a  very 
large  pitch  pine  tree  ;  the  which  tree  is  now  marked  with  the  letters  I>.A.  J. J» 
W.C,  by  whom,  we  know  not,  for  we  never  saw  them  before,  nor  was  there  any 
heap  of  stones  at  said  place  at  any  time,  when  any  of  us  were  there  before. 

And  whereas,  three  of  us,  viz. :  Daniel  Abbott,  John  Jenkins  and  William 
Greene,  who  were  a  committee  on  the  part  of  this  colony,  to  revise  the  bounds  be- 
tween said  colony  and  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  did  do  the  same  in  the  year  1739, 
and  then  reported  to  the  Honorable  General  Assembly  of  said  colony,  that  we  found 
the  heap  of  stones  that  was  made  at  Warwick  corner,  in  the  year  1728,  to  be  re- 
moved, and  gone  from  the  place  where  it  was  made  ;  and  that  we  then,  in  the  pres- 
ence of  near  twenty  men,  made  a  large  heap  of  stones,  in  the  same  place  where 
the  former  heap  was  made,  near  the  east  side  of  a  tree,  which  (through  a  mistake) 
we  then  called  a  pitch  pine  tree ;  and  said  tree  we  then  marked  with  the  two  first 
tetters  of  our  names,  viz. :  D.A.  J.J.  "W'.O. ;  and  there  was  then  on  said  tree  an 
old  nihfk,  on  the  east  side  Ihereof,  below  where  we  made  the  abovesaid  letters, 
which  was  cut  ihrougl)  the  bark,  so  that  it  was  grown  partly  up  ;  but  could  then 
plainly  see  a  letter  K,  which  Iptfef,  with  all  the  abovesaid  letters,  we  all  now  saw  on 
Ao  same  tree.  And  although  the  barlt  of  said  tree  looks  very  nuich  like  a  pitch 
pine,  yet,  upon  a  more  particular  and   sUl^^t  examination   thereof,  wc  all  find  the 


1741.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  35 

same  tree  to  be  a  wliite  pine  ti-ee.     It   is   a   middling  tree   for   bigness,  something 

tall ;  but  does  not  appear    to    be   a  very  thrifty  tree  ;  it  is  sometliing  crooked,  and 

the  rounding  part  of  the  croolc  hangs  towards  the  north-west. 

All  which    is    humbly  submitted    to    the    Honorable    General   Assembly,  as  the 

report  of 

WILLIAM  GREENE,  JOHN  JENKINS, 

EZEIvlEL  WARNER,  ISHMAEL  SPINK. 

DANIEL  ABBOTT, 


Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be 
accepted. 

Whereas,  Col.  Daniel  Updike,  Messrs.  James  lloneyman,  Jr. 
and  Thomas  Ward,  at  the  last  session  of  this  Assembly'',  were 
appointed  a  committee  to  draw  up  a  statement  of  the  case  re- 
lating to  the  controversy  between  this  colony  and  the  Province 
of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  respecting  the  eastern  bounds  of  this 
colony,  which  being  not  yet  done  ; — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  they  be  still  con- 
tinued, for  the  purpose  aforesaid,  with  the  addition  of  Peter 
Bours  and  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esqs.,  they,  or  the  major  part  of 
them  to  draw  up  the  same  as  soon  as  may  be,  to  be  examined 
by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  and  so  many  of  his  council  as 
shall  be  present,  and  then  forthwith  sent  home  by  His  Honor, 
the  Governor. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £200  be  forthwith  sent 
home  to  our  agent,  in  Great  Britain,  to  enable  him  to  carry  on 
the  appeal  from  the  judgment  of  the  court  of  commissioners, 
relating  to  our  eastern  boundaries  (and  other  occasions  of  the 
colony);  and  that  Messrs.  Peter  Bours,  George  Goulding  and 
Joseph  Whipple,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  commit- 
tee to  draw  money  sufficient  out  of  the  general  treasury ;  and 
procure  said  sum  in  silver,  gold  or  bills  of  exchange,  and  send 
the  same,  with  the  said  appeal ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Gov- 
ernor, write  to  the  said  agent,  urging  him  to  use  his  best  en- 
deavors to  procure  a  decree  for  our  demands,  in  respect  to  said 
eastern  boundaries.  . 

Whereas,  divers  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Newport,  in  the 
county  of  Newport,  did  petition  this  honorable  Assembly,  for 
liberty  to  erect  an  artillery  company  in  said  town,  to  choose 

1151583 


36  RECORDS    OF   TILE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISL^VND  [1741. 

their  officers,  with   several   other   privileges  in  said   petition 
contained  ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  ordered,  that  Peter  Bonrs,  Esq., 
Col.  John  Cranston  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  draw  up  a  charter  for  consti- 
tuting said  artillery  company,  and  present  the  same  to  the  next 
session  of  this  Assembly, 

Upon  the  petition  of  sundry  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Prov- 
idence, in  the  county  of  Providence  ; — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £80,  be,  and  it  is 
hereby  allowed  towards  the  building  of  Pawtucket  bridge;  and 
that  Capt.  William  Burrough  draw  the  same  out  of  the  general 
treasury,  when  said  bridge  is  completed. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  that  part  of  the  act  of  the  General 
Assembly,  passed  at  their  last  session,  directing  the  sloop  Tar- 
tar to  take  a  cruise  after  the  soldiers  were  landed  (that  are  to 
be  transported  in  her  to  the  camp  on  the  island  of  Cuba),  be^ 
and  it  is  hereby  repealed ;  and  that  the  committee  then  ap- 
pointed, put  a  sufficient  number  of  men  upon  wages,  on  board 
said  sloop,  for  her  security ;  and  also  that  said  sloop  be  ordered 
to  return  as  soon  as  possible,  after  said  soldiers  are  landed 
there. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly  of  the  colony  aforesaid,  at 
their  session,  held  on  the  third  Tuesday  in  August  last,  did, 
among  other  things,  enact  that  the  west  end  of  the  town  of 
Warwick,  in  the  count}^  of  Providence,  should  be  set  off  and 
incorporated  into  a  township,  and  the  same  to  be  distinguished 
and  known  by  the  name  of  Coventry,  and  for  that  purpose,  ap- 
pointed Daniel  Abbott,  John  Potter  and  Thomas  Spenser,  Esqs., 
a  committee  to  divide  the  same,  who  have  made  the  following 
report,  viz. : 

Report  of  the  Committee  on  the  new  toivn  of  Covcntri/. 

We  having  met  in  said  Warwick,  on  the  24tli  day  of  August  last  past,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  run  said  line,  beginning  at  the  westernmost  part  of  the  Coweset  Farms, 
in  said  Warwick,  and  from  thence  run  one  line  south,  seven  degrees  west,  until  we 
came  to  the  north  bounds    of   East    Greenwich,  and  the  south  bounds  of  said  War- 


1742.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  37 

•wick,  where  we  made  a  large  heap  of  stones,  making  several  heaps  of  stones  in  the 
said  line,  and  marking  several  trees  in  said  line,  with  the  letter  W  on  the  east,  and 
the  letter  C  on  the  west ;  then  beginning  at  the  first  mentioned  bounds,  and  run 
north  seven  degrees  east,  until  we  came  to  the  north  bounds  of  said  Warwick,  and 
the  south  bounds  of  Providence,  making  a  large  heap  of  stones  on  the  cast  end  of  a 
rock,  in  said  bounds,  and  made  several  heaps  of  stones,  and  marked  several  trees  in 
said  line,  as  aforesaid  ;  the  which,  we  now  make  as  our  return  for  the  fixed  and 
certain  bounds  between  the  aforesaid  town  of  Warwick  and  the  aforesaid  town  of 
Coventry  ;  and  that  the  said  town  of  Coventry  be  bounded  east  on  the  town  of 
Warwick,  south  on  East  and  West  Greenwich,  west  on  the  line  that  divides  the 
colony  of  llhode  Island,  &c.,  and  the  colony  of  Connecticut ;  and  north,  on  the 
south  bounds  of  the  towns  of  Providence  and  Scituate. 

Which  report  is  voted  to  be  accepted. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £62  be  allowed  and 
paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  Col.  Daniel  Abbott,  being 
for  his  service  in  attending  the  court  of  commissioners,  relating 
to  the  eastern  boundaries,  and  other  expenses  on  said  affair. 

Upon  the  petition  of  sundry  persons,  relating  to  a  highway 
in  Wecacheconet,  in  the  township  of  Warwick,  in  the  county  of 
Providence ; — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Stephen  Hopkins,  John  Jen- 
kins and  Immanuel  Northup,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereb}^ 
appointed  a  committee  to  view  and  inspect  into  the  circum- 
stance of  the  aforesaid  highway,  and  make  report  to  the  next 
session  of  this  Assembly. 

God  save  the  Kin  a;. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemUi/  held  for  the  Colony  of  Bhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kingstoivn,  the 
1st  dag  of  Fehruarg,  1741-42. 

The  lion.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Whereas,  Rouse  Helme,   Esq.,  Messrs.  Jeremiah  Lippett  and 
Job  Tripp,  Jr.,  were  appointed    a    committee    to    audit  the  ac- 


38  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1T42. 

counts  of  Col.  Joseph  Stanton,  one  of  the  trustees  of  the  Indian 
sachem,  and  to  make  report  thereon,  which  they  accordingly 
did  ;  and  reported  that  they  found  a  balance  due  to  the  said 
Joseph  Stanton,  of  £142  125.  od.,  that  he  had  advanced  more 
than  received,  on  account  of  the  said  sachem. 

Whereas,  Matliew  Hobinson,  of  Newport,  in  the  county  of 
Newpoii,  presented  an  account  to  this  General  Assembly,  as 
one  of  the  clerks  in  the  late  commissioners'  court,  respecting 
the  eastern  boundaries,  for  his  daily  attendance  on  said  court, 
book  of  records,  horse-hire,  expenses,  &c..  craving  an  allowance 
and  payment  thereof; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £166  ds. 
Gel,  be  allowed  and  paid  to  the  said  jMathew  Hobinson,  by 
the  committee  appointed  to  pay  the  charges  arising  on  said 
court. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £10,  be  allowed  and 
paid  out  of  tlie  general   treasury,  to  the   executors    of  John 
"Wickes,  Esq.,  deceased,  being  for   the  General  Assembly's  sit- 
ting at  his  house  in  Wai'Avick,  several   times,  and  for  fire-wood 
and  attendance  at  said  times. 

Whereas,  upon  the  settlement  between  this  colony,  and  the 
Province  of  the  JMassachusetts  Bay,  of  the  accounts  relating  to 
the  controversy  about. the  boundaries,  there  was  a  balance  due 
to  this  colony  of  £173  I65.  Id.; — 

It  is  therefore  resolved,  that  Peter  Bours,  Esq.,  be,  and  he 
is  hereby  appointed  to  write  to  Samuel  Wells,  Esq.,  to  urge  the 
payment  of  said  balance,  and  receive  the  same. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  John  Cranston,  ]\Iessrs.  Josias 
Lyndon  and  James  ^lartin,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed 
a  committee,  to  audit  the  accounts  of  Peter  Bours  and  William 
Ellery,  Esqs.,  jSIcssrs.  George  Goulding  and  Joseph  Whipple, 
who  were  the  persons  appointed  to  draw  money  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury  to  defray  the  charges  of  the  commissioners,  &c., 
and  make  report  to  the  next  session  of  this  Assembly. 

Voted  and  resolved,  tliat  Mr.  Samuel  Perr}'^,  be,  and  he  is 
hereby  dismissed  from  being  a  trustee  to  George  Ninegret,  the 
Indian  sachem,  the  said  sachem  having  desired  the  same. 


1742.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  39 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  James  Honeyman,  Jr.  and  Thomas 
Ward,  Esqs.,  and  James  Martin,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  revise  the  laws  of  this  colony,  in  order 
that  the  same  may  be  re-printed  in  a  suitable  time. 

Whereas,  the  preservation  of  this  colony  in  time  of  war,  de- 
pends, under  God,  chiefly  upon  the  military  skill  and  discipline 
of  the  inhabitants  ;  and  it  being  necessary,  in  order  to  revive 
and  perpetuate  tlie  same,  to  form  and  establish  a  military  com- 
pany, which,  by  acquainting  and  accustoming  themselves  to 
the  military  exercises  by  more  frequent  trainings,  than  the 
body  of  the  people  can  attend,  may  serve  for  a  nursery  of  skill- 
ful officers  ,•  and  in  time  of  an  actual  invasion,  by  their  superior 
skill  and  experience  may  render  the  whole  militia  more  useful 
and  effectual ; — 

And  whereas,  a  number  of  the  principal  inhabitants  of  the 
town  of  Newport,  viz.:  Jahleel  Brenton,  Godfrey  Malbone, 
Samuel  Wickham,  Henry  Collins,  John  Gidley,  James  Iloney- 
man,  Jr.,  John  Brown,  Nathaniel  Coddington,  Jr.,  Peleg  Brown, 
Charles  Bardin,  Simon  Pease,  David  Chesebrough,  Philip  Wil- 
,  kinson,  John  Freebody,  Jr.,  Thomas  Wickham,  Walter  Cranston, 
Seuton  Grant  and  William  Vernon,  have  freely  oiFered  them- 
selves to  begin,  and  with  such  others  as  shall  be  added  to 
them,  to  form  such  a  company  ;  and  by  their  humble  petition, 
have  prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  them  a  charter,  with  such 
privileges,  and  under  such  restrictions  and  limitations,  as  the 
Assembly  shall  think  proper  ; — 

Wherefore,  this  Assembly,  for  the  reasons  and  considera- 
tions aforesaid,  and  in  order  that  all  due  encouragement  may 
be  given  to  the  laudable  and  useful  design  of  the  petitioners, 
have  ordained,  constituted  and  granted,  and  by  these  presents 
do  ordain,  constitute  and  grant,  that  they,  the  said  petitioners, 
Jahleel  Brenton,  Godfrey  Malbone,  Samuel  Wickham,  Henry 
Collins,  John  Gidley,  James  Honeyman,  Jr.,  John  Brown,  Na- 
thaniel Coddington,  Jr.,  Peleg  Brown,  Charles  Bardin,  Simon 
Pease,  David  Chesebrough,  Philip  Wilkinson,  John  Freebody, 
Jr.,  Thomas  ¥/ickham,  Walter  Cranston,  Sucton  Grant  and 
William  Vernon,  together  v/ith  such  others  as  shall  bo  hereaf- 


40  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1742. 

ter  added  to  them  (not  exceeding  the  number  of  one  hundred 
in  the  whole,  officers  included),  be,  and  they  are  hereby  de- 
clared to  be  a  military  company,  by  the  name  of  the  Artillery 
Company,  of  the  town  of  Newport ;  and  by  that  name,  they 
shall  have  perpetual  succession,  and  shall  have  and  enjoy  all 
the  rights,  powers  and  privileges  in  this  grant  hereafter 
mentioned. 

[The  charter  of  this  company  is  omitted  here.] 

[The  following  public  laws  passed  in  the  year  1741,  will  be 
found  printed  at  length  in  the  public  laws  of  1744,  except 
those  designated  as  repealed.] 

4 

An  Act  for  the  more  effectual  putting  the  colony  in  a  proper 
posture  of  defence. 

An  Act  for  regulating  the  laying  out  highways  in  the  sev- 
eral towns  of  this  colony. 

An  Act  for  equipping  the  colony's  sloop,  and  sending  her 
out  on  a  cruise,  &c. 

An  Act  for  laying  an  embargo  on  vessels  (bound  to  sea)  on 
any  emergent  occasion. 

An  Act  for  prohibiting  the  exportation  of  provisions  and  naval 
stores  to  any  foreign  ports. 

An  Act  empowering  the  town  council  of  each  town  within 
this  colony,  to  bind  out  as  apprentices,  poor  children,  that 
are  likely  to  become  chargeable  to  the  town  wherein  they 
live. 

An  Act  for  ascertaining  the  board  wages  of  all  persons  that 
shall  be  employed  to  work  at  Fort  George.     (Ivcpealed.) 

An  Act  made  in  addition  to  an  act,  entitled  "  An  act  made  in 
addition  to,  and  in  amendment  of  an  act  passed  Septem- 
ber, 1740,  for  the  emission  of  £'20,000,  in  bills  of  public 
credit." 

An  Act  for  striking  off  £2,000  in  bills  of  public  credit  of  the 
new  tenor,  fur  the  supply  of  the  general  treasury. 

An  Act  for  lengthening  the  time  of  vessels'  cruising,  that  are 
employed  in  tlio  colony's  service. 


1742.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  41 

An  Act  in  addition  to  an  act,  appointing  court  martials  within 

this  colony. 
An  Act  for  appointing  and  erecting  a  court  of  equity,  to  hear 

and   determine    all  appeals    in    personal   actions   from  the 

judgments  of  the  superior  court. 
An  Act  in  addition  to  an  act  entitled  "  An  act  for  establishinfr 

vendue  masters  throughout  this  colony." 
An  Act  for  incorporating  the  west  end  of  the  town  of  Warwick 

into  a  township,  and  the  same  to  be  distinguished  and  known 

by  the  name  of  Coventry, 
An  Act  for  emitting  £2,000   of  the   new  tenor,  for  defraying 

the  charge  of  raising  and  transporting  a  number  of  recruits 

to  the  English  camp  on  the  island  of  Cuba. 
An  Act  for  hearing  and  determining  all  such  appeals,  as  bonds 

shall  be  given  for,  from  the  judgments  of  the  superior  court 

of  judicature,   held   by  adjournment   in   September,  1741- 

(Repealed.) 
An  Act  for  calling  in  and  exchanging  the  £24,000,  emitted  by 

by  this  colony  in  the  year  1740. 
An  Act  enabling  George  Ninegret,  sachem,  to    sell  some  land 

in  the  Narragansett   countr3^  for  the  payment  of  his  just 

debts. 

God  save  the  Kina;. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the 
Uhday  of  May.llil. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

VOL.  V.  0 


42  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1742. 


ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Peter  Bours,  Mr.  John  Dexter, 

jNIr.  William  Ellery,  Mr.  Daniel  Howland, 

Mr.  Richard  Fenner,  Mr.  Christopher  Phillips. 

Mr.  William  Robinson,  speaker. 
Mr.  Josias  Lyndon,  clerk. 

Voted,  that  the  following  be  admitted  freemen  of  this 
colony  : 

Of  Newport,  Clothier  Pearce,  Jr.,  William  Wiatt,  Grindall^ 
Tharst  n  Gideon  Cornell,  Seth  Luther,  George  Cornell,  son  of 
William ;  Charles  Wiekham,  John  Sherman,  Samuel  Tilling- 
hast,  James  Milward,  John  Dawby,  Joseph  Cowley,  Thomas 
Davenport,  Joseph  Stacey,  Aaron  Sutton,  Benjamin  Clarke, 
John  Curtain,  Peleg  Chapman,  Peter  Bowdoin,  Francis  Pope^ 
Thomas  Freebody,  Joseph  Thurston,  John  Dennis  and  John 
Brewer. 

Of  Providence,  Stephen  Hopkins,  John  Angel,  the  3d,  Eli- 
jah Dean,  Nathan  Mathewson,  Jonathan  Olney,  Timothy  Ma- 
son, John  Wanton,  John  Colwell,  Joshua  Remington,  Edward 
Thurber,  John  Johnson,  Richard  Smith,  Israel  Gibbs,  Roger 
Ivinnicutt  and  Samuel  Curry. 

Of  Portsmouth,  William  Earle,  Jr.,  Francis  Brayton  and  Sam- 
uel Pearce. 

Of  Warwick,  William  Wood,  Robert  Westgate,  Jr.,  Joseph 
Phillip,  Increase  Greene  and  Edward  Case. 

Of  North  Kingstown,  Arthur  Ayiesworth,  son  of  Philip  ; 
Philip  Card,  Samuel  Thomas,  James  Fowler,  Benjamin  Bur- 
dick,  Robert  Nichols  and  Ezekiel  Sheffield. 

Of  South  Kingstown,  Jeoffrey  Ilassard,  Roger  Mowrey,  Ste- 
phen Cotterel,  Jr.,  George  Gardner,  Jr.,  William  Taylor,  Tenant 
Tift,  Thomas  Ilassard,  son  of  Robert ;  Thomas  Browning  and 
William  Ilassard. 


1742.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  43 

Of  East  Greenwich,  Caleb  Vaughan  and  Thomas  Nichols,  son 
of  Thomas. 

Of  Jamestown,  John  Carr  and  John  Clarke,  tanner. 

Of  Scituate,  Joseph  Wilkinson,  Charles  Beers,  Benjamin 
Taylor,  William  King,  John  Stafford  and  Hezekiah  Walker. 

Of  Glocester,  Thomas  Field,  Abner  Bartlett  and  Hezekiah 
Mitchell. 

Of  Charlestown,  Thomas  Gould,  Joseph  Tanner,  Enoch  Lewis 
and  Joseph  Card. 

Of  West  Greenwich,  Thomas  Draper,  James  Reynolds,  son 
of  Francis  ;  Jacob  Lewis  and  John  Albro. 

Of  Coventry,  Aaron  Bowen,  Samuel  Cook,  John  Atherton, 
Benjamin  Blanchard,  Ebenezer  Perkins,  Joseph  Carpenter, 
Adam  Love,  Daniel  Welch,  Samuel  Cook,  Jr.,  Joseph  Sweet, 
Joseph  Arnold,  Gabriel  Love,  J.uues  Stronnihorn,  Richard 
Herendon,  William  Bennett  and  Mathew  Roberts. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembli/y  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  first 
Wednesday  in  May,  174  2. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Willian  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

DEPUTIES. 

For  Newport.  For  Providence. 

Mr.  George  Goulding,  Col  Daniel  Abbott, 

Mr.  Daniel  Gould,  Mr.  William  Burton, 

Mr.  Nicholas  Easton,  Col.  Jabez  Bowen, 

Col.  John  Cranston,  Capt.  Jonathan  Randall 
Mr.  Joseph  Whipple, 
Capt.  Ezbon  Sanford. 


u 


RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND 


[1742. 


For  Poiisnwuth. 
Mr.  John  Lawton, 
Capt.  Jeremiah  Lawton, 
Mr.  Robert  Lawton, 
Mr.  Wm.  Anthony,  Jr. 

Fo7'  Wanvick. 
Major  Joseph  Stafford, 
Mr.  John  Rhodes, 
Capt.  Wm.  Rice, 
Mr.  Barlow  Greene. 
For  Westerly. 
Mr.  Wilham  Champliii,  Jr, 
Capt.  John  Maxon. 

For  Ne20  Shoreham. 
Mr.  Edward  Sands, 
Mr.  William  Rock. 

For  North  Kingstown. 
Mr.  John  Reynolds, 
Col.  Immanuel  Northup. 

For  South  Kingstown. 
Mr.  Wm.  Robinson, 
Mr.  Jonathan  Hassard. 


DEPUTIES. 

For  East  Greenwich. 
Mr.  John  Spenser,  Jr., 
Mr.  John  Fry. 

For  Janiestoum. 
Capt.  Benjamin  Sheffield, 
Capt.  Josiah  Arnold. 
For  Smithjield. 
Mr.  James  Aldrich, 
Mr.  John  Sayles. 

For  Seitaate. 
]\lr.  Job  Randall, 
Mr.  Thomas  Realph. 
For  Glocester. 
Capt.  John  Smith, 
]\Ir.  Richard  Steere. 

For   Charlesiown. 
Mr.  Samuel  Perry, 
Capt.  Christopher  Champlin. 

For  West  Greemvich. 
Mr.  John  Spenser, 
Mr.  Joseph  Slocum. 
For  Coventry/. 
Capt.  Abel  Potter, 
Mr.  Robert  Greene. 


Mr.  William  Robinson,  speaker. 
Mr.  Josias  Lyndon,  clerk. 

The   following    officers   were    declared 
engaged. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor 


elected,   and    duly 


ASSISTANTS. 


Mr.  Peter  Bours, 
Mr.  William  Ellery, 
Mr.  Ezekiel  Warner, 
Mr.  Richard  Fenner. 
Mr.  John  Dexter, 


Mr.  Daniel  Howland, 
Mr.  Philip  Arnold, 
Capt.  James  Arnold, 
Ml'.  Daniel  Coggeshal!. 
Mr.  Rouse  Helme. 


1742.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  45 


SECRETARY.  GENERAL    TREASURER. 

Mr.  James  Martin.  Mr.  Gideon  Wanton. 

His  Honor,  the  Governor,  took  the  oath  to  the  acts  of  trade 
and  navigation,  in  presence  of  the  general  council. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Deputy  Governor 
and  Col.  Daniel  Abbott,  be  a  committee  to  join  with  a  commit- 
tee to  be  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly  of  the  colony  of 
Connecticut,  in  order  to  erect  a  large  monument  at  Warwick 
south-west  corner,  in  the  line  between  this  colony,  and  the  said 
colony  of  Connecticut,  in  the  same  place  that  was  settled  and 
agreed  upon  by  committees  appointed  by  both  said  colonies? 
some  years  past ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  or  deputy 
governor,  write  to  the  government  of  Connecticut,  desiring 
them  to  appoint  a  committee  to  meet  our  committee  at  said 
.place,  at  such  time  as  they  shall  appoint ;  and  if  it  shall  so 
happen,  that  no  committee  of  said  colony  of  Connecticut,  do 
not  meet  oar  said  committee,  at  the  time  and  place,  aforesaid, 
then  they  are  to  proceed  ex  parte,  and  erect  a  monument  in 
the  place  above  mentioned. 

Whereas,  John  Potter,  of  South  Kingstown,  in  the  county  of 
Kings  county,  did,  by  petition  to  this  Assembly,  set  forth,  that 
at  the  superior  court  of  judicature,  &c.,  held  at  Newport, 
within  and  for  said  colony,  on  the  last  Tuesday  in  March  past, 
he  was  sentenced  to  stand  in  the  pillory  five  times,  or  pay  five 
several  fines,  amounting  in  the  whole  to  £10,000,  the  last  pay- 
ment to  be  made,  or  punishment  suffered  to  be  on  the  21st  day 
of  June  next;  and  being  desirous  to  avoid  suffering  the  infa- 
mous punishment,  aforesaid  ( it  being  a  thing  impracticable  to  raise 
so  large  a  sum  within  so  short  a  time),  prayed  that  he  might  have 
the  liberty  of  paying  in  gold  dust  at  £20  per  ounce,  into  the 
general  treasury,  the  sum  of  £5,000,  being  the  one-half  of  his 
several  fines;  and  that  thereupon  this  honorable  Assembly 
would  please  to  allow  a  further  time  for  the  payment  of  the 
other  half  into  the  general  treasury,  he  giving  good  socunty 
for  that  purpose  ; — 


4G  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1742. 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  petitioner, 
John  Potter,  have  the  liberty  of  paying  the  sum  of  £5,000 
(being  one-half  of  all  his  fines),  into  the  general  treasury,  in 
gold  dust,  at  £20  per  ounce;  and  that  Peter  Bours,  Esq.,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby  appointed  to  examine  said  gold  dust,  with  the 
general  treasurer,  to  see  that  the  same  is  merchantable  ;  and 
that  upon  the  petitioner's  so  doing,  he  have  a  further  time 
granted,  until  the  8th  day  of  October,  next  ensuing,  for  the 
payment  of  the  other  £5,000,  being  the  remaining  half  of  all 
his  fines,  he  giving  bond  to  tlie  general  treasurer  of  this 
colony,  with  two  sufficient  sureties,  to  pay  the  same  at  the  said 
time. 

Whereas,  the  inhabitants  of  New  Shoreham,  in  the  county 
of  Newport,  did  set  forth,  that  they  were  under  difficult  cir- 
cumstances respecting  their  piers,  the  old  one  being  almost  de- 
stroyed, and  the  new  one  barred  up,  occasioned  by  great 
storms  in  the  winter  seasons ;  and  as  the  said  piers  are  not 
only  of  great  service  to  the  said  inhabitants,  but  to  all  others 
living  within  the  government,  the  same  being  convenient  for 
boats  and  small  vessels  to  harbor  in  ;  and  as  your  petitioners 
have  been  at  great  charges  to  repair  the  same,  and  their  en- 
deavors have  hitherto  proved  fruitless,  by  the  frequent  storms 
that  have  happened,  before  the  same  could  be  completed, 
therefore  prayed  this  General  Assembly  to  allow  them  so  mucli 
money  (towards  building  the  pier)  as  was  allowed  last  summer 
to  the  soldiers  sent  there,  for  their  assistance,  and  that  they 
would  lessen  that  charge  by  doing  more  duty  themselves ; — 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  ordered,  that  the  sum  of  £200 
be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  Capt.  Edw. 
Sands,  for  the  uses  and  purposes  aforesaid. 

Whereas,  Col.  John  Cranston  (as  captain  of  Fort  George), 
did  present  to  tliis  General  Assembly,  an  account  for  his  own 
service  the  last  year,  and  for  the  service  and  allowance  of 
1)oard  wages,  to  the  gunner,  and  two  other  men  at  said  fort, 
from  the  1st  day  of  November,  1741,  to  the  1st  day  of  May 
instant,  being  six  months,  and  amounting  to  the  sum  of  £220 
T'lv.,  riming  an  allowance  lliereof; — 


1742.]  AND   PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  47 

Whereupon, it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  sum  of  £220 
IQs.,  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  the 
said  John  Cranston,  for  him  to  pay  the  said  gunner  and  two 
other  men,  their  several  parts  thereof. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemUi/,  Mdfor  the  Colon?/  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neiuport,  the  21st  day 
of  June,  1742. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Wilham  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £15  be  allowed  and  paid 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  Benjamin  Ellery  and  Peter 
Bours,  Esqs.,  being  for  their  trouble  in  procuring  and  charter- 
ing the  sloop  Olive  Branch,  Aaron  Sheftield,  master,  for  pur- 
chasing the  provisions  and  stores  in  said  sloop,  to  accommodate 
the  honorable  commissioners  from  Nova  Scotia. 

Whereas,  Benjamin  Ellery  and  Peter  Bours,  Esqs.,  Messrs. 
Joseph  Whipple  and  Josias  Lyndon,  were  appointed  a  commit- 
tee to  audit  the  accounts  respecting  the  billeting  of  soldiers  in 
the  county  of  Newport,  that  were  raised  in  this  colony,  to  go 
against  the  Spaniards,  and  the  charges  accruing  thereon,  did 
report  that  they  had  examined  the  several  accounts  relating 
thereto,  and  found  the  whole  of  the  amount  of  the  said  accounts 
exhibited  by  Col.  John  Gardner,  to  be  £3070  18^.  4c/.;— 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be 
accepted  (saving  one  article  of  £17  lOs.  for  the  board  of  Ser- 
geant Welsh's  wife,  paid  James  Davis,  which  is  rejected),  the 
persons  exhibiting  said  accounts,  having  received  fidl  satisfac- 
tion for  the  same. 

Whereas,  Benjamin  Ellery  and   Peter  Bours,  Esqs.,  Messrs. 


48  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAJNTD  [1742. 

Joseph  Whipple  and  Josicas  Lyndon  were  appomted  a  commit- 
tee to  audit  the  accounts  respecting  the  billeting  of  soldiers  in 
the  county  of  Kings  county,  that  were  raised  in  this  colony,  to 
go  on  an  expedition  against  the  Spaniards,  and  the  charges  ac- 
cruing thereon,  did  report  that  they  had  examined  the  several 
accounts  relating  thereto,  and  found  the  whole  of  the  amount 
of  said  accounts  exhibited  by  Col.  Joseph  Stanton,  to  be  £541 
2..;- 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be 
accepted,  the  persons  exhibiting  said  accounts,  having  received 
full  satisfaction  for  the  same. 

Whereas,  Benjamin  Ellery  and  Peter  Bours,  Esqs.,  Messrs. 
Joseph  Whipple  and  Josias  Lyndon,  were  appointed  a  commit- 
tee to  audit  the  accounts  of  the  charges  arising  on  the  transports 
hired  by  this  government,  to  convey  the  soldiers  to  General 
"Wentworth's  camp  on  the  island  of  Cuba,  did  report  tliat  they 
had  examined  the  several  accounts  exhibited,  and  found  the 
same  amounted  to  £2,797  7s.  4t/. ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be 
accepted,  the  persons  exhibiting  said  accounts,  having  already 
received  full  satisfaction  for  the  same. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly  have  ordered  a  new  impres- 
sion of  bills  of  public  credit,  for  exchanging  the  late  emission  of 
bills  of  the  new  tenor,  some  of  the  which  have  been  counter- 
feited, and  persons  appointed  to  exchange  the  same,  and  a 
great  part  of  the  new  impression  being  now  finished  and  ready 
for  exchanging  ; — 

It  is  therefore  resolved,  that  all  persons  possessed  of  any  of 
said  bills  of  the  late  emission  of  the  new  tenor,  be,  and  they 
are  hereby  directed  to  bring  the  same  to  be  exchanged  by  the 
persons  appointed  for  that  purpose,  by  the  25th  day  of  Octo- 
ber next ;  and  that  after  that  time,  the  currency  of  said  bills 
be  stopped,  if  any  remain  out ;  and  that  the  same  be  inserted 
ill  the  public  prints,  together  with  the  names  of  the  persons 
appointed  to  cxeliangc  the  same. 

Voted,  that  Jainos  llonc3'man,  Jr.  and  Daniel  Updike,  Esqs. 
be  allowed  and  p;ii(l  out   of  ilie    general    treasury,  the  sum  ol 


1742.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  49 

£150,  each,  for  their  extraordinary  services  in  the  prosecution 
of  sundry  criminals  for  counterfeiting  the  bills  of  public  credit, 
emitted  by  this  colony. 

Upon  the  petition  of  Thomas  Potter,  Esq.,  sheriff  of  the 
county  of  Newport,  craving  an  allowance  for  entertaining  and 
looking  after  one  Francisco  Lorenzo  (master  of  a  Spanish  pri- 
vateer), brought  into  this  colony  by  Capt.  Benjamin  Norton,  in 
his  privateer  sloop,  called  the  Revenge,  and  ordered  into  the 
custody  of  the  said  Thomas  Potter,  by  His  Honor,  the  Gov- 
ernor, on  the  1st  day  of  March  last  past ; — 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  ordered,  that  the  sum  of  fifty 
shillings  per  week,  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general 
treasury,  to  the  said  Thomas  Potter,  for  his  entertainment  and 
care  of  the  said  Francisco  Lorenzo,  from  the  said  1st  day  of 
March  last  past,  during  his  stay  with  the  said  Thomas 
Potter. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £30  be  allowed  and 
paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  Thomas  Potter,  Esq.,  sheriff 
of  the  county  of  Newport,  for  his  time  and  expenses  on  the 
several  examinations  of  sundry  persons  apprehended  for  coun- 
terfeiting the  bills  of  public  credit  of  this  colony,  and  appre- 
hending sundry  persons  concerned  therein. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  John  Frye,  Esq.,  be,  and  he  is 
hereby  chosen  one  of  the  trustees  to  the  Indian  sachem,  in  the 
room  of  his  father,  Thomas  Frye,  Esq.,  who  desired  to  resign. 

This  Assembly  is  adjourned  till  the  second  Monday  in  Sep- 
tember next ;  but  if  there  do  not  a  sufficient  number  of  mem- 
bers appear  that  day  to  constitute  an  Assembly,  then  the  next 
day;  and  that  every  member  that  does  not  appear  the  first 
day,  be  fined  ten  shillings,  unless  he  can  make  a  reasonable 
excuse. 

God  save  the  King. 

VOL.  V.  7 


50  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE  ISLAND  [174' 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  second 
Tuesday  in  Septemher,  1742. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  to"wns. 

The  following  appropriations  were  made  for  bridges  : 
For  a  bridge  over  Pacatuck  river,  on  the  road  toward  the 
White  Plain,  £50  ;  for  a  bridge  on  Massacachuage  river,  in 
East  Greenwich,  £30 ;  for  repairing  and  fitting  up  the  bridge 
over  Moosup  river,  on  the  road  leading  from  Providence  to  Con- 
necticut, £50  ;  for  mending  bridge  in  the  town  of  Providence, 
£50 ;  for  repairing  two  bridges  across  Pawcatuck  river,  in 
Westerly,  £50  ;  for  building  a  bridge  over  Pawtuxet  river,  on 
the  road  that  leads  from  Coventry  to  Plainfield,  Connecticut^, 
£40. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the  last 
Wednesday  in  October,  1742. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Whereas,  it  has  been  represented  to  this  General  Assembly, 
that  Pawcatuck  bridge  is  so  much  out  of  repair,  as  renders  it 
dangerous  to  pass  over,  and   it  being   in    one  of  the  greatest 


1742.]  AND   PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  51 

roads  in  this  government,  there  is  an  absolute  necessity  of  a 
speedy  repair  ; — 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Joshua 
Champlin  and  Silas  Greenman,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  ap- 
pointed a  committee  to  repair  the  one-half  of  said  Pawcatuck 
bridge,  at  the  charge  of  this  colony,  as  soon  as  conveniently 
may  be. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Peter  Bours,  Esq.,  be,  and  he  is 
hereby  appointed  to  procure  passages  for  the  Spanish  prisoners 
(who  were  oflScers),  brought  into  this  colony;  and  send  them 
away  at  the  charge  of  said  colony,  upon  the  best  terms  he 
can. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  Daniel  Updike,  being  one  of  the 
grand  committee  of  this  colony,  William  Arnold  and  David 
Comstock,  Esqs.,  justices  of  the  peace,  be,  and  they  are  hereby 
appointed  and  directed  to  attend  the  trial  of  such  persons  as 
are  to  be  tried  for  counterfeiting  the  bills  of  public  credit  of 
said  colony,  at  the  next  court  of  assize,  to  be  held  in  the  county 
of  Essex,  in  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay  ;  and  that 
the  secretar}'-  deliver  what  counterfeit  bills  he  has  in  his  hands 
to  said  Col.  Updike,  to  be  carried  with  him  to  said  court. 

Whereas,  Col.  John  Cranston  (as  captain  of  Fort  George), 
did  present  to  this  General  Assembly,  an  account  of  the  serr 
vice,  and  allowance  of  board  wages  to  the  gunner  and  eleven 
other  men  (besides  Valentine  Downing),  from  the  5th  day  of 
May  last  past,  to  the  5th  day  of  November,  ensuing,  aud  for 
wood  laid  in  for  the  use  of  the  soldiers  in  the  ensuing  winter, 
amounting  in  the  whole  to  £606  16-5.,  craving  an  allowance 
thereof; — 

Whereupon,  it  was  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  sum  of 
£606  IQs.,  he  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to 
the  said  John  Cranston. 

Whereas,  Messsrs.  Stephen  Hopkins,  James  Aldrich,  Jeoffry 
Ilassard,  John  Smith  and  Robert  Hall,  were,  by  the  General 
Assembly  of  this  colony,  at  their  session,  held  by  adjournuient, 
on  the  second  Tuesday  in  September,  last  past,  appointed  a 
committee,  the}',  or  any  three   of  them,  to  inspect  into  the  cir- 


52  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1742. 

cumstances  of  the  old  highway  and  new  highway,  in  Warwick, 
in  the  county  of  Providence,  about  which  there  has  been  a  long 
controversy ; — 

And  whereas,  Messrs.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Roliert  Hall,  James 
Aldrich  and  JcolTry  Ilassard,  four  of  the  aforesaid  committee, 
having  made  inspection  into  the  premises,  aforesaid,  made  the 
following  report,  viz. : 

Report  of  the  committee  on  the  Providence  and  WarivicJc  highway. 

We,  the  sub?cribei-s,  being  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session 
held  at  Newport,  on  the  second  Tuesday  in  September  last  past,  to  inspect  into  the 
circumstances  of  the  old  highway,  and  the  new  highway,  in  the  lands  of  Natick  and 
Wecacheconet,  and  we  having  met  for  that  purpose,  and  viewed  the  several  high- 
ways, and  places  proposed  for  highways,  which  were  shown  to  us  by  the  parties 
concerned,  do  report :  that  the  highway  laid  out  by  the  jury  in  said  lands,  A.  D. 
1737,  not  reaching  to  the  north  line  of  the  said  town  of  Warwick,  near  the  south- 
east corner  of  the  town  of  Scituate,  we  are  of  opinion  that  the  same  ought  to  be 
continued  unto  the  said  north  line  of  the  said  town  of  Warwick,  in  the  most  con- 
venient manner,  that  may  be,  in  order  to  meet  the  highway  laid  out  in  said  Scitu- 
ate ;  and  we  further  report,  by  the  free  consent  and  loving  agreement  of  all  the 
parties  concerned  in  the  above  said  highway,  at,  and  near  Pawtuxet  river,  that  a 
highway  may  be  laid  out  to  cross  the  river  about  mid-way  between  the  said  old  and 
new  highways,  at  a  place  called  the  round  hill,  to  turn  out  of  the  said  new  highway 
in  the  lands  of  John  Holdou,  at,  or  near  a  pair  of  bars,  in  said  Iloldon's  farm,  and 
so  to  extend  through  said  Holdon's  land,  on  a  north-westerly  course,  according  as 
we  have  marked  the  same,  until  it  comes  to  the  bank  of  said  river,  where  we 
marked  a  black  oak  tree  for  a  bound,  on  the  easterly  side  of  the  way  ;  and  from 
thence  to  cross  the  said  river,  to  the  lands  of  Andrew  Barton,  where  we  marked  a 
walnut  pole,  on  the  easterly  side  of  the  way  ;  and  from  thence,  still  north-westerly, 
to  an  apple  tree,  near  said  Barton's  house,  on  the  west  side  of  the  way ;  and  from 
thence,  a  little  easterly  from  the  said  old  way,  until  it  comes  near  to  the  top  of  the 
hill,  by  said  Barton's  house  ;  and  from  thence,  in  the  said  old  way,  until  it  meets 
with  the  new  one. 

We  are  also  of  opinion,  that  near  the  banks  of  said  river,  said  way  ought  to  be 
five  poles  wide,  at  least ;  and  that  in  all  other  parts  of  said  way,  from  Warwick 
uortli  line,  downward,  to  Capt.  John  Rice's,  three  pole  wide  is  sufficient. 

We  are  also  of  opinion,  that,  upon  the  establishing  of  the  way  now  proposed, 
that  the  old  highway  and  new  highway  may  be  declared  to  be  no  highways,  where 
this  way  doth  not  go  in  either  of  them  ;  and  that  the  lands  of  the  said  liighways 
thrown  up,  return  to  the  owner  or  owners  thereof;  and  the  said  Andrew  Barton 
is  allowed  a  drift-way,  down  by  the  said  river-side,  to  some  meadow  shares,  that  be 
a  little  below  said  old  way,  on  the  north  side  of  said  "  lliver." 

All  which,  being  read  to  the  parties  concerned,  they  have  consented  to  the  same ; 
which  is  submitted  to  Your  Ilonors's  consideration. 


1742.]  AND    PEOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  53 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be 
accepted. 

And  that  the  said  Stephen  Hopkins,  Messrs.  John  Rhodes 
and  William  Rice,  be  a  committee  to  lay  out  the  highway,  ac- 
cording thereunto,  make  a  plat  thereof  and  report  thereon  to 
the  next  session  of  this  Assembly. 

God  save  the  Kin 2;. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly/  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  East  Greemmch, 
on  the  fourth  Monday  in  Novemler,  1742. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Voted  and  resolved,  tliat  Messrs.  Daniel  Updike,  James 
Honeyman,  Jr.,  Thomas  Ward,  Edward  Scott  and  Josias  Lyn- 
d'on,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  they,  or 
the  major  part  of  them,  to  revise  the  laws  of  this  colony  as  soon 
as  conveniently  may  be,  in  order  that  the  same  may  be  re- 
printed, and  a  printed  copy  to  be  sent  home. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  William  Holdon,  John  Rhodes  and  William 
Rice,  were,  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session,  in  Octo- 
ber last  past,  appointed  a  committee,  to  inspect  into  a  highway 
laid  out  by  the  town  of  Smithfield,  in  the  county  of  Providence, 
through  the  lands  of  John  Sayles,  and  others,  petitioners  for 
said  alteration  in  said  highway,  did  make  the  following  report, 
viz. : 

We,  having  viewed  said  way,  and  tbe  lands  adjacent,  and  heard  the  pleas  of 
the  respective  parties,  are  of  opinion,  that  no  other  place  showed  to  us  by  any  of 
the  petitioners  was  so  good  for  a  highway,  as  where  it  is  already  laid  out  by  said 
town. 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  said  report  be  ac- 


54  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1742. 

ceptecl ;  and  that  the  said  highway  be,  and  remain  as  it  is  al- 
ready laid  out  by  the  said  town  of  Smithfield  ;  and  that  the  ac- 
count of  the  said  committee,  amounting  to  £15  12s.  lOcl,  for 
their  service  performed,  as  aforesaid,  be  paid  to  the  said  Wil- 
liam Holdon,  John  Rhodes  and  William  Rice,  by  the  said  John 
Sayles  and  Jonathan  Mowrey,  both  of  Smithfield,  aforesaid, 
being  two  of  the  petitioners. 

Whereas,  Isaac  Anthony,  of  Newport,  in  the  county  of  New- 
port, goldsmith,  exhibited  an  account  to  this  General  Assem- 
bly, for  the  board  of  four  gentlemen,  Spanish  prisoners,  for  nine 
weeks,  and  their  washing  at  fifty-five  shillings  per  week,  each, 
craving  an  allowance  thereof; — 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  thirty 
shillings  per  week,  and  no  more,  be  allowed  of  said  account,  for 
the  nine  weeks'  board  and  washing ;  and  that  the  same, 
amounting  to  £54,  be  allowed  and  paid  to  the  said  Isaac  An- 
thony, out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  almost  all  the  free-holders  of  the  woods  part  of  the 
town  of  Newport,  did,  by  petition,  set  forth  to  this  Assembly, 
that  the  town  of  Newport,  at  present,  is  very  large,  consisting 
of  a  vast  number  of  inhabitants,  and  of  freemen,  upwards  of 
five  hundred,  so  that  the  affairs  thereof  cannot  be  managed 
with  that  regularity,  order  or  justice,  as  it  might  be,  if  the 
same  was  divided  and  made  into  two  towns,  and  would  there- 
fore be  of  great  advantage  to  all  the  inhabitants  ;  for  as  the 
compact  part  of  said  town  consists  chiefly  of  merchants  and 
tradesmen,  it  would  be  their  interest  to  make  such  suitable 
prudential  acts  for  the  better  government  of  their  afiairs,  so 
likewise  as  the  woods  part  of  said  town  consists  of  farmers, 
proper  prudential  laws  and  orders  would  be  made  suitable  for 
their  condition  and  circumstances  without  opposition,  which,  as 
yet,  hath  not  been  observed. 

The  petitioners  also  apprehend  they  are  greatly  injured,  be- 
ing obliged  to  bear  a  greater  proportion  of  the  public  charge 
and  expense  of  said  town,  than  the  other  inhabitants,  without 
being  taken  notice  of  as  such,  in  other  respects,  and  likely  so 


1742.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  55 

to  continue,  as  long  as  said  town  remains  undivided ;  and 
thereupon  prayed  for  a  division  of  said  town. 

The  compact  part  of  said  town  of  Newport,  being  cited, 
and  both  parties  fully  heard,  and  the  petition  maturely 
considered  ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  Daniel  Coggeshall, 
Samuel  Clarke,  Francis  Willett,  William  Robinson  and  Josiah 
Arnold,  Esqs.,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  inspect  into  the  circumstances 
of  said  town  of  Newport,  and  see  if  there  be  a  necessity  of  di- 
viding the  same  ;  and  if  there  be,  in  what  manner,  and  make 
report  thereon,  to  the  next  session  of  this  Assembly. 

Whereas,  Edmond  Sheffield,  of  North  Kingstown,  in  the 
county  of  Kings  county,  yeoman  (in  behalf  of  himself  and 
John  Gould,  of  North  Kingstown,  aforesaid),  and  Job  Tripp,  of 
said  North  Kingstown,  Esq.,  and  attorney  to  the  town  council 
of  said  town,  at  the  General  Assembly,  held  by  adjournment, 
in  September  last  past,  did  agree  to  leave  the  inspection  of 
part  of  the  highway  mentioned  in  said  Sheffield's  petition,  the 
same  to  begin  at  a  black  oak  tree,  standing  on  the  eastern  side 
-of  said  highway,  in  the  first  elbow  thereof,  on  the  north  side 
of  said  Sheffield's  south  flirm  ;  and  from  thence,  to  the  north- 
east corner  of  Isaac  Gardner's  fiirm  (in  said  petition  mention- 
ed), where  said  Gardner  now  lives,  all  the  rest  of  said  petition 
being  dropped ;  the  same  to  be  made  by  Rouse  Ilelme,  of 
South  Kingstown,  in  Kings  county,  Esq.,  George  Babcock,  of 
said  South  Kingstown,  yeoman  and  John  Hicks,  of  Charles- 
town,  in  said  county  of  Kings  county,  Esq.,  and  they  or  either 
two  of  them,  to  make  report  thereon,  which  they  according- 
ly did,  in  the  following  manner,  viz. : 

W"e,  being  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly,  to  inspect  into  part  of  a  high- 
way, which  was  lately  laid  out  by  a  jury,  appointed  by  the  town  council  of  said 
North  Kingstown,  viz. :  that  part  of  the  said  highway  that  runs  through  the  land  of 
said  Edmond  Sheffield,  in  particular  from  a  certain  black  oak  tree,  to  Isaac  Gardner's 
north-east  corner;  and  we  having  this  day  viewed  the  land,  and  deliberately  con- 
sidered the  premises,  do  give  it  as  our  opinion,  that  the  highway  that  runs  south- 
ward from  said  black  oak  tree,  shall  run  the  same  course  as  was  laid  out  by  said 
jury,  by  a  chesnut  tree,  marked  ;  and  so  to  continue   tlie   same   course   from  said 


56  RECORDS   OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1742. 

chesnut  tree,  to  said  Isaac  Gardner's  line,  and  then  to  run  by  said  Gardner's  line, 
eastward,  to  his  aforesaid  corner  ;  but  the  highway  to  be  taken  out  of  said  Sheffield's 
land. 

Which  report  was  thereupon  voted  to  be  accepted,  and  the 
said  highway  to  he,  and  continue  agreeably  thereto. 

Whereas,  John  Lawton  and  Barlow  Greene,  did,  by  petition, 
set  forth  to  this  Assembly,  that  the  establishing  a  ferry  from 
the  landing  place,  in  said  Lawton's  fiirm,  at  Portsmouth,  in  said 
colony,  to  the  southern  part  of  Prudence  island,  belonging  to 
Benjamin  and  William  Brown;  and  another  from  Warwick 
Neck,  to  the  northern  end  of  said  Prudence  island,  would  be 
greatly  serviceable  to  the  public,  by  furnishing  the  north- 
western parts  of  this  colony,  and  those  of  the  neighboring  gov- 
ernments with  a  more  easy  and  better  passage  to  Newport,  the 
metropolis  of  this  colony,  than  is  possible  to  obtain  from  any  of 
the  ferries  now  settled  at  other  places ;  the  lands  being  more 
smooth  and  level,  the  way  by  land  and  water  more  direct  and 
much  shorter  ;  and  as  all  the  parties  concerned,  are  not  only  wil- 
ling, but  very  desirous  such  ferries  may  be  made,  therefore,  the 
petitioners  prayed  that  ferries  may  be  erected  and  appointed 
at  the  places  aforesaid  ; — 

Upon  consideration  whereof,  it  is  voted  and  enacted,  that 
there  be  ferries  at  the  places  above  mentioned ;  and  that  the 
committee  appointed  to  lease  out  the  ferries,  put  the  ferries 
now  granted,  under  the  same  regulations  as  the  others  are. 

[The  following  public  laws,  passed  during  the  year  1742, 
(except  those  subsequently  repealed)  will  be  found  printed  at 
length  in  the  Public  Laws  of  1744.] 

An  Act  for  hearing  all  appeals  (not  yet  determined)  from  the 
judgment  of  the  superior  court  of  judicature,  for  which  bonds 
have  l)ecn  given. 

An  Act  relative  to  the  proceedings  and  trials  of  actions  not  ex- 
ceeding forty  shillings. 

An  Act  for  establishing  petit  jurors'  fees ;  and  also  the  grand 
and  petit  jurors'  fines,  for  their  non-appearance  at  the  sev- 
eral courts. 


1742.]  AND   PKOVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  ht 

An  Act  directing  the  general  treasurer  how  to  sue  for  the  colo- 
ny's debts,  and  likewise  for  choosing  a  king's  attorney. 

An  Act  requiring  the  king's  attornies  to  account  to  the  general 
treasurer  for  all  the  bonds  received,  &c. 

An  Act  for  the  more  effectual  establishing  of  a  military  watch 
in  time  of  war,  throughout  the  colony. 

An  Act  empowering  the  several  town  councils  to  have  the  care 
and  oversight  of  all  delirious,  distracted  or  non-compoS 
mentis  persons,  and  their  estates. 

An  Act  for  the  better  regulating  the  choice  of  petit  jurors* 
throughout  the  several  towns  in  this  colony. 

An  Act  for  the  better  regulation  of  freemen  voting. 

An  Act  empowering  the  vendue  masters  of  the  several  towns 
to  call  special  courts. 

An  Act  enabling  persons  in  small  causes,  to  sue  in  towns 
where  they  dwell. 

An  Act  to  prevent  the  fish  being  stopped  in  their  course  up 
Pawcatuck  river. 

An  Act  appointing  the  several  town  meetings  for  choosing  dep- 
uties, and  proxing  for  general  officers  in  this  colony,  to  be 

-  held  on  the  same  days. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Cohny  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  East  Greenwich,  the 
second  Tuesday  in  March,  1742. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  incorporating  the  west  end  of  the  town  of  North 
Kingstown  into  a  township,  and  the  same  to  be  distinguished 
and  known  by  the  name  of  Exeter. 

VOL.  V.  8 


58  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1742. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colon}^,  and 
by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  town  of  North 
Kingstown,  in  the  county  of  Kings  county,  be  divided  into 
two  towns,  by  a  line  beginning  at  the  south  side  of  said  town, 
at  the  middle  of  the  highway  that  runs  between  the  farm,  now 
or  late  of  Jeoffry  Ilassard  and  the  farm  of  Eber  Shearman,  to 
extend  from  thence  northwardly,  to  the  extent  of  said  highway, 
as  the  same  runs  northwardly ;  and  from  the  middle  of  said 
way,  where  it  meets  the  cross  highway,  to  extend  northwardly, 
in  a  straight  line,  to  meet  the  highway  that  runs  between  the 
land  of  William  Hall  and  Christopher  Spenser ;  and  from 
thence,  to  extend  northwardly,  as  said  highway  runs  to  East 
Greenwich  south  Ime  ;  and  that  the  eastward  part  of  said  town 
retain  the  charter  and  name  of  North  Kingstown,  and  the  west- 
ern part  to  be  called  by  the  name  of  Exeter,  and  be  incorporated 
into  a  township  ;  and  to  have  and  enjoy  the  like  privileges 
with  other  towns  in  this  colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
each  town  receive,  and  have  a  proportion  of  the  money  in,  and 
belonging  to  the  treasury  of  said  North  Kingstown,  according 
to  the  money  for  which  the  lands  in  each  town  is  mortgaged 
to  the  colony ;  and  that  all  justices  living  within  the  bounds  of 
said  new  town,  retain  their  authority,  and  act  as  such  therein, 
until  the  next  general  election. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  at  their  ses- 
sion, hold  by  adjournment,  at  East  Greenwich,  on  the  fourth 
Monday  in  November  last  past,  did  order  and  appoint,  that 
Daniel  Coggeshall,  Samuel  Clarke,  Francis  Willett,  William 
Ptobinson  and  Josiah  Arnold,  Esqs.,  they,  or  the  major  part  of 
them,  to  be  a  committee  to  inspect  into  the  circumstances  of 
the  town  of  Newport,  in  the  county  of  Newport,  and  to  see  if 
there  was  any  necessity  of  dividing  the  same,  and  if  there  was, 
in  what  manner,  and  to  make  report  thereon,  to  this  present 
session  of  this  Assembly  ; — 

And  whereas,  Daniel  (voggeshall,  Francis  Willett  aiid  Josiah 
Arnold,  Esqs.,  three  (and  the  major  part  of  said  committee)  did 
meet  at  Newport,  aforesaid,  and  upon  hearing  the  reasons  and 


1742.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  59 

allegations  of  the  several  persons  both  for  and  against  the  di- 
vision of  said  town,  made  the  following  report : 

That  they  were  of  opinion,  there  was  no  necessity  for  dividing  the  aforesaid  town 
of  Newport. 

Which  report  was  thereupon  voted  to  be  accepted ;  and 
also,  that  the  account  of  Jonathan  Nichols,  amounting  to  £2 
10s.,  for  the  expenses  of  said  committee,  be  allowed ;  and  that 
there  be  allowed  and  paid  to  the  said  Daniel  Coggeshall  and 
Francis  Willett,  the  sum  of  £4  each,  and  to  the  said  Josiah  Ar- 
nold, the  sum  of  £2,  for  their  particular  service  in  said  affair ; 
and  the  whole  to  be  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  at  their  ses- 
sion, held  at  Providence,  on  the  last  Wednesday  in  October, 
A.  D.  1742,  appointed  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  Messrs.  John 
Rhodes  and  William  Rice,  a  committee,  to  lay  out  a  highway 
in  the  lands  of  Natick  and  Wecacheconet,  in  the  town  of  War- 
wick, and  county  of  Providence,  according  to  the  report  by  the 
committee  then  made,  and  make  a  plat  thereof;  which  they 
have  now  done,  and  presented  to  this  Assembly,  agreeably  to 
said  report,  as  deciphered  upon  the  said  plat  may  appear ; — 
'  It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  said  plat  and  report 
thereon  made,  be  accepted ;  and  that  said  highway  continue  as 
thereon  laid  out,  forever. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  at  their  ses- 
sion, held  by  adjournment  on  the  fourth  Monday  in  November 
last  past,  at  East  Greenwich,  within  and  for  the  colony  afore- 
said, did  appoint  Messrs.  Daniel  Abbott,  John  Frye  and  Ish- 
mael  Spink,  a  committee,  to  meet  with  the  committee  of  the 
colony  of  Connecticut,  in  order  to  erect  a  large  monument  at 
Warwick  south-west  corner,  in  the  line  between  this  colony  and 
that  of  Connecticut,  who  proceeded  on  said  affair,  and  made  the 
following  report,  viz.  : 

We,  the  subscribers,  represent  to  this  Honorable  Assembly,  that  as  ve,  beins; 
appointed  a  committee  by  the  government  of  Rhode  Island,  to  meet  a  committee 
also  appointed  by  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  to  erect  a  large  monument  or  heap  of 
stones,  at  Warwick  south-west  corner,  in  the  place  where  the  corner  formerly  was 


60  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1742. 

made  at  tlic  time  of  settling  the  line  betwixt  the  two  governments  ;  and  accordingly, 
■we  met  at  said  place,  the  24th  day  of  November  last,  where  we  met  James  Wads- 
worth  and  Timothy  Pearce,  Esq.,  with  Col.  Avery,  their  surveyor,  and  sundry 
others  in  company,  where  we  spent  the  afternoon  debating  matters,  and  waiting  for 
the  Hon'ble  lloger  Wolcott,  Esq.,  he  having  their  act  of  Assembly  that  empowered 
them. 

Whereupon,  the  ne.\t  day,  the  25th,  we  met  at  said  corner,  the  Hon'ble  Roger 
Wolcott,  Es(j.,  James  Wadsworth  and  Timothy  Pearce,  Esqs.,  a  committee  ap- 
pointed by  the  government  of  Connecticut,  and  equally  empowered  with  us,  to 
make  said  monument  or  heap  of  stones,  at  said  corner ;  and  after  a  conference  and 
some  arguments  used,  they  unanimously  agreed  to  join  with  us,  to  revise  the  afore- 
said corner ;  whereupon,  we,  with  such  assistance  as  was  present,  belonging  to 
each  government,  raised  a  stone  in  said  corner,  that  was  provided  and  brought  ia 
place,  of  ten  feet  and  a  half  long,  and  two  feet  and  three  inches  wide,  and  considera- 
ble thickness,  having  the  letter  C  on  the  west  side,  and  R  on  the  east,  and  the 
date  of  the  year,  and  several  other  letters ;  being  now  a  corner  of  West  Greenwich 
and  Coventry  ;  and  round  the  same,  we  made  a  considerable  heap  of  stones." 

DANIEL  ABBOTT,  ISHMAEL  SPINK. 

JOHN  FRY, 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be 
accepted ;  and  that  the  same  be  recorded  by  the  secretary. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  several  accounts  of  the  commit- 
tee that  revised  the  boundaries  at  Warwick  south-west  corner 
be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  viz. : 

To  Col.  Daniel  Abbott,  £8  10s. ;  to  Mr.  John  Frye,  £7  10s. 
9(1,  and  to  Capt.  Ishmael  Spink,  £6,  for  their  service  in  said 
affair. 

Whereas,  the  judge  of  admiralty,  for  this  colony,  being  gone 
home  for  Great  Britain,  and  his  deputy  appointed  here,  declin- 
ing to  serve  any  longer  ; — 

It  is  therefore  voted,  that  Mr.  John  Gidley,  of  Newport,  in 
the  county  of  Newport,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  appointed  judge  of 
admiralty  for  this  colonj'-,  until  a  person  be  properly  appointed 
from  home,  to  that  office  -,  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor, 
give  him  his  oath  to  said  office. 

Upon  a  motion  made  by  Capt.  William  Hopkins,  who  was 
the  recruiting  officer  in  this  colony,  for  Col.  William  Gooch's 
regiment  (as  well  as  fur  the  two  old  corps  of  marines),  for  pay- 
ment, for  the  raising  recruits  for  said  regiment ; — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  no  more  money  be  advanced 
to  him  by  this  government  on  that  account. 


1743.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  61 

Whereas,  Isaac  Anthony,  of  Newport,  in  the  county  of  New- 
port, goldsmith,  presented  to  the  General  Assembly,  at  their 
session,  held  by  adjournment,  at  East  Greenwich,  on  the  fourth 
Monday  in  November  last  past,  an  account  for  the  entertain- 
ment of  several  Spanish  officers  (who  were  brought  into  New- 
port, as  prisoners),  from  the  20th  day  of  September,  to  the 
22d  day  of  November,  A.  D.  1742,  amounting  to  the  sum  of 
£99,  and  craved  an  allowance  thereof;  whereupon,  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  thought  proper  to  make  him  an  allowance  of  the 
sum  of  £54,  in  satisfliction  thereof,  which  he  apprehended  was 
not  a  sufficient  compensatian  for  the  costs  and  charges  he  had 
been  at  in  said  affair ;  and  therefore  made  application  to 
this  present  General  Assembly,  for  further  relief  in  the 
premises ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  ordered,  that  the  sum  of  £18  more 
be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  the  said 
Isaac  Anthony,  for  the  entertainment  of  the  said  Spanish  offi- 
cers, during  the  time  aforesaid. 

Voted,  that  Harrison  Weaver,  Caleb  Beagle,  William  Wall 
and  Samuel  Gorton,  all  of  East  Greenwich,  in  the  county  of 
Providence,  be  admitted  freemen  of  this  colony. 
.  Voted,  that  John  Kenion,  son  of  James,  deceased,  and  Ste- 
phen Rosse,  both  of  Charlestown,  in  the  county  of  Kings 
county,  be  admitted  freemen  of  this  colony. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the 
M  daij  of  May.  1743. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 


62  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1743. 


ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Peter  Bours,  Mr.  Daniel  Howland, 

Mr.  William  Ellery,  Mr.  Philip  Arnold, 

My.  Ezekiel  Warner,  Mr.  James  Arnold, 

Mr.  Richard  Fennor,  Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 

Mr.  John  Dexter,  Mr.  Rouse  Ilelme. 

Mr.  John  Potter,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon  clerk. 

The  following  are  admitted  freemen  of  the  colony  : 

Of  Newport,  Isaac  Stelle,  Henry  Stacy,  David  Seaver,  Hux- 
ford  Merchant,  William  Strengthfield,  Peleg  Thurston,  Incom 
Sanford,  Joseph  Wanton,  Jr.,  John  Whiting,  John  Petel,  Joshua 
Coggeshall,  son  of  Thomas  ;  Benjamin  Borden,  Daniel  Bate- 
man,  Robert  Carter,  Joseph  Freeborn,  James  Holmes,  Samuel 
Lyndon,  Jr.,  Robert  Stevens,  William  Paul,  John  Brown,  Jr., 
Isaac  Bowen,  John  Morris,  William  Tate,  Evan  Malbone,  Si- 
mon Newton,  Nathaniel  Langley,  Henry  Bliss,  Zabdiel  Potter, 
Nicholas  Brown,  John  Pitman,  Stephen  Ayrault,  Jonathan  Bar- 
den,  Matthew  Robinson,  George  Lawton,  son  of  Robert ;  Thos. 
Gavitt  and  Edward  Wanton. 

Of  Providence,  Josiah  Jenckes,  Charles  Olney,  Robert 
Knight,  Jr.,  Philip  Roberts,  Josiah  Potter,  Othniel  Carpenter, 
Resolved  Waterman  and  William  Brown. 

Of  Portsmouth,  William  Hall,  Jr.,  Jonathan  Pearce,  John 
Corey,  son  of  Thomas  ;  William  Butts,  Samuel  Phettiplace 
and  Jonathan  Phettiplace. 

Of  Warwick,  Jonathan  Greene,  Jeremiah  Randall.,  Benjamin 
Greene,  son  of  John  ;  and  Benjamin  Weaver. 

Of  Westerly,  Henry  Willis,  Jonathan  Lewis,  Samuel  Gavitt, 
John  Crandell,  son  of  Peter ;  Benjamin  Chase,  Matthew 
Greene,  Samuel  Brown  and  Benjamin  Hall. 

Of  North  Kingstown,  John  Baker,  Robert  Nichols,  John  Al- 
len, Jr.,  John  Bent,  Thomas  Northup,  Jr.,  Abicl  Tripp,  James 
Lewis,    Adam    Gould,    Abraham    Willcox,    Jabez    Chadsey, 


1743.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  63 

Ephraim  Gardner,  James  Gardner,  Stukely  Congdon,  Anthony 
Corey,  Israel  Phillips,  Robert  Sweet,  Henry  Wall,  Daniel 
Fourtane,  Alexander  Havens  and  Henry  Olden. 

Of  South  Kingstown,  Nathan  Gardner. 

Of  East  Greenwich,  Benjamin  Sweet,  Jr.  and  Nicholas 
Goddard. 

Of  Jamestown,  William  Tew,  John  Carr  and  Jonathan 
Greene. 

Of  Smithfield,  Nathaniel  Man,  Seth  Cooke,  Daniel  Sayles 
and  John  Harris. 

Of  Scituate,  Edward  Potter,  Thomas  Remington,  Dean  Kim- 
ball, Samuel  Rogers,  John  Level,  David  Brown,  Hugh  Pray 
Jeremiah  Hopkins,  Job  Shippey,  Jonathan  DollafF,  Daniel  Ben- 
nett and  Josiah  Bennett. 

Of  Glocester,  Elisha  Cooke,  Morris  Tucker,  Silas  Williams, 
Daniel  Smith  and  Timothy  Willmarth. 

Of  Charlestown,  Benjamin  Potter. 

Of  West  Greenwich,  Arthur  Aylesworth,  son  of  John ;  and 
Daniel  Case. 

Of    Coventry,    James    Green,    son  of  John ;   Azariah  Ed- 
dy, Josias    Spink,  Ptobert  Havens,  Benjamin  Gardner,  Joseph 
Potter,   John   Rice,   Richard    Stafford,  Daniel    Colviu,    John 
'  Holmes,  Obadiah  Johnson  and  Samuel  Bennett. 

Of  Exeter,  James  Rogers,  Jr.,  and  Philip  Greene. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhlt/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  first 
Wednesday  in  May,  1743. 

The  Hon.  Richard  Ward,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 


64 


RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND 


[1743. 


Neivport. 
Capt.  George  Wanton, 
Mr.  Daniel  Gould, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Easton, 
Col.  John  Cranston, 
Capt.  Jonathan  Nichols, 
Capt.  Ezbon  Sanford. 

Providence. 
Mr.  John  Potter, 
Col.  Jabez  Bowen, 
Capt.  Jonathan  Randall, 
Capt.  Christopher  Harris. 

Portsmouth. 
Capt.  John  Lawton, 
Capt.  Jeremiah  Lawton, 
Mr.  Robert  Lawton, 
Mr.  William  Anthony,  Jr 

Warwick. 
Major  Joseph  Stafford, 
Major  John  Rhodes, 
Capt.  William  Rice, 
Mr.  Barlow  Greene. 

Westerlif. 
Capt.  John  Maxson, 
Mr.  William  Hern. 

New  Shoreham. 
Mr.  Robert  Hull, 
Mr.  Henry  Gardner. 

North  Kingstown. 
Col.  Iramanuel  Northup, 
Mr.  George  Tibbetts,  Jr. 


DEPUTIES. 

South  Kingstoivn. 
Capt.  Robert  Hassard, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Peckham,  Jr. 

East  Greenivich. 
Mr.  John  Frye, 
Mr.  Joseph  Nichols. 

Jamestown. 
Mr.  Abel  Franklin, 
Mr.  Samuel  Slocum. 

Smithfield. 
Mr.  Thomas  Steere, 
Mr.  David  Comstock. 

Scituate. 
Capt.  Job  Randall, 
Mr.  Joseph  Knight. 

Glocester. 
INIr.  John  Walton, 
Capt.  Isaiah  Inman. 
Oharlestoivn. 
Major  Christopher  Champlin, 
Capt.  Nathaniel  Lewis. 

West  Greenwich. 
Capt.  Ishmael  Spink, 
Mr.  Samuel  Hopkins. 

Coventry. 
Capt.  Abel  Potter, 
Mr.  John  Johnson. 

Exeter. 
Capt.  Jotn  Weight, 
Mr.  John  Reynolds,  Jr. 


Mr.  John  Potter,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon,  clerk. 


1743.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  65 

The  following  oiOficers,  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged : 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Peter  Bours,  Mr.  Daniel  Howland, 

Mr.  William  Ellery,  Mr.  Philip  Arnold, 

Mr.  Ezekiel  Warner,  Mr.  James  Arnold, 

Mr.  Richard  Fenner,  Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 

Mr.  John  Dexter,  Mr.  Rouse  Helme. 

SECEETARY.  GENERAL  TREASURER. 

Mr.  James  Martin.  Mr.  John  Gardner. 

ATTORNEY    GENERAL. 

Mr.  Daniel  Updike. 

Voted,  that  William  Burton,  Esq.,  be  chosen  an  assistant,  in 
the  room  of  Ezekiel  Warner,  Esq.^  who  refused. 

Voted,  that  Philip  Greene,  Esq.,  be  chosen  an  assistant  in 
the  room  of  Philip  Arnold,  Esq,,  who  refused. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  William  Anthony,  Jr.,  and 
William  Rice,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee, 
to  receive  of  Richard  Ward,  Esq.,  the  late  Governor,  the  colony 
seal,  giving  him  a  receipt  for  the  same ;  and  to  deliver  said 
seal  to  His  Honor,  the  present  Governor,  taking  his  receipt  for 
the  same. 

Whereas,  Col.  John  Cranston  (as  captain  of  Fort  George), 
did  present  to  this  General  Assembly  an  account  for  his  service 
the  last  year,  and  for  the  service  and  allowance  of  board  wages 
to  the  gunner  and  two  other  men  at  said  fort,  to  the  5th  day  of 
May  instant,  amounting  to  the  sum  of  £260  lO^.,  craving  an 
allowance  thereof ; — 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  sum  of 
$260  JOs.,  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury, 
to  the  said  John  Cranston,  for  him  to  pay  the  said  gunner  and 
two  other  men  their  several  parts  thereof 

God  save  the  King. 

VOL.  V.  9 


66  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1743. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembli/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Bhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  loth  day  of 
June,  1743. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  dividing   the  town  of  Newport,  in  the  county  of 

Newport,  into  two  towns. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 
by  the  authority  thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  said  town  of 
Newport  be  divided  into  two  towns  ;  and  the  division  to  begin 
at  the  head  of  the  creek,  that  separates  the  two  farms  of  the 
Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Esq.,  and  Godfrey  Malbone,  of  said  New- 
port, merchant ;  and  so  to  extend  upon  a  direct  line  between 
the  two  houses  of  Elisha  Card,  and  that  in  the  possession  of 
Samuel  Pemberton,  Esq. ;  and  from  thence  on  a  straight  line 
to  the  place  where  the  creek  on  Easton's  Beach  runs  into  the 
sea ;  and  all  to  the  southward  and  westward  of  the  said  line,  to 
belong  to  the  town  of  Newport ;  and  all  to  the  northward  and 
eastward  of  said  line,  to  be  incorporated  into  a  town  by  the 
name  of  MiddletoAvn. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authorit}^  aforesaid,  that 
John  Dexter,  Esq.,  Messrs.  Benjamin  Peckham,  Jr.,  and  Sam'l 
Easton,  surveyor,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  commit- 
tee, they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  to  run  the  aforesaid  line, 
and  make  report  to  the  next  session  of  this  Assembly. 

Whereas,  the  inhabitants  of  New  Shoreham,  in  the  county  of 
Newport,  did,  by  petition  to  this  Assembly,  set  forth,  that  the 
cost  in    erecting   their   pier  in   said    New  Shoreham,  will   be 
far  greater  than  they  did  expect  or  imagine,  and  what  tliey  are 
by  no  means  able  to   go  through  with,  unless  this  General  As- 


1743.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  67 

sembly  will  grant  tbem  a  further  supply ;  and  therefore  craved 
relief  for  that  purpose  ;— 

Which  being  duly  considered,  be  it  enacted  by  the  General 
Assembly  of  this  colony,  and  by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  en- 
acted, that  the  sum  of  £400,  be  allowed  and  paid  to  Mr.  Rob" 
ert  Hull,  out  of  the  general  treasury,  towards  defraying  the 
cbarge  of  building  said  pier,  as  soon  as  a  report  shall  be  made 
that  the  work  is  completed,  by  a  commitiee  to  be  appointed 
hereafter,  by  the  General  Assembly,  for  that  purpose. 

Whereas,  there  is  a  balance  of  £173  16s.  Id.,  due  to  this 
colony,  from  the  Province  of  the  Massachusets  Bay,  upon  a 
settlement  of  the  accounts  of  charges  of  the  court  of  commis- 
sioners for  settling  the  controversy  between  said  governments? 
relating  to  the  boundary  line,  and  other  charges  respecting 
said  affliir ; — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  Peter  Bours,  Esq., 
be,  and  he  is  hereby  appointed  to  address  His  Excellency, 
William  Shirley,  Esq.,  Governor  of  said  Province,  requesting 
the  payment  of  said  sum. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Samuel  Wickham,  Gideon  Wanton, 
Edward  Scott  and  Thomas  Ward,  Esqs.,  and  the  secretary,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  they,  or  the  major 
part  of  them,  to  revise  the  laws  of  this  colony,  as  well  those  in 
print  already,  as  those  that  are  not,  that  the  whole  thereof  may 
be  new  printed,  as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Peter  ]3ours,  Esq.,  Messrs.  John 
Cranston  and  Ezbon  Sanford,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appoint- 
ed a  committee  to  receive  of  the  late  Governor,  Rich.  Ward,Esq., 
the  charier  of  this  colony,  the  copper  plates,  books,  pnpers,  and 
what  else  belongs  to  the  government,  and  deliver  the  same  to 
the  Hon.  William  Greene,  Esq.,  the  present  Governor,  giving 
and  taking  receipts  for  that  purpose. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  Peter  Bours,  Esq., 
amounting  to  $11  2-5.  od.,  for  shipping  off  tli<3  Spanish  officers, 
being  for  their  passages  and  necessaries  put  on  board  for  them, 
be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury. 


68  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1743. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  James  Davis,  keeper 
of  His  Majesty's  jail  in  Newport,  in  the  county  of  Newport, 
amounting  to  £23  7s.  Id,  for  the  board  of  the  Spanish  captain, 
and  his  washing,  from  the  14th  day  of  September,  to  the  31st 
day  of  December  last  past,  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  John  Easton, 
amounting  to  £21  Ss.  2d.,  being  for  clothes  bought  for  the 
Spanish  captain,  when  put  on  board,  for  his  return  home  ;  and 
for  services  done  at  sundry  times,  in  summoning  evidences  re- 
specting Stephen  Talman's  attendance  upon  the  General  As- 
sembly, &c.,  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  James  Reynolds,  of  West  Green- 
wich, in  the  county  of  Providence,  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of 
the  general  treasury,  the  sum  of  £116  85.,  for  his  extraordina- 
ry service  and  care  in  maintaining  the  true  division  line  be- 
tween this  colony,  and  the  colony  of  Connecticut. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembli/,  held  for  the  Colon?/  of  PJiode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  fourth  Tues- 
day in  August,  1743.  ^ 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  incorporating  the  north-east  part  of  the  town  of 

Newport,  into  a  township,  and  the  same  to  be  distinguished 

and  known  by  the  name  of  Middletown. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session,  held   by 

adjournment  at  Newport,  within  and  for  said  colony,  on  the 

second  Monday  in  June,  last  past,  did,  among  other  things,  en- 


1743.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  69 

act,  that  the  town  of  Newport  should  be  divided  into  two 
towns  ;  and  for  that  purpose,  appointed  a  committee  to  run  the 
dividing  line,  and  make  report  thereon  to  this  present  ses- 
sion of  the  Assembly,  who  have  accordingly  reported,  that  they 
have  done  the  same,  in  the  following  manner : 

Beginning  at  the  head  of  the  creek,  that  separates  the  two  farms  of  the  Hon- 
Joseph  Whipple,  Esq.,  and  Godfrey  Malbone,  of  said  Newport,  merchant ;  and  on 
a  south  course,  nineteen  degrees  and  an  half  east,  run  a  direct  line,  extending  to 
the  south-east  corner  of  a  lot  of  land,  belonging  to  Job  Almy,  of  said  Newport, 
merchant ;  the  said  corner  being  between  the  houses  of  Elisha  Card,  and  that  in 
the  possession  of  Samuel  Pemberton ;  and  from  said  corner,  a  straight  line  south, 
twenty -seven  degrees  east,  crossing  the  bridge  that  lieth  over  the  creek,  on  Eas- 
ton's  Beach  ;  and  so  into  the  sea  on  that  course,  it  being  the  place  where  the  said 
creek  usually  runs  into  the  sea. 

And  the  said  report  being  accepted ; — 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 
by  the  authority  of  the  same  it  is  enacted,  that  all  the  lands  to 
the  southward  and  westward  of  the  said  line,  as  before  describ- 
ed, belong  to  the  town  of  Newport ;  and  that  all  the  lands 
to  the  northward  and  eastward  of  said  line,  be  distinguished 
and  known  by  the  name  of  Middletown ;  and  that  the  inhabit- 
ants of  said  Middletown,  from  time  to  time  shall  have  and  en- 
joy the  like  benefits,  liberties,  privileges  and  immunities  with 
other  towns  in  this  colony,  according  to  charter. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  justices  of  the  peace,  living  within  the  aforesaid  toAvn  of 
Middletown,  shall  remain  and  continue  in  their  aforesaid  offices 
until  the  next  general  election  ;  and  that  the  first  of  said  justices 
of  the  peace  grant  forth  his  warrant  to  call  the  inhabitants  of 
said  Middletown  together  on  Tuesday  next,  being  the  30th  day 
of  August  instant,  to  elect  and  appoint  such  town  officers  as 
they  shall  have  occasion  for,  and  the  law  directs ;  and  to  ap- 
point the  times  and  places  of  their  town  meetings ;  and  to 
choose  and  elect  two  deputies,  to  represent  them  at  the  next 
General  Assembly,  and  so  on,  as  by  the  charter  is  directed. 

And   be   it  further   enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 


70  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1743. 

said  town  of  Middletown  shall  send  one  grand  and  three  petit 
jurors  to  the  superior  court  of  judicature,  court  of  assize  and 
general  jail  delivery  ;  and  three  grand  and  three  petit  jurors  to 
every  inferior  court  of  common  pleas  and  general  sessions  of 
the  peace,  held  within  the  county  of  Newport ;  and  that  the 
town  of  Newport  shall  hereafter  send  to  each  of  the  aforesaid 
courts,  so  many  jurors  less  of  what  they  are  now  compelled  by 
law,  as  is  ordered  to  be  sent  by  the  aforesaid  town  of  Middle- 
town. 

Whereas,  Samuel  Wickham,  Gideon  Wanton,  Edward  Scott 
and  Thomas  Ward,  Esqs.,  and  the  secretary,  were  appointed  at 
the  last  session  of  this  Assembly,  a  committee  to  revise  the 
laws  of  this  colony,  as  well  those  in  print,  as  those  that  are  not, 
that  the  whole  might  be  printed  as  soon  as  may  be  ; — 

It  is  now  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  John  Callender,  Jr.^ 
be,  and  he  is  hereby  added  to  the  aforesaid  committee,  for  that 
purpose ;  and  that  any  three  of  them  are  hereby  empowered  to 
act  therein ;  and  that  said  committee  put  those  laws  into 
print,  which  they  have  already  revised,  transcribed  and  pre 
sented  to  this  Assembly ;  putting  the  charter  in  print  in  the 
first  i>lace. 

And  that  said  committee  procure  paper  and  other  necessa- 
ries, for  printing  off  five  hundred  copies,  in  the  best  manner, 
and  draw  money  out  of  the  general  treasury  to  defray  the 
charges  thereof;  and  when  they  are  finished,  each  of  the  mem- 
bers of  this  present  General  Assembly  shall  be  furnished  with 
a  book  gratis. 

Whereas,  there  was  a  committee  appointed  by  the  General 
Assomldy  of  this  colony,  at  their  present  session,  to  inspect  in- 
to the  affair  of  His  Majesty's  patent,  under  the  privy  seal,  pro- 
duced by  Leonard  Lockman,  Esq.,  appointing  him  clerk  of  the 
naval  or  navy  office,  in  said  colony  (a  copy  whereof  was  laid  be- 
fore said  General  Assembly),  and  make  report  thereon,  and 
said  committee  accordingly  reported  in  the  following  manner, 
viz. ; 


1743.]  AND   PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  71 

That  with  humble  submission,  it  is  conceived,  that  His  Majesty  was  mistaken  in 
said  grant;  for  that,  by  several  acts  of  Parliament,  said  office  is  in  the  appointment 
of  the  Governor  of  said  colony,  who  had  (according  to  the  privilege  used  of  old)  ap- 
pointed a  naval  officer  in  said  colony,  and  is  by  law  answerable  for  the  neolects 
and  misdemeanors  of  said  officer,  agreeably  to  the  statutes  in  this  case  provided. 

Which  report  is  A^otecl  to  be  accepted. 
God  save  the  King;. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neiqjort,  the  last 
Tuesday  in  September,  1743. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Upon  the  petition  of  Elizabeth  Munday,  of  Newport,  in  the 
county  of  Newport,  widow,  craving  an  allowance  of  the  account 
of  her  late  husband,  Richard  Munday,  deceased,  against  the 
colony  house  ;  and  also  for  his  advice  and  attendance  re- 
specting the  building  thereof,  and  for  drawing  a  plan  of  the 
same ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  Peter  Bours,  Esq., 
and  Capt.  Jeremiah  Lawton,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed 
a  committee,  to  consider  what  shall  be  allowed  to  the  petition- 
er, for  her  late  husband's  advice  and  attendance,  &c.,  about  the 
colony  house,  and  drawing  a  plan  thereof,  and  make  report 
thereon. 

God  save  the  King. 


72  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [114:1 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembhj,  held  for  the  Colomj  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kingstoivn,  the 
last  Wednesday/  of  October,  1743. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wliipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Whereas,  Comfort  Taylor,  of  Little  Compton,  in  the  county 
of  Bristol,  and  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  widow,  did, 
by  petition,  set  forth  to  this  Assembly,  that  at  a  court  of 
equity,  held  at  Providence,  within  and  for  said  colony,  on  the 
second  Tuesday  of  October,  instant,  the  petitioner  obtained  a 
judgment  against  a  negro  man,  named  Cuff,  belonging  to  Thom- 
as Borden,  of  Portsmouth,  in  the  county  of  Newport,  for  £200, 
and  costs  of  suit,  for  a  grievous  trespass,  committed  by  said 
Cuff,  against  her  ;  and  that,  as  the  execution  will  go  against 
his  person  to  be  imprisoned,  according  to  the  common  form  of 
executions,  it  is  not  clear  that  the  sheriff  can  dispose  of  him, 
which  she  apprehends  he  ought  to  have  power  to  do,  because 
said  negro  is  not  free,  but  a  private  property ;  and  therefore 
prayed  that  the  said  sheriff  might  be  empowered  to  sell  him,  as 
other  personal  estate,  taken  by  execution,  to  satisfy  debts  ; 
and  considering  the  great  abuse  she  has  suffered,  and  the 
charge  that  will  come  out  of  said  negro,  for  prison  fees,  she  de- 
sired that  the  fine  of  £20  against  said  negro  Cufi'  might  be 
remitted,  otherwise  she  should  get  nothing  for  all  the  hardships 
she  has  endured  ; — 

Upon  consideration  whereof,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that 
the  sheriff  of  the  said  county  of  Newport,  when  he  shall  receive 
the  execution  against  the  said  negro  Cuff,  be,  and  he  is  hereby 
fully  empowered  to  sell  said  negro  Cuff  as  other  personal  es- 
tate ;  and  after  the  fine  of  £20  be  paid  into  the  general  treas- 


1743.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  73 

ury,  and  all  other  charges  deducted  out  of  the  price  of  said  ne- 
gro, the  remainder  to  be  appropriated  in  said  satisfying  said 
execution. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write  a 
letter  in  answer  to  the  agent's  letter  relating  to  the  naval  offi- 
cer, and  present  the  same  to  this  Assembly  as  soon  as  conven- 
iently may  be,  in  order  to  be  sent  home. 

God  save  tho  King. 

[The  following  laws  of  a  public  nature,  passed  during  the 
year  1743,  are  printed  at  length,  in  the  Digestof  1747.] 

An  Act  to  prevent  all  persons  from  voting  in  any  town  meet- 
ing in  this  colony,  saving  in  the  town  where  such  person 
dwells. 

An  Act  directing  the  manner  of  choosing  grand  jurors  through- 
out this  colony. 

An  Act  directing  the  attendance  of  the  petit  jurors  and  wit- 
nesses at  the  courts  in  this  colony. 

An  Act  to  prevent  the  fish  being  stopped  in  their  course  up 
Pawcatuck  river. 

An  Act  for  the  preventing  the  counterfeiting  of  bills  of  public 
credit  emitted  by  any  of  the  governments  of  New  England, 
and  to  prevent  defacing  the  same.* 

An  Act  to  prevent  persons  convicted  of  counterfeiting  bills  of 
public  credit,  or  any  other  forgery,  from  proxing  or  voting 
in  this  colony,  or  from  being  chosen  to  any  office. 


*  So  much  had  the  colonies  suffered  by  the  counterfeiting  of  their  bills  of  credit, 
that  the  most  severe  penalties  were  necessarily  inflicted,  to  put  a  check  to  it.  In  the 
act  in  question,  it  was  provided  that  "  persons  so  offending  therein,  shall  be  pilloried, 
and  have  both  his,  her  or  their  ears  cropped,  and  be  branded  with  the  letter  R,  on 
each  cheek,  and  be  imprisoned  at  the  discretion  of  the  judges  for  the  time  being,  before 
whom  all  such  offenders  shall  be  tried,  and  shall  pay  double  damages  to  all  persons 
defrauded  or  cheated,  with  all  costs  of  prosecution  ;  and  double  interest  during  the 
time  of  possessing  said  bill  or  bills."  Furthermore,  "  that  all  deeds  or  other  instru- 
ments of  lands  or  personal  estate,  made  by  persons  convicted  of  counterfeiting,  shall 
be  void."— J.  R.  B. 
VOL.  V.  10 


74  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1744. 

An  Act  for  the  greater  ease   of  the  inhabitants  in  discharging 
their  debts  due  to  the  colony. 

An  Act  to  prevent  the  unnecessary  quashing  of  justices'  orders 
in  case  of  bastardy. 

An  Act  for  the  more  effectual  calling  in  and    exchanging  the 
public  bills  of  credit  of  this  colony,  emitted  in  17-iO. 

An  Act  for  the  more  effectual  punishment  of  negroes,  that  shall 
attempt  to  commit  a  rape  on  any  Avhite  woman. 

An  Act  for  restoring  Silas   Greenman,  of  Westerh',  to  his  for- 
mer rights  and  privileges,  as  a  freeman  of  this  colony. 

An  Act  for  stating  the  prices  of  ferriage  at  the  several  ferries 
in  this  colony. 

An  Act  stating  the  fees  of  the  collector  of  His  Majesty's  cus- 
toms, and  the  naval  officer  in  this  colony. 

An  Act  establishing  the  fees  of  the  court  of  vice  admiralty, 
this  colony. 

An  x\ct  for  settling  and   ascertaing  damages  upon  protested 
bills  of  exchange. 

Letter  from  Governor  Sliirlcy  to  Governor  Greene. 

Boston,  January  29,  1744-5. 

Sir : — Though  I  doubt  not  but  that  the  interest  of  the  common  cause  of  New 
England,  will  sufficiently  animate  your  government  to  exert  themselves  vigorously 
in  the  intended  expedition  against  Louisburg,  yet  I  would  beg  leave  to  add,  that 
the  exposed  situation  of  your  colony  by  sea,  and  the  resentment  of  the  enemy 
against  it,  on  account  of  the  activeness  of  your  privateers,  make  it  particularly  prob- 
able that  you  may  have  a  sudden  visit  from  the  French,  this  summer,  if  Cape  Briton 
is  not  reduced. 

The  gentlemen  who  deliver  this,  will  apprise  Your  Honor  how  essential  it  is,  to. 
wards  our  proceeding  in  this  importmt  affair,  that  we  should  have  a  naval  fonjc  be- 
fore Louisburg,  by  the  beginning  or  the  middle  of  March,  at  furthest,  to  cut  off  the 
enemy's  provision  vessels,  and  intercept  Mr.  Duvivicr,  who  is  expected  about 
that  time  with  recruits  for  the  garrison  ;  which  latter  event  must  be  so  killing  a 
blow  to  the  people  of  the  town  and  garrison,  that  it  would  not  fail  of  being  deci- 
sive ;  and  they  will  also  let  yon  know  what  this  government  has  done,  and  what 
applications  I  have  made  towards  providing  such  a  naval  force  ;  I  hope,  therefore, 
you  will  not  fail  to  exert  yourself  in  this  respect.  They  will  further  inform  you  how 
necessary  it  is  that  we  should  have  a  proper  train  of  artillery,  which  should  be  four 
pieces,  of  eighteen  pound  shot,  to  twenty-four  pound  ;  of  which  sort,  we  have  not» 
sufficient  in  our  castle;  and  I  therefore  hope  you  will  contribute  your  quota,  also 
in  this  respect. 


1744.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  75 

I  doubt  not  but  our  united  force,  vigorously  exerted  upon  this  occasion,  in  con- 
junction with  His  Majesty's  other  neighboring  colonies,  will  meet  with  success 
which  I  hope  will  be  the  event  of  this  expedition,  and  am,  sir. 

Your  Honor's  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

Hon'ble  Governor  Greene. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemUy  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kingstoivn,  the 
lith  dajj  of  February,  1743-44. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  emitting  the  sum  of  £40,000  in  bills  of  public 
credit,  of  the  new  tenor,  to  be  let  upon  loan. 

Protest. 

We,  the  subscribers,  dissent  from  the  foregoing  vote,  and  protest  against  it,  for 
the  following  reasons  : 

1st.  Because  the  interest  to  be  paid  by  (hose  who  take  up  the  bills  emitted  by 
this  act,  is  so  low,  and  the  principal  to  be  paid  in  again  at  such  distant  periods,  that 
it  will  necessarily  depreciate  their  value,  as  well  as  frustrate  one  of  the  principal 
ends  of  emitting,  and  letting  them  out  upon  loan,  which  is  to  defray  the  charges  of 
the  government. 

2d.  Because  we  think  that  making  so  large  a  bank  at  this  time,  will  be  of  most 
pernicious  consequence  to  the  trade  of  this  colony,  by  so  much  depreciating  our 
whole  paper  currency,  that  it  may  bring  on  a  discount  between  our  bills  ami  those 
of  the  neighboring  governments,  (being  what  they  once  aimed  at),  which  when  once 
begun,  no  one  can  tell  where  it  will  stop,  and  must  introduce  the  utmost  difficulties 
and  confusion  in  our  trade  with  the  inhabitants  of  those  governments,  upon  which 
our  foreign  trade  so  much  depends. 

3d.  Because  this  emission  will  make  so  large  an  addition  to  that  load  of  bank 
mortgages  already  upon  the  lands  of  this  colony,  that  posterity  will  never  be  able 
to  discharge  them,  but  must  unavoidably  end  in  the  utter  ruin  of  a  vast  number  of 
families. 

4th.  Because  we  look  upon  it  to  be  highly  unjust  to  make  an  act  that  will 
naturally  and  necessarily  depreciate  the  bills  already  extant,  whereby  all  creditors 


76  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1744. 

will  be  defrauded  of  a  great  part  of  their  just  dues  ;  -widows  and  orphans,  whose  in- 
terest consists  of  money,  will  be  greatly  injured  and  oppressed,  all  industry  dis- 
couraged, and  idleness,  extravagance  and  extortion  highly  encouraged  to  the  mani- 
fest hurt  and  dishonor  of  the  colony. 

5th.  Because  we  apprehend  it  will  greatly  endanger  our  most  valuable  charter 
privileges,  and  be  looked  upon  as  a  presumptuous  and  undutiful  piece  of  con- 
duct, to  add  one  large  emission  to  another,  and  of  such  a  pernicious  tendency, 
after  so  many  instructions,  admonitions,  and  commands  to  the  contrary,  which  have 
been  sent  to  this  colony,  both  from  the  then  lords  justices,  and  from  the  lords  com- 
missioners of  trade  and  plantations,  as  well  as  the  votes  of  the  Honorable  House  of 
Commons,  showing  their  disapprobation  of  such  a  paper  currency ;  all  which  have 
been  now  read  in  this  house. 

6th.  Because,  as  we  apprehend,  that  this  fatal  act  will  be  attended  with  all  the 
pernicious  consequences  before  mentioned,  we  would  have  the  whole  colony  as  well 
as  posterity,  know  that  we  have  not  been  instrumental  in  their  ruin  and  misery, 
but  have  endeavored,  (as  much  as  in  us  lay,)  to  preserve  and  transmit  down  to  pos- 
terity the  privileges  and  properties  which  their  ancestors  obtained  and  earned  with 
■so  much  hazard,  labor  and  expense. 

SAMUEL  WICKHAM,  JOSEPH  JACOB, 

JOHN  TILLINGHAST,  BENJAMIN  HALL. 

[A  protest  was  also  presented  by  Peter  Bours,  another  mem- 
ber of  the  Assembly,  against  the  passage  of  the  act  referred  to. 
It  is  omitted  here,  on  account  of  its  length.] 

An  Act  repealing  an  act  made  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  His 
present  Majesty's  reign,  entitled  "  An  act  for  appointing  and 
erecting  a  court  of  equity,  to  hear  and  determine  all  appeals 
in  personal  actions,  from  the  judgments  of  the  superior  court," 
and  for  granting  reviews  in  personal  actions. 
Whereas,  it  is  found,  by  experience,  that  the  trials  of  causes 
by  the  said  court  of  equity  is  inconvenient,  and  a  great  griev- 
ance to  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  of  the  same,  that  the  said  act,  and  every  clause 
thereof,  be,  and  it  is  hereby  repealed,  and  made  null  and  void ; 
and  that  the  said  court  be,  and  it  hereby  is  dissolved  and 
abolished. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
all  the  records  of  said  court  shall  be  lodged  and  remain  in  the 
secretary's  office,  and  that  they  be,  and  remain  as  valid ;  and 
all  copies  extracted  therefrom,  and  attested  by  the  secretary, 


1744.]  AND   PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  77 

shall  be  as  authentic,  to  all  intents  and  purposes  in  the  law  as 
if  the  said  court  of  equity  were  still  in  being. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  all 
executions  upon  any  judgments  obtained  in  said  court,  and  not 
satisfied,  shall  be  hereafter  granted  forth  by  the  secretary,  and 
be  returnable  into  his  office,  on  such  days,  as  would  have  been 
the  first  days  of  said  court  of  equity's  sitting,  had  not  the 
same  been  hereby  abolished. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  all 
writs  of  scire  facias,  upon  any  judgment  obtained  in  the  said 
court  of  equity,  shall  be  brought  before  the  judges  of  the  supe- 
rior court  of  judicature,  who  are  hereby  authorized  and  empow- 
ered to  take  cognizance  of  the  same,  in  the  same  manner  they 
might  have  done,  if  the  said  judgments  had  been  obtained  in 
the  said  superior  court. 

And,  to  the  end  that  there  may  be  no  failure  of  justice,  and 
that  no  person  or  persons  be  foreclosed  by  any  judgment,  where 
they  might,  upon  a  new  trial,  be  provided  with  new  and  further 
evidence  for  their  defence ; — 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  the  person  or 
persons  that  shall  be  aggrieved  at  any  judgment  of  the  superior 
court,  shall,  and  may  have  liberty  to  bring  a  writ  of  review, 
and  thereupon  have  another  hearing  of  said  cause,  in  the  said 
superior  court. 

Provided,  the  said  party  hath  obtained  a  judgment  in  the 
said  cause,  either  at  the  inferior  or  superior  court,  and  no 
other  person  whatsoever  ;  and  the  party  bringing  such  writ  of 
review,  shall  bring  an  attested  copy  of  the  whole  case,  and 
each  party  shall  have  the  benefit  of  any  new  and  further  pleas 
and  evidence  ;  and  the  party  who  shall  recover  judgment  in 
such  action  of  review,  shall  recover  all  lawful  costs  by  him  at 
any  time  before  expended  in  said  suit. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
when  and  so  often  as  it  shall  happen,  that  both  parties  shall 
bring  actions  of  review  to  the  superior  court  in  the  same  cause, 
that  then,  and  in  such  case,  the  writs  in  both  actions,  and  all 
the  evidence  of  both  parties,  shall  be  committed  together  by 


78  RECORDS    OP   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1744. 

the  court  to  the  same  jury,  in  order  to  confirm,  reverse  or  alter 
the  former  judgment  of  the  superior  court,  according  to  law 
and  justice ;  and  the  party  who  shall  recover  judgment,  shall 
recover  the  whole  costs  of  both  suits. 

Provided,  that  no  action  of  review  shall  be  brought  after  the 
expiration  of  one  year  from  the  time  of  rendering  the  judg- 
ment to  be  reviewed,  and  that  the  said  writ  or  summons  of  re- 
view, shall  be  taken  out  and  served  thirty  days  before  the  sit- 
ting of  said  court  to  which  such  action  of  review  shall  be 
brought  ;  and  the  reasons  of  such  review  shall  be  therein  con- 
tained, saving  to  any  infant,  feme  covert,  or  person  non  com- 
pos mentis,  or  beyond  sea,  one  year  after  such  impediment  be 
removed,  to  bring  their  writ  of  review,  as  aforesaid. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
execution  shall  not  be  stayed  or  suspended,  by  reason  of  any 
such  action  of  review ;  and  that  any  judgment  given  in  any 
action  of  review,  shall  no  ways  hinder  the  party  who  shall  be 
aggrieved  thereat,  to  appeal  to  His  Majesty  in  council,  in  aU 
cases  where  the  law  of  this  colony  permits  and  allows  the  same- 

And  136  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  the 
sherifls,  or  their  deputies,  shall  take  good  and  sufficient  bail  in 
all  writs  of  review  that  shall  be  directed  to  them,  to  answer  the 
judgments  that  shall  be  thereon  given  ;  and  where  the  body  of 
the  defendant  cannot  be  found,  nor  sufficient  estate  be  found 
to  attach,  to  answer  the  said  actions  of  review,  that  then,  and 
in  such  case,  it  shall,  and  may  be  lawful  for  the  sheriflf,  or  his 
deputy,  to  attach  the  money,  goods  or  land  by  him  received, 
seized  or  attached  by  virtue  of  the  execution  taken  out  in 
pursuance  of  the  former  judgment  obtained,  if  the  same  be 
remaining  in  his  hands,  or  unsold  at  the  time  of  his  receiv- 
ing the  said  writ  of  review. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  and  it  is  the  true  intent  and  meaning  of 
this  act,  that  the  same,  and  every  part  thereof,  shall  take  place 
and  be  in  force  the  first  Wednesday  in  May  next  ensuing  the  date 
hereof,  and  not  before ;  any  thing  herein  contained,  or  any 
law,  custom  or  usage  to  the  contrary  hereof,  in  any  wise, 
notwithstanding;. 


1744.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  79 

Whereas,  Peter  Bourse,  Samuel  Wickham  and  Edward  Scott, 
Esqs.,  were  appointed  a  committee  to  examine  into  the  conduct 
of  the  court  of  vice  admiralty,  relating  to  the  condemnation  of 
the  sloop  Gertrude,  Samuel  Baal,  commander,  did  report,  that 
they  had  procured  a  copy  of  the  case,  and  examined  Samuel 
Pemberton,  Esq.,  late  deputy  judge  of  said  court,  who  informed 
them,  that  he  had  no  other  reasons  to  give,  why  he  condemned 
said  sloop,  than  tho?e  he  had  assigned  in  the  body  of  his 
decree. 

Which  report  is  voted  to  be  accepted. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Esq., 
Peter  Bours  and  Samuel  Wickham,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  prepare  a  letter  for  His 
Honor,  the  Governor,  to  sign,  and  send  the  same  to  their  ex- 
cellencies, the  lords  justices,  respecting  the  condemnation  of 
the  sloop  Gertrude,  and  to  send  home  a  copy  of  the  decree  of 
the  court  of  vice  admiralty  concerning  said  condemnation ;  and 
that  said  committee  send,  by  the  first  good  opportunity,  £150 
to  the  agent  of  this  colony ;  and  they  are  hereby  empowered 
to  draw  money  out  of  the  general  treasury  to  sufficient  to  pur- 
chase said  sum,  in  bills  of  exchange,  gold  or  silver,  for  the  pur- 
pose aforesaid. 

Governor  Greene's  Letter  to  the  DuJce  of  Neiucastle. 

Newport,  Rhode  Island,  March  15,  1843. 
My  Lord  : — In  obedience  to  the  directions  of  their  excellencies,  the  late  lords  jus- 
tices, to  me,  to  procure  and  send  the  proceedings  of  the  court  of  admiralty,  here,  upon 
the  trial  of  a  barque,  of  Curraco,  called  La  Gertruyda,  Capt.  Samuel  Baal,  f;om- 
mander,  taken  near  Rio  de  la  Hache,  by  three  English  privateers,  commanded  by 
Robert  Flowers,  John  Rows  and  William  Wilkinson,  and  condemned  in  the 
court  of  admiralty,  in  this  colony,  and  divided  among  the  captors,  (which  Mr.  Hop, 
minister  from  the  States  General  of  the  United  Provinces,  complains  of,  as  contrary 
to  the  treaties  subsisting  between  His  Majesty  and  the  States),  together  v^ith  a  full 
account  of  the  reasons  which  induced  the  said  court  to  proceed  to  the  condemnation 
of  her.  I  have  procured  the  enclosed  authentic  copy  of  the  trial  of  the  said  barque, 
from  the  records  of  the  admiralty  court ;  and  a  committee  of  the  General  Assembly 
of  this  colony  has  been  appointed  to  inquire  of  the  late  deputy  judge  (who  is  now  a 
prisoner  for  debt),  what  reasons  he  had  to  Induce  him  to  proceed  to  the  condemna- 
tion of  said  barque,  who  replied,  that  he  had  no  other  reasons  to  render  but  those 
he  had  assigned  in  the  body  of  his  decree.     So  that  I  am  not  able  to  give  your  grace 


80  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1744. 

any  further  account,  but  humbly  hope,  that,  as  this  court,  which  has  the  sole  cogni- 
zance of  prizes,  is  wholly  independent  of  any  authority  in  this  colony,  that  the 
Governor  and  Company  will  never  be  thought  liable  to  censure  on  account  of  any 
judgment  in  that  court,  that  may  be  thought  owing  to  the  mistakes  or  passions  of  an 
ignorant  or  indigent  person  ;  that  without  their  consent  or  knowledge,  may  be  de- 
puted to  judge  and  determine  singly  in  matters  of  such  high  and  public  concern- 
ment. I  am,  with  great  respect,  my  lord, 

Your  Grace's  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 
To  His  Grace,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle.  W.  GREENE. 

Voted,  that  Thomas  Pearce,  son  of  John ;  Abel  Hall,  Nicho- 
las Goddard,  John  Manchester,  Jr.,  and  Benjamin  Corey,  all 
of  East  Greenwich,  in  the  county  of  Providence,  be  admitted 
freemen  of  this  colony. 

God  save  the  King. 

Letter  from  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  to  Governor  Greene. 

Whitehall,  March  31st,  1744. 
Sir  : — The  French  king  having  declared  war  against  His  Majesty,  (as  you  will 
see  by  the  enclosed  copy  of  his  declaration,  for  that  purpose,  which  is  full  of  the 
grossest  and  most  indecent  misrepresentations,  and  reflections  upon  His  Majesty's 
conduct,)  I  am  to  acquaint  you,  by  His  Majesty's  command,  that  on  Thursday  last, 
the  29th  instant,  a  great  council  was  held  at  St.  James's,  where  His  Majesty  ap- 
proved, and  has  since  signed,  a  declaration  of  war  against  the  French  king,  and  or- 
dered that  the  same  should  be  published  on  this  day,  by  the  heralds  at  arms,  in  the 
usual  places,  and  with  the  accustomed  formalities  on  the  like  occasions ;  which  has 
been  done,  accordingly. 

I  send  you  enclosed,  a  printed  copy  of  the  said  declaration,  and  am  commanded 
to  signify  to  you  His  Majesty's  pleasure,  that  you  cause  it  to  be  proclaimed  in  the 
colony  under  your  government,  that  His  INIajesty's  subjects  having  this  notice,  may 
take  care  to  prevent  any  mischief,  which  otherwise  they  might  suffer  from  the  ene- 
my, and  do  their  duty  in  their  several  stations,  to  distress  and  annoy  the  subjects  of 
the  French  king. 

And  His  Majesty  would  have  you  be  very  rigorous  and  severe,  in  preventing  any 
ammunition,  or  stores  of  any  kind,  from  being  carried  to  them  ;  and  you  are  to 
use  all  proper  methods,  that  may  be  most  effectual  for  that  purpose. 

I  send  you  enclosed,  His  Majesty's  proclamation  for  the  distribution  of  prizes 
taken  by  His  Majesty's  ships  of  war,  or  privateers,  which,  you  will  take  care,  may 
be  published  in  the  colony  under  your  government;  and  you  will  do  every  thing  in 
your  power,  to  encourage  His  Majesty's  subjects  to  fit  out  ships  to  act  as  privateers 
against  the  enemy ;  and  you  will,  upon  the  receipt  of  this  letter,  take  all  opportuni- 
ties, as  far  as  depends  upon  you,  to  distress  and  annoy  the  French  in  their  settle- 
ments, trade  and  commerce. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 
To  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island.  NEWCASTLE. 


1744.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  \st  day 
of  May,  Vi  a. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Peter  Bours,  Mr.  Philip  Greene, 

Mr.  William  Ellery,  Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshali, 

Mr.  William  Burton,  Mr.  Rouse  Helme. 

Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 

The  following  are  admitted  freemen  of  the  colony : 

Of  Newport,  Miller  Frost,  Elisha  Johnson,  Timothy  Newell, 
Jonathan  Nichols,  vintner ;  James  Tanner,  Jonathan  Bardin, 
Lawrence  Payne,  Matthew  Robinson,  Samuel  Carr,  son  of  Sam- 
uel ;  Kendall  Nichols,  Jr.,  William  Benson,  Nathan  Carpenter, 
John  Coggeshali,  son  of  Abraham  ;  John  Rouse,  James  Ger- 
rald,  William  Gibbs,  Job  Almy,  Ephraim  Harris,  Solomon  Sen- 
ter,  Charles  Coombs,  Daniel  Smith,  William  Torrey,  John 
Brown,  son  of  Samuel ;  Peleg  Clarke,  Daniel  Coggeshali,  John 
Amory,  Joseph  Bull,  Ebenezer  Baldwin,  John  Belitho,  South- 
cote  Langworthy,  Jonathan  Lawtou,  son  of  Jeremiah ;  Benja- 
min Cranston  and  John  Tanner. 

Of  Providence,  Seth  Dean,  Jonathan  Bucklin,  Benjamin 
Gorham,  Jonathan  Hammond,  John  Jenckes,  John  Wilkinson, 
Jeremiah  Knight,  Jeremiah  Westcot,  Moses  Burlingame,  Jr.? 

VOL.  V.  11 


82  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1744. 

Christopher  Waterman,  James  Irwin,  Benjamin  Brown,  John 
Aplin,  David  Harris  and  Samuel  Chace. 

Of  Portsmouth,  John  Dexter,  Jr.,  Jacob  Mott,  Jr.,  Benjamin 
Ereeborn,  David  Earle,  Thomas  Manchester,  Thomas  Brownell, 
Samuel  Clarke,  Silas  Talman,  Benjamin  Fish,  Jonathan  Allen^ 
Caleb  Allen,  George  Lawton,  Robert  Lawton,  Jr.,  Thomas  Slo- 
cum  and  Joseph  Martin,  Jr. 

Of  Warwick,  Benjamin  Clarke,  Jeremiah  Colegrove,  Benja- 
min Ellis,  Benjamin  Arnold,  William  Battey,  Anthony  Holdon, 
Daniel  Budlong,  Silas  Baker,  James  Cook,  Matthew  Prince 
and  Thomas  Tibbetts. 

Of  Westerly,  William  Crumb,  Jr.,  Thomas  Pendleton,  Na- 
thaniel Cotterel,  John  West,  William  Davis,  Jr.,  John  Champ- 
lin,  Caleb  JNIaxson,  Jonathan  Palmitter,  Jr.,  Thomas  Wells,  Jr., 
Thomas  Rathbone,  Andrew  Champlin,  Rice  Nicholas,  Stephen 
Saunders,  Jr.,  Elisha  Stillman  and  Gideon  Worden. 

Of  New  Shoreham,  Abel  Franklin,  Jr.,  Nathaniel  Mott  and 
Nathaniel  Dodge. 

Of  North  Kingstown,  Thomas  Turgee,  Nathaniel  Berry^ 
Benjamin  Greene,  Thomas  Cooper,  William  Dyre,  Samnel  War- 
iier,  James  Boone,  Charles  Brown,  Jr.,  Nicholas  Watson,  James 
Douglas  and  John  Vaughan,  Jr. 

Of  South  Kingstown,  William  Potter,  son  of  John ;  Abie! 
Shearman,  Joshua  Bell,  Jonathan  Shearman,  Joseph  Hull,  Wil- 
liam Briggs,  John  Potter,  son  of  Ichabod  ,  David  Stanton  and 
Jeremiah  Browning. 

Of  East  Greenwich,  Benjamin  Sweet,  Jr.,  William  Spenser, 
son  of  Peleg  ;  John  Spenser,  Jr.,  John  Gardner,  schoolmaster ; 
David  Vaughan  and  Daniel  Vaughan,  sons  of  Robert. 

Of  Jamestown,  Benedict  Remington  and  William  Martin. 

Of  Smithfield,  Maturin  Bellou,  Jr.,  Stephen  Inman,  Silvanus 
Aldrich,  John  Sa^des,  Jr.,  Anthony  Comstock.  Samuel  Cook 
Roger  Derby,  Samuel  Aldrich,  son  of  Sauuiel ;  Ezekiel  Angel 
Daniel  Smith,  son  of  Elisha ;  Benj.  Wilkinson,  Jos.  Carpenter. 
John  Scott,  Jr.,  Resolved  Waterman,  Jr.,  Abraham  Winsor,  John 
Windsor,  John  Tredwin,  Baulston  Brayton,  John  Knox,  Samuel 


1744.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  83 

Buxton,  Benjamin  Buxton,  Benjamin  Thompson,  Thomas  Man, 
Oliver  Man,  Thomas  Woodward. 

Of  Scituate,  John  Ilulet,  Ezekiel  Hopkins,  Jr.,  John  Pray, 
John  Weight,  Noah  Fisk,  Uriah  Franklin,  Jonathan  Hopkins, 
Samuel  Corpe,  Jr.,  Stephen  Williams,  William  Salsbury. 
John  Herenden,  Jr.,  Oliver  Westcot,  John  Sprague,  Nathaniel 
Kimbell,  Joshua  Eddy,  Gideon  Smith,  David  Aylsworth,  Ben- 
jamin Colvin  and  Ebenezer  King. 

Of  Gloucester,  Eliphalet  Weight,  William  Herenden,  John 
Grover,  Thomas  Knolton,  John  Davis,  Elias  Smith,  Noah  Ar- 
nold, Obadiah  Inman,  John  Whipple,  Ebenezer  Darling,  James 
Cowen,  George  Bumpus,  Eliphalet  Eddy,  Ebenezer  Howard, 
Benjamin  Phetteplace,  Noah  Aldrich,  Jonathan  Cutter,  Stephen 
Smith,  Jr.,  and  Nathaniel  Man. 

Of  Charlestown,  John  Ladd,  Ichabod  Closson,  William 
Welch,  David  Nichols,  William  Potter,  Jr.,  Jonathan  James, 
John  Willbore,  Joseph  Woodmansie,  Jr.,  Lott  Tripp,  David 
Moore,  Stephen  Willcox,  Jr.,  William  Congdon,  Samuel  Stan- 
ton, Joseph  Dodge  and  David  Babcock. 

Of  West  Greenwich,  Isaac  Johnson,  Arthur  Aylesworth,  son 
of  John ;  Daniel  Case,  Joseph  Dolliver,  John  Reynolds,  son  of 
Samuel ;  John  Young,  Amos  Jones,  James  Willson,  Henry  jNIat- 
tason,  son  of  Henry ;  John  Greene,  Jr.,  Robert  Willson,  Josiah 
Sweet,  Jeremiah  Ellis,  Jr.,  Joseph  Spenser,  Ezekiel  Whitford, 
John  Case,  Jr.,  Chad  Aylesworth,  Thomas  Rogers,  Robert  Car- 
penter, Robert  Briggs,  Benjamin  Rogers,  Thomas  Thurston, 
Samuel  Niles,  Amos  Mattason  and  Timothy  Carpenter. 

Of  Coventry,  Thomas  Brayton,  William  Burlingame,  Stephen 
Colvin,  Anthony  Corey,  Job  Potter,  Uriah  Staflbrd,  James 
Greene,  Jr.,  Stephen  Cappel,  Stephen  Nichols,  Roger  Burlin. 
game,  Thomas  Stafford,  Jr.,  Thomas  Stafford,  son  of  William  ; 
Adam  Caston  and  Samuel  Perkins. 

Of  Exeter,  Robert  Mowrey,  Robert  Reynolds,  JNloses  Barber, 
Jr.,  Nicholas  Barber,  John  Rathbone,  Jr.,  John  Champlin,  Jede- 
diah  Irish,  Samuel  Gardner,  Joseph  Rogers,  John  Reynolds, 
son  of  John  ;  James  Eldred  and  George  Weight. 


84 


KECOKDS   OF   THE    COLONY    OF  RHODE   ISLAND 


[1744. 


Of  Middletown,  Benjamin  Smith,  Isaac  Manchester,  Samuel 
Rogers,  Jr.,  Samuel  Allen,  James  Peckham,  Jonathan  Peck- 
ham,  Joseph  Nichols,  Benjamin  Nichols,  Elisha  Weaver^ 
Thomas  Weaver,  son  of  Thomas  Weaver,  Jr.,  and  Joseph 
Eider. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhly  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  the 
Iddwj  of  May.,  1744. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 


Newport. 
Mr.  Samuel  Wickhara, 
Mr.  Peter  Coggeshall, 
Mr.  John  Tillinghast, 
Col.  John  Cranston, 
Mr.  Joseph  Jacob, 
Major  Benjamin  HaU, 

Providence. 
Col.  Jabez  Bowen, 
Mr.  John  Burton,  Jr., 
Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Capt.  Joseph  Borden. 

Portsmouth. 
Mr.  Stephen  Brownell, 
Mr.  Gideon  Freeborn,  Jr 
Mr.  Benjamin  Tucker, 
Mr.  Joseph  Brownell,  Jr 


DEPUTIES. 

WarivicJc. 
Major  Joseph  Stafford. 
Major  John  Rhodes, 
Mr.  John  Holdon,  Jr., 
INIr.  John  Warner. 
Westerly. 
Capt.  John  jNIaxson, 
Mr.  William  Babcock. 

New  Shoreham. 
Capt.  Edward  Sands, 
Air.  Thomas  Dickens. 

North  Kingstown. 
Col.  Immanuel  Northup, 
Mr.  Daniel  Gould. 

South  Kingstown. 
Capt.  Robert  Hassard, 
Mr,  James  Perry. 


1744.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS. 


85 


East  Greemvich. 
Mr.  Joseph  Frye, 
Mr.  Joseph  Nichols. 

Jamestown. 
Mr.  Samuel  Clarke, 
Mr,  Daniel  Weeclen. 

Smithfield. 
Major  William  Smith, 
Mr.  Thomas  Steere. 

Scitiiate. 
Capt.  Job  Randall, 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Angell. 

Glocester. 
Capt.  John  Smith, 
Mr.  Richard  Steere. 


DEPUTIES. 

Charkstoivn. 
Mr.  Stephen  Hoxie, 
Col.  Christopher  Chmplain. 

West  Greenwich. 
Mr.  Joseph  Slocum, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Spink. 

Coventry. 
Capt.  Abel  Potter, 
Mr.  John  Johnson. 

Exeter. 
Capt.  John  Weight, 
Capt.  John  Reynolds. 

Middletoivn. 
Mr.  Daniel  Gould, 
Mr.  John  Taylor. 


Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins,  speaker,  and    Mr.   Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 

The  following  officers  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 


ASSISTANTS. 


Mr.  Benjamin  Hassard, 
Mr,  William  Ellery, 
Mr,  William  Burton, 
Mr.  Richard  Fenner, 
Mr.  Daniel  Howland, 


Mr,  Robert  Lawton, 
Mr,  James  Arnold, 
Mr.  William  Rice, 
Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 
Mr.  Rouse  Helme, 


SECEETAEY. 

Mr.  James  Martin. 

ATTORNEY    GENERAL. 

Mr.  Daniel  Updike. 


GENERAL  TREASURER. 

Mr.  John  Gardner, 


86  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE    ISLAND  [1744. 

Whereas,  there  are  sundry  appeals  from  the  superior  court 
of  judicature,  to  the  court  of  equity,  which  remain  yet  unde- 
termined, and  said  court  of  equity  being  now  dissolved ; — 

It  is  therefore  resolved,  that  William  Ellery,  Esq.,  Messrs- 
Samuel  Wickhara,  Joseph  Jacob  and  the  attorney  general  be, 
and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  consider  of  a 
remedy  in  said  affiiir,  and  prepare  a  bill  for  that  purpose,  and 
present  the  same  to  the  next  session  of  this  Assembly. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  John  Cranston  be,  and  he  is 
hereby  appointed  to  procure  for  the  use  of  Fort  George,  five 
barrels  of  gunpowder,  and  so  much  shot  as  he  shall  think  ne- 
cessary, as  soon  as  may  be,  and  draw  money  out  of  the  general 
treasury  to  pay  for  the  same. 

Whereas,  Peter  Bours,  Samuel  Wickham  and  Daniel  Gould, 
Esqs.,  and  the  secretary,  being  the  major  part  of  the  committee 
appointed  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  Febru- 
ary last  past,  to  receive  from  Mr.  James  Helme  (one  of  the 
committee  appointed  to  exchange  the  bank  emitted  in  A.  D. 
1740),  what  money  has  been  exchanged  by  him,  did  report 
that  they  had  received  from  the  said  James  Helme  the  sum  of 
£1,409  ISs.  10c/.,  in  the  new  tenor  of  several  denominations, 
and  burnt  the  same,  pursuant  to  the  vote  of  said  General 
Assembly ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be 
accepted. 

God  save  the  King. 


1744.]  AND   PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  87 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  the  fourth 
Tuesday  in  May,  1744. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Whereas,  it  has  been  heretofore  customary  for  the  grand 
committee  to  give  one  another  orders  upon  the  general  treasu 
ry,  for  paying  themselves  for  signing  of  bills  of  credit,  which  is 
conceived  to  be  very  irregular ; — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  for  the  future,  the 
grand  committee  do  not  draw  any  money  out  of  the  general 
treasury,  for  such  a  service  as  aforesaid,  but  by  order  of  the 
General  Assembly. 

Upon  the  petition  of  sundry  inhabitants  of  the  town  of 
Providence,  in  the  county  of  Providence,  praying  that  an  ar- 
tillery company  might  be  incorporated  in  said  town,  and  a 
charter  granted  them  in  such  manner  as  has  been  heretofore 
done  ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  this  petition  be 
granted ;  provided,  the  company  be  raised  in  the  county  of 
Providence,  aforesaid ;  and  called  by  the  name  of  the  Artillery 
Company,  of  the  county  of  Providence ;  and  that  no  person 
be  admitted  into  said  company  but  by  the  consent  of  the  pa- 
tentees or  petitioners  ;  and  that  a  charter  be  granted  to  said 
company,  under  the  colony  seal,  and  signed  by  the  secretary, 
in  the  same  form  as  the  charter  granted  to  the  Artillery  Com- 
any  in  the  town  of  Newport,  in  the  county  of  Newport. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  William  Ellery  and  Samuel  Wick- 
ham,  Esqs.,  and  Mr.  John  Callender,  be,  and  they  are  hereby 
appointed  a  committee  to  draw  a  petition  to  His  Majesty,  for  a 
number  of  cannon,  and  other  warlike  stores,  for  the  use  of  this 


88  RECORDS    OP   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1744. 

colony,  to  be  signed  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  in  behalf  of 
the  General  Assembly,  and  present  the  same  to  the  next  ses- 
sion of  this  Assembly. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write  to 
His  Honor,  the  Governor  of  Connecticut,  and  move  to  him, 
that,  upon  any  emergent  occasion,  the  two  colony  sloops  may 
join  in  their  cruises. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £300  be  allowed  and 
paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  the  Hon.  William  Greene, 
Esq.,  Governor  of  this  colony,  for  his  last  year's  salary  and  ex- 
traordinary service. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £50  be  allowed  and 
paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  the  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple? 
Esq.,  Deput}''  Governor  of  said  colony,  for  his  last  year's  salary 
and  extraordinary  service. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Esq., 
Deputy  Governor,  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  Messrs.  Stephen 
Brownell,  Robert  Hassard,  Job  Randall  and  Samuel  Perry,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  determine  what 
is  ratable  estate,  and  prepare  a  bill  for  the  same,  and  present 
it  to  the  next  session  of  this  Assembly. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colons/  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport^  the  \Wi 
day  of  June,  1744. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  putting  this  colony  in  a  proper  posture  of  defence, 
in  the  present  war. 


1744.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  89 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  battery  under  Fort  George,  be 
enlarged,  so  as  to  mount  two  cannons  more  in  a  complete  man- 
ner, at  the  south  end  thereof;  and  that  ten  men  more  be  ad- 
ded to  the  former  twenty  soldiers  for  the  defence  of  said  fort ; 
and  that  the  gunner's  pay  be  augmented  to  £10  per  month, 
and  the  men's  to  £8  per  month,  old  tenor ;  which  men  may  be 
impressed  by  the  field  officers  of  the  county  of  Newport,  in 
case  a  sufficient  number  do  not  enlist  in  ten  days  ;  and  that  a 
lieutenant  be  dppointed  to  said  fort  by  the  General  Assembly, 
and  to  receive  the  pay  of  £20  per  month,  old  tenor,  he  con- 
stantly residing  at  said  fort,  till  the  10th  day  of  October  next 
ensuing,  and  finding  himself 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
eighty  barrels  of  good  gunpowder  (including  what  is  already 
ordered  to  be  purchased),  and  fifteen  hundred  pounds  weight 
of  musket  balls  be  procured  as  soon  as  may  be,  at  the  expense 
of  the  colony,  and  for  the  use  thereof,  by  the  commissary ;  fifty 
barrels  of  said  powder  to  be  for  the  use  of  said  Fort  George,  and 
to  be  delivered  to  the  captain  of  said  fort ;  twelve  barrels  there- 
of to  be  for  the  use  of  the  colony  sloop  Tartar,  and  to  be  deliv- 
ered to  the  captain  of  said  sloop  ;  three  barrels  thereof,  for  the 
defence  of  Block  Island,  and  to  be  delivered  to  Capt.  Edward 
Sands  ;  and  the  remaining  fifteen  barrels,  with  the  musket 
balls,  to  be  divided  to  the  three  counties  ;  that  is,  five  barrels 
of  gun  powder  and  one-third  part  of  the  musket  balls  to  each 
county,  to  be  delivered  to  the  colonel  of  the  regiment,  within 
the  same. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  commissary,  as  he  shall  purchase  any  of  the  aforesaid  war- 
like stores,  shall  draw  money  out  of  the  general  treasury  to 
pay  for  the  same,  as  he  shall  have  occasion ;  and  render  an 
annual  account  of  the  expenses  arising  thereon,  or  sooner,  if 
required  thereto  by  the  General  Assembly. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  rate  ordered  to  be  levied  at  the  last  session,  be  augmented 

VOL.  V.  12 


90  RECOEDS    OF   TIIE    COLONY    OP   EHODE   ISLAND  [1744. 

to  the  sum  of  £10,000,  old  tenor,  to  be   collected  as  said  act 
expressetli ;  the  whole  to  be  done  in  nine  months'  time. 

But  for  the  present  supply  of  the  government  with  neces- 
sary stores,  £2,500,  new  tenor,  be  impressed  from  the  plates^ 
dated  1743,  and  signed  by  the  grand  committee,  and  deliv- 
ered to  the  general  treasurer,  immediately  to  be  applied  to 
the  uses  aforesaid,  and  no  other ;  and  the  aforesaid  sum  to  be 
sunk  by  said  rate,  when  collected. 

An  Act  for  fitting  out  the  colony  sloop    Tartar,  in   company 

with  the  sloop  kept  by  His  Majesty's  colony  of  Connecticut, 

for  guarding  the  coast. 

Whereas,  it  is  necessary  for  the  safety  of  trade  on  the  coast 
of  New  England,  and  the  preservation  of  shipping,  to  keep  some 
vessels  of  force  cruising,  to  protect  His  Majesty's  subjects 
and  their  efiects  against  foreign  enemies  now  in  time  of  open 
war ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  colony  sloop  Tartar 
be  forthwith  fitted  out  in  a  warlike  manner,  with  guns,  ammu- 
nition, and  all  other  stores  of  war,  and  other  necessary  stores, 
as  soon  as  possible,  and  be  manned  with  ninety  able  bodied 
men  (officers  included),  and  proceed  forthwith  on  a  cruise,  sail- 
ing as  fiir  eastward  as  Martha's  Vineyard,  and  as  fiir  westward 
as  Long  Island  extends,  and  to  continue  said  cruise  (without 
any  intermission,  only  to  procure  necessaries)  from  the  time  of 
sailing,  until  the  1st  day  of  October  next. 

And  all  the  soldiers,  by  act  of  Assembly  ordered  to  Block 
Island,  for  its  security,  are  hereby  ordered  on  board  said  sloop 
Tartar,  upon  her  aforesaid  cruise,  as  part  of  said  number  of 
men  appointed. 

And  the  officers  and  men  on  board  said  sloop,  are  hereby  allow- 
ed the  following  wages  and  encouragements  :  the  captain,  £25 
per  month  ;  the  lieutenant,  £'15  per  month  ;  the  master,  £12 
per  month  ;  the  gunner,  £12  per  month  ;  the  mates,  £  1 1  per 
month;  the  boatswain,  £11  per   month;  the  carpenter,  £11 


1744.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  91 

per  montli ;  the  surgeon,  £15  per  month  ;  and  to  the  sailors, 
or  other  hands  on  board  said  sloop,  £8  per  mouth ;  which  said 
captain  and  lieutenant  shall  be  appointed  by  the  General  As- 
sembly ;  and  the  said  captain  shall  appoint  all  the  other  offi- 
cers, and  ship  the  other  hands. 

And  whatever  prize  or  prizes,  or  part  thereof,  shall  be  taken 
by  said  sloop,  shall  be  divided  among  the  captors  in  the  follow- 
ing proportion,  viz. :  one-eighth  part  to  the  captain ;  two- 
eighths  equally  to  be  divided  among  the  other  officers ;  and 
the  remaining  five-eighths,  in  equal  shares  among  the  men,  or 
their  representatives,  if  any  be  killed  or  die. 

And  during  said  cruise,  the  allowance  on  board  said  sloop 
shall  be  as  followeth,  viz. :  to  each  man  per  week,  seven  pounds 
of  bread,  four  pounds  of  beef,  two  pounds  of  pork,  two  quarts 
of  peas  or  beans,  and  one  pound  of  butter  •  and  for  every  day, 
each  man  half  a  pint  of  rum. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  all 
necessaries  for  said  sloop,  shall  at  all  times  be  procured  at  the 
expense  of  the  colony,  by  the  commissary  thereof,  and  delivered 
by  him  to  the  captain  of  said  sloop  ;  and  in  case  a  sufficient 
number  of  men  shall  not  have  entered  voluntarily  on  board  said 
sloop,  when  ready  to  sail,  then  the  Governor  or  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, are  empowered  forthwith  to  grant  a  warrant  for  impress- 
ing a  sufficient  number  for  cruising,  as  aforesaid. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  is  re- 
quested speedily  to  acquaint  His  Honor,  the  Governor  of  Connec- 
ticut, with  this  act  of  the  General  Assembly,  that  said  colony 
of  Connecticut  may  comply  with  the  intent  thereof,  by  fitting 
out  their  colony  sloop  in  conjunction,  as  aforesaid,  for  guarding 
the  trade,  and  preserving  the  interest  of  both  governments,  if 
they  shall  think  fit ;  but  in  case  said  government  of  Connec- 
ticut shall  not  join  force  with  this  colony  by  fitting  out  their 
sloop,  as  aforesaid,  then  the  said  sloop  Tartar  is  not  to  be  sent 
out  on  said  cruise  by  virtue  of  this  act ;  but  shall  be  sent 
out  only  upon  any  emergency,  as  His  Honor,  the  Governor, 
shall  have  intelligence,  and  judge  necessary^  ond  proper  j 
any  thing  afore  written,  notwithstanding. 


92  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   KHODE   ISLAND  [1744. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  commissary  draw  money  out  of  the  general  treasury,  for 
the  purposes  aforesaid,  and  pay  the  aforementioned  wages 
at  the  end  of  every  cruise,  and  account  annually,  or  oftener, 
as  the  General  Assembly  shall  direct. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  a  commissary  be  now  chosen,  to 
take  care  of  the  colony's  arms,  war  like  stores  and  other 
stores,  and  to  perform  such  other  duties  as  properly  belong  to 
said  office  •  and  that  such  commissary  shall  be  hereafter  an- 
nually chosen  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session,  held 
on  the  first  Wednesday  in  May. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Esq., 
and  Col.  John  Cranston,  being  of  the  former  committee,  ap- 
pointed to  take  care  of  the  colony  sloop  Tartar,  and  to  fit  her 
out  upon  a  cruise,  do  deliver  to  the  commissary  the  said  colony 
sloop  Tartar,  with  the  stores  and  appurtenances  thereunto  be- 
longing, taking  a  receipt  for  the  same  ;  which  is  to  be  lodged? 
with  an  inventory  of  the  stores  and  appurtenances,  as  aforesaid 
in  the  secretary's  office. 

And  that  Messrs.  John  Tillinghast  and  Joseph  Jacob  be  a 
committee  to  audit  the  above  mentioned  committee's  accounts, 
and  give  them  an  order  upon  the  general  treasurer  for  the  bal- 
ance that  shall  appear  to  be  due  to  them,  and  make  report  to 
the  next  session  of  this  Assembly. 

Whereas,  there  are  sundry  of  the  subjects  of  the  king  of 
Erance,  now  in  His  Majesty's  jail,  in  Newport,  in  the  county  of 
Newport ; — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  in  case  they,  or  any 
of  them,  or  any  other  of  the  said  French  king's  subjects  other. 
Avays  confined  in  Newport,  aforesaid,  see  cause  to  remove  to 
the  town  of  Providence,  in  the  county  of  Providence,  and  there 
to  subsist  themselves,  they  shall  be  transported  there,  and  shall 
remain  within  said  town  of  Providence,  till  further  orders  from 
Ilis  Honor,  the  Governor,  or  the  General  Assembly  ;  and  that, 
if  they,  or  any  of  them,  shall  bo  found  without  the  precincts  of 
the  said  town  of  Providence,  nr.t  haA  iiig  liberty  for  the  same, 
either  from  tBe  Governor  or  from  the  General  Assembly,  thos< 


1744.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  93 

SO  offending,  shall  he  confined  to  jail,  and  there  to  remain  till 
further  orders. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  when,  and  as  often  as  the  captain, 
or  lieutenant  of  the  colony  sloop  Tartar,  shall  refuse  to  take 
their  respective  offices  when  chosen,  or  shall  die.  His  Honor, 
the  Governor,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  fully  empowered,  in  the  re- 
cess of  the  General  Assembly,  to  appoint  others  in  their  room. 

Whereas,  the  committee  appointed  at  the  last  session  of  this 
Assembly,  to  prepare  the  draft  of  a  petition  to  His  Majesty,  for 
a  supply  of  cannon  and  military  stores,  did  now  present  the 
same  for  the  consideration  of  this  Assembly  ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  draft  be, 
and  it  is  hereby  approved  of  and  accepted  ;  and  that  His  Honor, 
the  Governor,  sign  a  fair  copy  thereof,  and  transmit  it  to  the 
agent  of  this  colony,  by  the  first  opportunity,  in  order  to  be 
presented  to  His  Majesty  ;  and  that  the  said  agent  be  directed 
to  solicit  this  affair  in  the  best  manner,  so  as  to  get  an  answer 
as  soon  as  possible. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Deputy  Governor, 
Messrs.  Daniel  Updike,  John  Callender  and  James  Martin,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  prepare  an  an- 
swer to  the  letter  from  the  lords  commissioners  of  the  admiral- 
ty, in  respect  to  the  judge  and  other  officers  of  the  court  of  vice 
admiralty,  in  this  colony,  and  present  the  same  tothis  Assembly, 
at  their  next  session. 

God  save  the  King. 

Letter  from  Secretary  Willardto  Governor  Greene. 

Province  of  the  Massacbusets  Bay, 
Boston,  June  5,  1744. 
Sir  : — This  court  being  apprehensive   that   nothing  will  more  contribute  to  the 
success   of  the  war   in  these  parts,  than  that  the  several  northern  governments  in 
America,  shall  enter  into  an   agreement  with  one  another,  for  their  mutual  assist- 
ance, and  for  carrying  on  the  war  in  the  most  eflfectual  manner ; — 

AVe  have  accordingly  chosen  and  appointed  five  commissioners,  to  meet  at  Alba- 
ny, the  12th  of  this  month,  (where  the  Governor  of  New  York  has  appointed  to 
meet  with  the  Six  Nations,)  to  treat  with  commissioners  from  the  other  governments 
in  New  fjngland,  and  agree  on  such  measures  as  may  be  thought  equal  and  neces- 

* 


94  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1744. 

sary  for  their   mutual   safety  and  defence,  and  for   annoying  their  enemies ;  such 
agreement  to  be  binding  on  the  respective  governments. 

We  therefore  desire  Your  Honor,  that  commissioners  may  be  appointed  by  your 
government,  with  the  same  full  power,  to  transact  these  important  affairs,  at  the 
time  and  place,  aforesaid.  We  pray  your  excuse  for  not  giving  you  longer  notice 
of  this  business.  The  meeting  of  the  Six  Nations  of  Indians  at  Albany,  on  the 
day  above  mentioned,  gives  us  such  an  opportunity  of  strengthening  our  interest, 
which  ought  not  to  be  lost,  and  we  are  but  just  now  apprised  of  it. 

Your  Honor's  most  obedient  servants. 
In  the  name  and  by  the  order  of  the  Great  and  General  Court  of  said  Province, 

JOSIAH  WILLARD,  Secretary. 
The  llon'blc  William  Greene,  Esii. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemUf/,  held  for  the  Coloni/  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  third  Tues- 
duf/  in  Aiigust,  1744. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  lion.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  soldiers  which  remain  at 
Block  Island,  and  were  not  taken  on  board  the  colony  sloop,  be 
forthwith  discharged. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £7  be  allowed  and  paid 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  John  Barker,  for  bringing  the 
packet  from  Boston,  with  His  Majesty's  declaration  of  war 
against  France. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  Messrs.  Peter  Maw- 
ny  and  Jabez  Bowen,  two  of  the  field  officers  in  the  county  of 
Providence,  amounting  to  £5  15^.,  being  the  expenses  at 
Providence,  in  the  county  of  Providence,  at  the  declaration  of 
war  against  France,  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general 
treasur}^ 

God  save  the  Jving. 


1744.]  AND    PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  95 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Ass  ernUi/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  lihode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Naqmi,  the  third 
Tuesday  in  September,  1744. 

The  Hon.  William  GreenOj  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  ascertaining  the  quota  of  the  several  towns  in  this 

colony,  to  discharge  the  public  rate. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  at  their  ses- 
sion, held  at  Newport,  within  and  fo^r  said  colony,  by  virtue  of 
a  warrant  from  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  on  the  19th  day  of 
June  last  past,  among  other  things  passed  an  act  for  levying 
or  assessing  a  rate  of  £10,000,  old  tenor,  upon  the  inhabitants 
of  said  colony ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof  it  'is  enacted,  that  the  same  be  assessed 
upon  the  several  towns  in  the  colony  in  the  proportion  foUow- 
ng,  viz. : 

£      s.  £     s. 

Newport 1,250  00  Jamestown 162  10 

Providence 1,175  00  Smithfield 675  00 

Portsmouth 500  00  Scituate 500  00 

Warwick '.  .700  00  Glocester 487  10 

Westerly 600  00  Charlestown 500  00 

New  Shoreham 125  00  West  Greenwich 350  00 

North  Kingstown 652  10  Coventry 233  00 

South  Kingstown 811  05  Exeter   432  10 

East  Greenwich 440  00  Middletown 405  00 

And  that  the  general  treasurer  grant  out  his  warrant  to 
the  several  towns  for  levying  the  same. 

jSepiemier  19th,  1744. 
In  the  house  of  deputies : 


96  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1744. 

I,  the  subscriber,  beg  leave  to  dissent  from  the  above  vote,  in  respect  of  the  pro- 
portion of  the  rate  to  the  several  towns  ;  for  that  I  believe  some  of  the  towns,  in  the 
outskirts  of  the  government,  will  be  rated  at  least  three  or  four  times  as  much  in 
proportion  to  their  ratable  estate,  as  some  of  the  frontier  towns  will  in  proportion 
of  theirs,  who,  if  any,  will  receive  the  most  benefit  thereby. 

RICHARD  STEEEE. 

Whereas,  the  committee  appointed  at  the  last  session  of  this 
Assembly,  to  prepare  the  draught  of  a  letter  to  the  Right  Hon- 
orable the  Lords  Commissioners,  for  executing  the  office  of 
Lord  High  Admiral  of  Great  Britain,  in  answer  to  the  com- 
plaint of  Leonard  Lockman,  Esq.,  judge  of  the  court  of  vice  ad- 
miralty, in  this  colony,  did  now  present  the  same  for  the  con- 
sideration of  this  Assembly  ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  draught  be? 
and  it  is  hereby  approved  of,  and  accepted ;  and  that  His 
Honor,  the  Governor,  sign  a  fair  copy  thereof,  with  a  duplicate ^ 
and  transmit  the  same  to  the  agent  for  this  colony,  by  the  first 
opportunities,  in  order  to  be  by  him  delivered  in  London,  to 
Thomas  Corbet,  Esq.,  secretary  to  the  said  lords  commis- 
sioners. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  cruise  of  the  colony 
sloop,  be,  and  it  is  hereby  lengthened  out,  till  the  last  day 
of  October  next  ensuing ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor? 
inform  the  Honorable  Governor  of  the  colony  of  Connecticut 
thereof,  and  request  of  him  that  their  colony  sloop  may  cruise 
also  till  that  time. 

God  save  the  Kin  2;. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhlf/,  held  for  ilie  Colowj  of  JRhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the  last 
Wednesdau  of  October,  1744. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Wliipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 


1744.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  97 

An  Act  for  supplying  the  agent  of  this  colony,  in  Great  Brit- 
ain, with  money,  for  defence  of  the  privileges  granted  by 
charter. 

Forasmuch,  as  some  attempts  have  been  made  against  the 
privileges  of  this  colony,  as  established  by  charter  which  re- 
quire the  speedy  application  of  some  money  for  opposing  the 
same  ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the 
authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  sum  of  £550  be  remit- 
ted to  the  agent  of  the  colony  as  soon  as  may  be,  to  be  applied 
and  expended  in  the  just  defence  of  the  charter  privileges  of 
the  colony,  so  as  need  shall  require. 

And  for  the  more  speedy  procuring  and  remitting  the  same, 
it  is  enacted  and  ordered  b}'-  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  the 
sum  of  £900,  in  bills  of  the  new  tenor,  be  struck  off  upon  the 
large  plate,  made  for  the  last  bank,  and  signed  by  the  grand 
committee,  and  put  into  the  general  treasury,  to  be  drawn  out 
by  the  committee,  for  the  remitting  said  sum ;  which  sum  of 
£900,  shall  be  sunk  by  stopping  the  proportion  of  the  interest 
money,  which  is  appropriated  for  the  use  of  the  several  towns 
in  this  colony,  arising  from  the  bank  emitted  Anno  1738,  and 
so  much  shall  be  burnt  out  of  said  interest  money  as  soon  as 
the  same  shall  become  due  to  said  towns. 

And  it  is  further  ordered  and  enacted,  that  the  Hon.  Joseph 
Whipple,  Esq.,  Samuel  Wickham,  Esq.,  and  Jonathan  Nichols, 
merchant,  be  the  committee  for  drawing  said  money  out  of  the 
general  treasury,  and  purchasing  bills  of  exchange,  silver  or 
gold,  and  for  making  remittance  home,  according  to  this  act. 

Whereas,  the  committee  appointed  to  prepare  the  draught 
of  a  letter  of  instructions  to  be  sent  to  the  agent  of  this  colony, 
in  Great  Britain,  for  him  to  oppose  the  taking  away  our  char- 
ter privileges,  did  present  the  same  for  the  consideration  of  this 
Assembly  ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  draught  be, 
and  it  is  hereby  accepted   and  approved  of,  and  that  three  fair 
copies  thereof,  be  signed  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  and  sent 
VOL.  V.  13 


98  EECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1744. 

in  three  different  vessels,  to  tlie  said  agent,  as  soon  as  may 
be. 

Whereas,  CoL  John  Cranston,  (as  captain  of  Fort  George,) 
did  present  to  this  General  Assembly,  an  account  of  £1,314 
1^.,  for  making  an  addition  to  the  new  battery,  and  making 
carriages  at  said  fort,  and  repairing  the  platforms  there ;  and 
also  one  other  account,  amounting  to  £1,277  155.  Scl,  for  the 
wages  of  the  gunner  and  twenty-nine  other  men,  with  their  al- 
lowance of  board,  from  the  1st  day  of  May,  A.  D.  1744,  to  the  1st 
day  of  November,  A.  D.  1744,  craving  an  allowance  of  said  ac- 
counts ; — 

Whereupon,  Messrs.  George  Brown,  Jeremiah  Lippitt  and 
Benoni  Hall,  were  appointed  a  committee  to  examine  said  ac- 
counts, and  make  report  to  this  Assembly  thereon ;  "who  ac- 
cordingly reported — 

That  they  had  examined  the  several  vouchers  relating  to  the  account  for  the 
work  done  at  said  fort,  and  found  due  the  said  sum  of  £1,314  Is. ;  and  that  tliey  al- 
so found  due  for  the  wages  and  weekly  allowance  of  the  gunner,  and  other  soldiers, 
the  sum  of  £1,277  15s.  Sd. 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  aforementioned 
two  sums,  amounting  to  £2,591  IGs.  Scl,  be  allowed  and  paid 
to  the  said  Col.  John  Cranston,  by  John  Gardner,  Esq.,  com- 
missary of  this  colony,  for  full  satisfaction  of  the  several  persons 
concerned  in  the  aforesaid  accounts. 

.Voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  soldiers  at  Fort  George  be 
immediately  dismissed,  excepting  eight,  who  are  still  to  be  con- 
tinued there,  in  order  to  guard  the  same. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Joseph  Wanton,  John  Mason,  iillen 
Brown,  Joseph  Randall,  son  of  William,  and  Gideon  Manches- 
ter, all  of  Providence,  in  the  county  of  Providence,  be  admitted 
freemen  of  this  colony. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Amos  Sprague  and  Thomas  Cruff, 
Jr.,  of  Smithfield,  in  the  county  of  Providence,  be  admitted 
freemen  of  this  colony. 

God  save  the  Kins. 


1744.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  99 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhlt/  held  for  the  Colon)/  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  on 
2Wi  day  of  November,  1744. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

[The  following  Public  Laws,  passed  during  ths  year  1744,  are  printed  at  length 
in  the  volume  of  laws  published  in  1747,  unless  repealed  previous  to  that  time.] 

An  Act  for  emitting  the  sum  of  £40,000,  in  bills  of  public  credit,  of  the  new  tenor 

to  be  let  upon  loan. 
An  Act  ordering  the  committee   men   for  the  several  towns,  to  give  bond  for  the 

faithful  execution  of  their  trust. 
An  Act  directing  how  mortgages  given  to  the  colony's  trustees,  shall  be  discharged ; 

and  appointing  a  person  with  whom  said  mortgages  shall  be  deposited. 
An  Act  to  prevent  the  spreading  of  the  small  pox,  and  other  contagious  sickness  ia 

this  colony. 
An  Act  establishing  the  proceedings  and  trials  of  actions  not  exceeding  £5. 
An  Act  repealing  "an  act  for  erecting  a  court  of  equity,  to  hear  and  determine  al 

appeals  in  personal  actions,  from   the  judgments  of  the  superior  court,  and  for 

granting  reviews  in  personal  actions." 
An  Act  empowering  the  sheriffs  of  the  several  counties  to  call  special  courts. 
An  Act  to  prevent  weirs  being  made  across  Pettaquamscutt  river. 
An  Act  for  preventing  trespasses. 
An  Act  for  altering  the  time  for  choosing  deputies,  and  proxing  for  general  officers 

in  the  several  towns  in  this  colony. 
An  Act  empowering  the  general  treasurer   to   appoint  proper  attornies  to  sue  for 

interest  money  due  from  persons  that  have  left  the  colony. 
An  Act  for  settling  the  allowance  of  Spanish,  or  other  prisoners  of  war. 
An  Act  for  repealing  part   of  the  act  passed  in  1743,  for  preventing  the  counter 

feiting  of  bills  of  public  credit. 
An  Act  for   the   relief  of  those   persons  who  had  brought  appeals  to  the  court  of 

equity,  and  which  were  not  determined  before  said  court  was  abolished. 
An  Act  for  putting  the  colony  in  a  posture  of  defence,  and  for  rendering  the  militia 

in  the  several  towns  thereof  more  useful  in  time  of  an  actual  invasion. 
An  Act  for  stating  the  fees  on  actions  not  exceeding  £5. 
An  Act  for   repealing   an   act   entitled  "  An  act  prohibiting  inn-holders  and  other 

retailers,  from  trusting  the  inhabitants  above  twenty  sliillings." 
An  Act  for  enlarging  a  trooper's  fine  from  ten  to  twenty  shillings,  for  a  day's  non- 
appearance. 


100  KECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1745. 

An  Act  granting  a  salary  to  one  of  the  committee  tbat  shall  give  bond  to  take  care 

of  the  mortgages  and  tenth  bonds,  belonging  to  the  colony. 
An  Act  granting  additional  fees  to  the  clerks  of  the  several  courts,  and  the  town 

clerks,  for  recording  and  copying  all  writings. 
An  Act  for  putting  this  colony  in  a  posture  of  defence,  in  the  present  war. 
An  Act  for  fitting  out  the  colony's  sloop  Tartar. 
An  Act  for  the  relief  of  persons  of  tender  consciences. 
An  Act  for  the  augmentation  of  fees  to  the  attorney  general. 
An  Act  for  ascertaining  what  estate  is  ratable,  and  for  proportioning  the  same  in 

value. 
An  Act  for  allowing   a   lottery  of  £15,000  for  building  a   bridge  over  Weybosset 

river,  at  Providence. 
An  Act  for  taking  off  the  bounty  upon  hemp,  fJax,  whale  oil,  codfish  and  whale 

bone. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhl>/  held  for'  the  Colon>j  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the  5th 
da,f/  of  Fettruary,  1744-45. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  fitting  out  the  colony  sloop,  in  order  to  join  the 
forces  of  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  on  an  expe- 
dition against  Cape  Breton. 

Whereas,  there  is  an  expedition  began  by  the  Province  of 
the  Massachusetts  Bay,  in  order  to  reduce  Cape  Breton,  and 
the  assistance  of  this  colony  has  been  requested  in  said  expedi- 
tion ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the 
authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  colony  sloop  Tartar,  be 
immediately  equipped  with  all  necessary  warlike  stores,  by  the 
commissary,  and  manned  Avith  a  number  of  good  able  seamen, 
not  exceeding  one  hundred  and  thirty ;  and  that  all  sorts  of 
provision  be  put  on  board  said  sloop  by  the  commissary,  also, 
for  four  months,  according  to  the  allowance  stated  by  law  of  this 
colony ;  and  after  she  be  so  equipped  and  manned  with  a  number 


1745.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  101 

of  volunteers,  that  she  immediately  proceed  to  join  the  forces 
raised  by  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  at  the  place 
of  rendezvous,  that  shall  be  appointed  by  that  government ;  and 
that  she  continue  in  that  service,  and  be  subject  to  the  commo- 
dore, or  council  of  war,  of  the  naval  forceof  the  aforesaid  expedi- 
tion, until  the  1st  day  of  June  next,  if  there  be  occasion  of  the 
continuing  there  so  long  ;  at  which  time,  she  shall  return  di- 
rectly to  this  colony,  unless  the  captain  shall  receive  further 
instructions  from  this  government. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  officers  and  the  men  belonging  to  said  sloop,  shall  have  and 
receive  the  same  wages  that  were  stated  by  an  act  of  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly,  made  and  passed  in  June,  A.  D.  1744  ;  and 
that  they  be  entitled  to  all  prizes  and  plunder  that  they  shaU 
take  in  the  said  expedition,  in  the  proportion  stated  in  and  by 
said  act ;  and  that  each  man  be  paid  one  month's  pay  in  ad- 
vance, before  their  sailing  from  this  colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
for  the  defraying  the  charges  and  expenses  of  said  expedition, 
the  sum  of  £2,500,  in  bills  of  credit  of  the  new  tenor,  be  im- 
mediately struck  off  upon  the  large  plate,  that  was  made  for 
the  last  bank ;  and  that  the  same  be  signed  by  the  grand  com- 
mittee, and  delivered  to  the  general  treasurer,  for  that  pur- 
pose ;  and  that  the  same  be  called  in  and  sunk  by  a  tax  upon 
the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  the  one-half  in  the  year  1748; 
and  the  other  half  in  the  year  1749  ;  which  taxes  shall  be  as. 
sessed  upon  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony  according  to  the 
polls  and  value  of  their  ratable  estates  in  each  town  of  said 
colony ;  and  that  a  captain  and  lieutenant  be  appointed  for 
said  sloop  Tartar,  and  commissioned ;  and  that  the  instructions 
be  given  to  the  said  captain,  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor, 
agreeably  to  this  act. 

An  Act  for  laying  an  embargo  on  vessels  bound  to  sea,  on  any 

emergent  occasion. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  Governor  of  this  colony,  for 


102  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1745. 

the  time  being,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  fully  empowered,  b}--,  and 
with  the  advice  of  his  council,  to  lay  an  embargo  on  all  vessels 
in  this  colony,  from  time  to  time,  and  at  all  times  hereafter 
when  the  same  shall  to  him  appear  needful. 
God  save  the  Kino-. 


Pi'ocecdinrjs  of  the  General  AssemU>/,  held  for  the  Colon?/  of  Bhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  East  Greemvich,  on  the 
first  Monday  in  March,  1744-5. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  in  addition  to,  and  in  amendment  of  an  act  made  and 
passed  by  the  General  Assembly,  held  at  Providence,  (by 
virtue  of  His  Honor,  the  Governor's  warrant,)  on  Tuesday^ 
the  5th  day  of  February,  Anno  Domini  1744,  entitled  "An 
act  for  the  fitting  out  of  the  colony  sloop,  to  join  with  the 
forces  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  in  an  expedition  against 
Cape  Breton." 

Whereas,  the  reducing  of  the  island  of  Cape  Breton  to  the 
obedience  of  His  Majesty,  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  all 
His  Majesty's  dominions,  and  especially  to  the  provinces  and 
colonies  in  New  England  ;  and  this  colony  being  willing  and 
desirous  to  contribute  as  much  as  in  their  power,  in  joining  the 
forces  of  the  said  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  and  the 
other  governments  concerned  in  the  expedition  against  said 
place,  and  it  being  thought  proper  by  this  Assembly  to  make 
an  addition  to  the  forces  granted  in,  and  by  said  act ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the 
authority  of  the  same,  that  the  number  of  one  hundred  and  fifty 
men  be  enlisted  as  soldiers  (exclusive  of  commissioned  officers) 
in  order  to  go  in  said  expedition ;  and  that  the  said  men  be  di- 


1745.]  AND    rKOVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  103 

videcl  into  three  companies,  to  each  of  which  companies,  there 
shall  be  appointed  by  this  government,  one  captain,  one  lieu- 
tenant, and  one  second  lieutenant  or  ensign ;  which  officers 
shall  be  accordingly  commissionated  by  His  Honor,  the  Gov- 
ernor ;  and  all  subaltern  officers,  for  the  said  companies,  shall 
be  appointed  by  the  commissioned  officers,  out  of  the  men 
which  they  shall  enlist. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  officers  and  soldiers  which  shall  be  enlisted  as  aforesaid? 
shall  receive  the  following  pay,  in  the  old  tenor,  viz. : 

A  captain,  £18  per  month. 

First  lieutenant,  £'12  per  month. 

Second  lieutenant  or  ensign,  £8  per  month. 

A  sergeant,  £6  8s.  per  month. 

A  corporal,  £5  12s.  per  month. 

Drummer,  £5  125.  per  month. 

Each  private  soldier,  £5  per  month. 

And  that  one  month's  pay  be  advanced  to  each  officer  and 
soldier  before  they  embark  in  said  expedition. 

And  as  a  further  encouragement  for  them  to  enlist  in  said 
service ; — 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  each  soldier 
who  shall  enlist  in  said  service,  shall  have  given  him  the  sum  of 
£6,  in  bills  of  the  old  tenor,  as  a  bounty  ;  and  also,  a  blanket ; 
and  that  the  officers  and  soldiers  shall  be  entitled  to  all  the 
plunder  they  shall  take  in  the  said  expedition  ;  and  no  officer 
shall  have  a  greater  share  thereof  than  a  private  soldier ;  and 
that  they  both,  officers  and  soldiers,  shall  be  discharged  as  soon 
as  the  expedition  is  over,  and  shall  be  exempt  from  all  impress- 
es to  any  military  service,  for  the  space  of  two  years  after  their 
return. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  no 
volunteer,  who  hath  already  enlisted,  or  shall  enlist  into  His 
Majesty's  land  or  sea  service,  in  the  said  expedition,  shall  be 
liable  to  be  arrested,  or  his  goods  or  his  real  estate  attached  by 
any  process    or  execution,  whatsoever,  (other  than   for  some 


104  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1745. 

criminal  matter,)  for,  and  during  the  space  of  six  months,  ex- 
cept they  should  return  from  the  said  expedition  before  the  ex- 
piration of  that  time,  unless  for  a  real  debt,  or  other  just  cause 
of  action,  not  under  the  sum  of  £100  of  the  old  tenor;  and 
before  the  taking  out  such  p'^ocess,  not  being  for  a  criminal 
matter,  the  plaintiff,  or  some  person  in  his  behalf,  shall  make 
affidavit  before  one  or  more  judges  of  any  of  the  courts  of 
record  in  this  colony,  that  to  his  knowledge  the  sum  is  justly 
and  really  due  to  the  plaintiff  from  the  defendant,  in  the  action 
on  which  such  process  shall  issue,  or  that  the  debt  or  damages 
besides  the  costs  for  which  such  execution  shall  be  issued 
out,  amounts  to  £'100;  which  affidavit  shall  be  certified  by 
said  judge  or  judges  upon  the  back  of  said  writ  or  execution, 
before  they  are  delivered  to  the  sheriff 

And  if  any  person  shall  be  arrested,  or  their  goods  or  real 
estate  attached,  contrary  to  the  intent  of  this  act,  it  shall  be 
lawful  for  any  judge  or  judges  of  such  court,  on  complaint  by 
the  party  himself,  or  by  his  superior  officer,  to  examine  into 
the  same,  by  the  oath  of  the  parties  or  otherwise,  and  by  a 
warrant  under  his  hand  and  seal,  directed  to  the  sheriff  or  offi- 
cer in  whose  custody  the  said  soldier  or  his  goods  or  real  estate 
is  detained,  to  discharge  such  soldier  so  arrested,  or  such  goods 
or  real  estate  so  attached,  on  due  proof  made  before  him,  that 
such  soldier  was  legally  enlisted  in  said  service,  and  arrested, 
or  his  goods  or  real  estate  attached  contrary  to  this  act. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  number  of  one  hundred  and  thirty  men,  which  was  ordered 
in,  and  by  the  said  act  of  Assembly,  to  be  embarked  on  board 
the  colony  sloop  going  in  said  expedition,  shall  be,  and  they 
are  hereby  reduced  to  the  number  of  ninety ;  and  that  the 
commander  of  said  sloop,  and  the  commissary,  govern  themselves 
accordingly. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
Capt.  Jonathan  Nichols  and  Capt.  John  Tillinghast,  be  a  com- 
mittee to  hire  a  convenient  vessel,  to  transport  the  said  officers 
and  soldiers  in  the  said  expedition. 


1745.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  105 

And  that  the  commissary  procure  a  sufficient  quantity  of 
provisions,  stores,  arms,  ammunition,  and  all  other  necessaries, 
for  the  aforesaid  number  of  soldiers  during  the  said  expedition, 
and  that  the  soldiers  be  allowed  each  half  a  pint  of  rum  per 
day ;  and  that  the  commissary  make  use  of  the  colony's  arms 
for  the  use  of  said  expedition,  if  there  be  a  sufficient  number 
over  and  above  what  are  to  be  made  use  of  for  the  colony's 
sloop. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  sum  of  £2,500,  in  bills  of  credit  of  the  new  tenor, 
which  was  enacted  and  ordered  to  be  emitted  in,  and  by  the 
said  act  of  Assembly,  for  defraying  the  charges  of  equipping  * 
and  manning  the  colony  sloop  to  go  in  the  aforesaid  expedi. 
tion,  be,  and  it  is  hereby  augmented  to  the  sum  of  £6,250,  of 
the  new  tenor,  which  sum  shall  be  struck  off  and  signed  in 
manner  as  directed  in,  and  by  the  said  act ;  and  shall  be  ap- 
propriated for  the  defraying  the  charge  and  expense  of  both 
the  land  and  sea  forces,  which  are  ordered  to  be  sent  in  the 
said  expedition ;  and  the  same  shall  be  called  in  and  sunk  by 
a  tax  on  polls  and  ratable  estates  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  col- 
ony, in  the  following  manner,  viz. : 

One-fourth  part  thereof  to  be  levied  in  the  year  1748 ;  one- 
fourth  part  in  the  year  1749  ;  one-fourth  part  in  the  year 
1750  ;  and  the  remaining  fourth  part  in  the  year  1751,  which 
taxes  shall  be  proportioned  to  the  several  towns  in  this  colony 
according  to  the  number  of  polls,  and  the  value  of  the  ratable 
estates  in  each  respective  town. 

An  Act  for  encouraging  soldiers  to  enlist  to  go  in  the  intended 
expedition  against  the  French  settlements  on  the  island  of 
Cape  Breton,  in  the  pay  of  the  Province  of  the  Massaclm- 
setts  Bay. 

Whereas,  Capt.  Godfrey  Malbone  has  laid  before  this  Assem- 
bly several  letters  from  His  Excellency,  William  Shirley,  Esq., 
Governor  of  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  wherein  it 
is  proposed,  that  a  regiment,  consisting  of  five  hundred  men  be 
speedily  raised  in  this  colony,  for  the  aforesaid  service,  and  to 

VOL.  V.  14 


106  RECORDS    OP   THE   COLONY   OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [174'" 

be  paid  by  the  said  Province ;  and  this  Assembly  being  willing 
to  give  all  due  encouragement  to  a  sufficient  number  of  able 
men  to  enlist  as  volunteers  in  said  expedition ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted,  that  each  and  every  soldier,  which 
hath  been,  or  shall  be  enlisted  by  the  said  Godfrey  Malboue,  as 
aforesaid,  shall  receive  from  this  government  the  sum  of  forty 
shillings,  old  tenor,  as  an  additional  bounty  to  what  is  allowed 
by  the  said  Province,  to  be  paid  before  they  depart  out  of  this 
colony,  viz. :  three  hundred  and  fifty  soldiers,  if  so  many  shall  en- 
list ;  but  if  not,  to  as  many  as  shall  enlist,  not  exceeding  that 
number. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  all  soldiers  who  have  already 
enlisted,  and  shall  enlist  in  said  service,  as  aforesaid,  shall  be 
exempt  from  any  process  or  processes  in  civil  actions,  as  fully 
and  in  the  same  manner,  as  those  who  shall  be  enlisted  for  said 
expedition  in  the  pay  of  this  colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  said  Godfrey  Malbone  be  hereby  fully  empowered  and  au- 
thorized to  command,  lead  and  conduct  all  such  soldiers  so 
enlisted,  from  the  places  where  they  shall  be  enlisted,  till  they 
come  into  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  George  Taylor,  Esq.,  and  Lieuten- 
ant William  Smith,  both  of  Providence,  be,  and  they  are  here- 
by appointed,  and  fully  empowered  to  enlist  soldiers  into  the 
service  of  this  government,  to  go  in  the  expedition  against 
Cape  Breton,  not  exceeding  the  number  of  one  hundred  and 
fifty  men ;  and  what  money  the  said  Taylor  and  Smith  shall 
necessarily  expend  on  said  affair,  shall  be  reimbursed  to  them. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  land  forces  to  be  raised  in  this 
government,  to  go  in  the  expedition  against  Cape  Breton,  be 
billeted  out  by  the  several  captains,  under  whom  they  enlist 
in  the  cheapest  manner,  till  they  embark,  at  the  expense  of  the 
government. 

And  that  the  several  captains,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  em- 
powered to  receive  of  the  commissary,  the  bounty  money,  wa- 
ges and  blankets,  pursuant  to  the  law  of  this  colony,  to  distrib- 
ute amongst  their  respective  soldiers. 


'^'745.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  107 

Whereas,  the  two  deputies,  and  divers  of  the  inhabitants  of 
the  town  o^New  Shoreham,  in  the  county  of  Newport,  did  rep- 
resent to  this  General  Assembly,  the  poor,  defenceless  condition 
they  now  labor  under  in  this  present  war,  and  craved  some  as- 
sistance from  the  government  for  their  better  security  ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  twenty-one  soldiers 
be  sent  to  said  New  Shoreham,  by  the  20th  day  of  April  next 
ensuing ;  seven  out  of  each  county,  to  be  enlisted  and  sent 
by  the  colonels  of  each  county,  and  there  to  remain  (upon 
the  establishment  as  those  which  were  sent  there  last  year) 
until  the  return  of  the  colony  sloop  from  the  expedition  against 
Cape  Breton,  or  till  further  order  from  the  General  Assembly. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  secretary  write  in  behalf  of  this 
colony,  to  the  secretary  of  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts 
Bay,  that  his  letters  of  the  18th  of  October  last  past,  and  the 
2d  of  this  instant  March,  are  but  just  come  to  hand ;  that  we 
know  of  none  of  those  rioters  being  within  this  colony ;  and 
that  the  authority  of  this  government  has  been,  and  will  at  all 
times,  be  ready  to  discountenance  any  persons  that  shall  fly 
from  the  justice  of  that  province,  upon  proper  application  being 
made  to  us ;  and  that  if  any  persons  be  appointed  to  apply  to 
the  authority  of  this  government  for  the  aid  thereof,  in  search- 
ing after  any  of  those  rioters,  they  shall  have  all  due  assistance. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  in  case  any  of  the  officers  appointed 
to  command  the  companies  to  be  raised  for  the  expedition 
against  Cape  Breton,  should  refuse  or  die,  that  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  be  empowered  and  requested  to  appoint  others  in 
their  room  ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write  to  the 
Governor  of  Connecticut,  and  request  that  our  forces  be  joined 
to  their  regiment ;  and  in  case  they  refuse,  that  His  Honor, 
the  Governor,  join  them  to  one  of  the  regiments  of  the  Massa- 
chusetts Bay. 

Whereas,  divers  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Warwick, 
of  the  county  of  Providence,  did  represent  to  this  General  As- 
sembly that  there  is  a  great  necessity  of  building  a  bridge  in 
the  highway  that  leads  across  Pawtuxet  river,  from  that  place^ 
called  the  Fulling  Mill,  through  the  lands  of  Wecocheconet  and 


108  KECORDS    OP   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

Natick,  and  up  to  the  town  of  Scituate,  said  highway  being  the 
most  public  for  the  inhabitants  of  that  part  of  tl^e  country  to 
pass  in,  both  to  mill  and  market ;  and  during  the  winter  sea- 
son, either  by  ice  or  floods,  the  river  there  is  rendered  useless 
to  pass,  so  that  the  inhabitants  and  other  travellers,  are  put  to 
great  difficulty,  and  obliged  to  travel  some  miles  further  in  bad 
weather,  and  therefore  prayed  the  assistance  of  this  General 
Assembly,  in  allowing  them  a  sum  out  of  the  general  treasury 
for  the  building  of  said  bridge ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £60 
be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury  towards  build- 
ing the  said  bridge,  and  the  same  to  be  drawn  by  Samuel 
Barton,  Esq.,  (one  of  the  petitioners,)  when  the  said  bridge  is 
built  and  completed. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write  to 
the  agent,  and  send  him  copies  of  the  evidence  taken  in  this 
house,  respecting  the  supposed  false  certificate,  whereby  it 
is  conjectured  that  a  sum  of  money  has  been  received  by 
Capt.  William  Hopkins,  of  the  paymaster  general,  for  forces 
said  to  be  enlisted  on  the  Cuba  expedition,  and  request  of 
of  him  to  advise  with  the  paymaster  general  of  the  King's 
forces,  thereof,  and  to  use  his  endeavors  that  the  certificate 
be  sent  to  this  government,  to  prosecute  the  offender  or  ofiend- 
ers  concerned  therein. 

God  save  the  Kins:. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemUf/  held  for  the  Colon)/  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Ncivport,  the 
oth  day  of  April,  1745. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 


1745.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  109 


ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Benjamin  Hassard,  Mr.  James  Arnold, 

Mr.  William  Ellery,  Mr.  Daniel  Coggesliall, 

Mr.  Robert  Lawton, 

Mr.  Peter  Bours,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon,  clerk. 

The  following  are  admitted  freemen  of  the  colony  : 

Of  Newport,  Joseph  Ireson,  Oliver  Child,  John  Chapman, 
Fones  Haszard,  Josias  Coggeshall,  Jr.,  John  Tanner,  Benjamin 
Jeffers,  Robert  Robinson,  John  Griffith,  William  Torrey,  John 
Rogers,  Jonathan  Lawton,  Nathaniel  Grafton,  Andrew  Hunter, 
Benjamin  Nichols,  Ebenezer  Clarke,  William  Arnold,  John 
Goddard,  son  of  Daniel ;  George  Goulding,  Thomas  Rodman, 
Robert  Prior,  John  Thurston,  James  Perrin,  Southcote  Lang- 
worthy,  Zephaniah  Pease,  John  Borden,  John  Spooner,  William 
Cranston,  Jr.,  Joseph  Harrison  and  Gindefer  Lindee. 

Of  Providence,  William  Peirce,  Samuel  Chaco,  John  Battey, 
Jonathan  Whipple,  Isaiah  Hawkins,  Joseph  Dexter,  John 
Brown,  Jr.,  Joseph  Carpenter,  Josiah  Olney,  Jr.,  Stephen 
Sheldon,  Oliver  Angel,  Joseph  Comstock,  Samuel  Winsor,  Jr. 
Dean  Kimble,  Moses  Smith,  John  Dunbar,  Daniel  Die,  John 
Briggs,  Jr.,  Nathan  Peirce,  Thomas  Edmonds,  Samuel  Westcot, 
Jr.,  Samuel  Burlingame,  John  Corpe,  Nathan  Angel,  Nedebiah 
Olney  and  William  Corpe. 

Of  Portsmouth,  Thomas  Tripp,  Richard  Cornell,  Clark  Cor- 
nell, William  Butts  and  Benjamin  Talman. 

Of  Warwick,  Azziakim  Pearce,  John  Stone,  Josiah  Arnold, 
son  of  Josiah ;  Stephen  Greene,  Thomas  Rice,  son  of  John  Rice, 
Jr. ;  Rufus  Barton,  son  of  Rufus  ;  John  Walton,  Ebenezer  Slo- 
cum,  Pentecost  Sweet,  Benjamin  Sweet,  Adam  Lockwood, 
Samuel  Finney,  Aaron  Davis,  Thomas  Remington,  Peter  Comet, 
John  Slocum,  Oliver  Carpenter,  Benjamin  Stone  and  Richard 
Estes. 


]]0  RECORDS    OP   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

Of  Westerly,  Ilezekiah  Collins,  Ichabocl  Clarke,  William 
Hadsall,  John  Porter,  Richard  Bennett,  Ezekiel  Lewis,  Daniel 
McCoon,  Jr.,  George  Drake,  Oliver  Chase,  Gideon  AVorden, 
Jonathan  Potter,  David  Wilcox,  Jonathan  Burdick,  John  Page 
and  Christopher  Sugar. 

Of  North  Kingstown,  Hutchinson  Clark,  Samuel  Shearman, 
John  Reynolds,  son  of  Peter  ;  Thomas  Hill,  Jr.,  Thomas  Law- 
town,  Thomas  Bissell  and  Edward  Cole. 

Of  South  Kingstown,  Caleb  Gardner,  Thomas  Cotterell,  Ben- 
edict Helme,  Samuel  Albro,  Sanford  Case,  John  Brown,  Benja- 
min Baker,  Nathan  Tift,  Samuel  Wilson,  Jeremiah  Brown, 
Paul  Niles,  Benjamin  Haszard,  son  of  George  ;  and  Robert 
Haszard. 

Of  East  Greenwich,  John  Dexter,  Jr.,  Obadiah  Jenckes,  Col- 
onel Carpenter,  David  Vaughan,  Daniel  Vaughan,  John  Nichols, 
Caleb  Briggs,  Wm.  Case,  John  Gardner,  son  of  Samuel ;  Wm. 
Spenser,  Jr.,  Jas.  Andrew,  Wm.  Carr,  Benj.  Briggs,  Jr.,  SamT 
Tarbox,  Thomas  Fry,  the  3d,  Jonathan  Corey,  Giles  Pearse,  son 
of  John  ;  and  John  Wall. 

Of  Smithfield,  Enoch  Barns,  Joseph  Morey,  son  of  Daniel ; 
Abraham  Smith,  Jr.,  Elish  Morey,  Richard  Sayles,  Jr.,  Joseph 
Smith,  son  of  Joseph,  John  Wilkinson,  Jr..  Azariah  Phillips, 
David  Evans,  Jr.,  Jonathan  Bellow,  Benjamin  Lapham,  Peter 
Bellow,  Jr.,  and  John  Jenckes. 

Of  Jamestown,  Edward  Carr,  Jr. 

Of  Scituate,  John  Howland,  John  Gilson,  Stephen  Wilbore 
John  Mois,  Eliza  Collins,  Jr.,  Christopher  Relph,  William  Col- 
lins, Samuel  Sprague,  Daniel  Tift,  David  Zeaw,  William  Blan- 
cher,  Jr.,  Jonathan  INIowry,  Thomas  Hudson,  Jonathan  Aldrich, 
Joseph  Wetherecj,  Joseph  Slaughter,  Nathan  Bennett  and  Wm. 
Hammond. 

Of  Glocester,  Henry  Shippey,  Joseph  Shippcy,  Job  Bartlet, 
Ptobcrt  Colwel,  Edward  Bishop  and  John  Chilsou. 

Of  New  Shoreham,  William  Dodge,  Samuel  Dodge,  John 
Pain  and  Sanuicl  Champlin. 

Of  Charlcstown,  Benjamin  Breman,  William  Gorton,  William 


1745.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  Ill 

Potter,  Jr.,  Joseph  Dodge,  Peleg  Cross,  Richard  Boss  and  Ed- 
ward James. 

Of  West  Greenwich,  Anthony  GofF,  Robert  Hopkins,  Matu- 
ran  Albro,  Thos.  Wilson,  Sam'l  Spink,  John  Tillinghast,  Ebene- 
zer  Cahoone,  Abner  Goflf,  Thomas  Joslin,  Nicholas  Whitford, 
son  of  Pascho  ;  John  Dolliver,  Joshua  Gardner,  William  Hall, 
James  Hopkins,  son  of  Samuel ;  James  Hopkins,  David  Hop- 
kins, John  Case,  son  of  John,  son  of  Joseph ;  Henry  Streight 
and  Daniel  Hill,  Jr. 

Of  Coventry,  Esek  Bowen,  Benjamin  Gorton,  Joseph  Colvin, 
John  Letson,  Robert  Letson,  Thomas  Nichols,  Caleb  Colvin, 
Benjamin  Andrew,  Manser  Cooper,  Job  Matthewson,  James 
Gibson,  Daniel  Greene,  Thomas  Greene,  Henry  Greene,  Nathan 
Goff,  John  Andrew,  William  Willson,  Richard  Herenton,  Jr.^ 
John  Skillion,  Thomas  Parker,  Thomas  Haven,  Charles  Hegin- 
bothan,  Benoni  Price,  Benjamin  Carpenter,  William  Phillips^ 
James  Lee,  John  Burlingson,  William  Phillips,  Jr.,  Francis 
Brayton  and  Joseph  Weaver,  Jr. 

Of  Exeter,  Jeremiah  Wilkey,  John  Hall  and  Samuel  Hall, 
Joshua  Gardner,  John  Gardner,  Jr.,  Peleg  Tripp,  Moses  Shear- 
man, Joseph  Potter,  John  Casey,  Daniel  Dawley,  Nathaniel 
Dawley,  Benjamin  Bentley,  Thomas  Rathbone,  Benjamin  Pot- 
ter, James  Moon,  James  Nichols,  Samuel  Baker,  William  Bar- 
ber, Stephen  Wilcox,  Thomas  Lewis,  Samuel  Casey,  Jr.,  and 
Samuel  Mowry,  Jr. 

Of  Middletown,  Cornelius  Clarke,  Daniel  Gould,  Jr.,  Walter 
Easton  and  Jeremiah  Rogers. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemU>/,  held  for  the  Colomj  of  Mode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neiuport,  the  1st  day 
of  May,  1745. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 


112 


RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE  ISLAND 


L1745. 


Neioport. 
Mr.  Samuel  Wickham, 
Mr.  Peter  Bours, 
Mr.  Joseph  Scott, 
Capt.  George  Wanton, 
]\Ir.  Jonathan  Nichols, 
Mr.  James  Sheffield. 

Providence. 
Mr.  William  Smith, 
Mr.  George  Brown, 
Capt.  Joseph  Borden. 
Mr.  Ezekiel  Warner, 

Portsmouth. 
Mr.  Gideon  Freeborn,  Jr 
Mr.  Benjamin  Tucker, 
Mr.  Joseph  Brownell,  Jr, 
Mr.  Adam  Lawton. 

WarwicJc. 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Lippett, 
Mr.  John  Rice,  Jr., 
Capt.  Josiah  Arnold, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Earle. 

Wcsterli/. 
Mr.  William  Hern, 
Capt.  Nathaniel  Lewis. 

New  Shoreham. 
Capt.  Robert  Hull, 
Mr.  John  Dodge. 

North  Kingstown. 
Col.  Immanuel  Northup, 
Mr.  Thomas  Allen. 


DEPUTIES. 

South  Kingstoivn. 
Capt.  Robert  Hassard, 
Major  Thomas  Haszard. 

East  Greenwich. 
Mr.  William  Spenser, 
Mr.  Giles  Pearse. 
Jamestoivn. 
Mr.  John  Paine, 
Mr.  Joseph  Clarke. 
Smithfield. 
Mr.  John  Sayles, 
Mr.  Thomas  Arnold,  Jr. 
Scitiiate. 
.,  Capt.  Job  Randall, 

Mr.  Ezekiel  Hopkins. 

Glocester. 
Mr.  Richard  Steere. 
Mr.  Walter  Phetteplace. 

Charlestoivn. 
Col.  Joseph  Stanton, 
Mr.  Joseph  Hicks. 

West  Greenwich. 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Ellis, 
Mr.  Thomas  Streight. 

Coventry. 
INIr.  Robert  Greene, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Nichols. 

Exeter. 
Mr.  Benoni  Hall, 
Mr.  Job  Tripp. 

Middlctown. 
Mr.  Robert  Nichols, 
Mr.  John  Taylor. 


]Mr.  Peter  Bours,  speaker,  and  IMr.  Josias  Lyndon,  clerk. 


1745.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  113 

The  following  officers  declared  elected,  "were  duly  engaged. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Robinson,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Benjamin  Haszard,  Mr.  Gideon  Durfey, 

Mr.  Gideon  Cornell,  Mr.  James  Arnold, 

Mr.  William  Rhodes,  Capt.  William  Rice, 

Capt.  Jonathan  Randall,  Mr.  Benjamin  Weight, 

Mr.  Daniel  Howland,  Mr.  Jeremiah  Niles, 

SECRETARY.  GENERAL  TREASURER. 

Mr.  James  Martin.  Mr.  John  Gardner. 

ATTORNEY    GENERAL.  COMMISSARY. 

Mr.  Daniel  Updike.  Mr.  John  Gardner. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Samuel  Rodman,  Tedde- 
man  Hull  and  Abel  Franklin,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appoint- 
ed a  committee  to  view  the  pier,  at  Block  Island,  and  see  if  the 
same  be  completely  finished,  and  make  report  to  the  next  ses- 
sion of  this  Assembly. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemblf/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neiuport,  the  fourth 
Tuesday  in  May,  1745. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Robinson,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act   for   raising  three   companies  of  soldiers  to  join  the 
forces  of  the    neighboring  governments   sent   against    the 
island  of  Cape  Breton. 
VOL.  V.  15 


114  RECORDS   OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1745. 

Whereas,  the  town  of  Louisboiirg,  on  the  island  of  Cape 
Breton,  is  now  actually  besieged  by  the  forces  sent  against  it, 
by  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  and  the  other  neigh- 
boring governments,  and  it  having  been  represented  to  this  As- 
sembly, by  the  copy  of  a  letter  from  the  general  of  the  said  forces 
that  a  reinforcement  of  men  is  wanting ;  and  lest  any  enter- 
prise of  such  importance  to  all  His  Majesty's  dominions,  should 
be  frustrated  for  want  of  some  timely  assistance  ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the 
authority  of  the  same,  that  three  companies  of  soldiers  be  im- 
mediately enlisted  in  this  colony,  consisting  of  fifty  men  each 
exclusive  of  commissioned  officers,  in  order  to  join  the  said 
forces ;  and  that  there  be  appointed  to  each  company,  one  cap- 
tain, one  lieutenant,  and  one  second  lieutenant  or  ensign ; 
which  officers  shall  be  SAvorn  and  commissioned  by  His  Honor^ 
the  Governor,  accordingly ;  and  all  subaltern  officers  shall  be 
appointed  by  the  said  commissioned  officers  of  each  respec- 
tive company,  out  of  the  men  which  they  shall  enlist. 

[Here  follows  the  mode  of  organization  of  the  companies,  the 
rate  of  pay  allowed  to  the  several  officers  and  men,  form  of 
oath  to  be  taken,  etc.] 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
in  case  a  sufficient  number  of  volunteers  cannot  be  enlisted,  as 
aforesaid,  that  then  it  shall,  and  may  be  in  the  power  of  the 
Governor  of  this  colony,  to  grant  forth  his  warrant  to  impress 
so  many  as  will  make  up  the  aforesaid  number. 

Provided,  that  no  person  be  impressed  into  said  service,  ex- 
cepting transient  sea-faring  men,  and  persons  who  have  no  cer- 
tain place  of  abode,  or  such  as  have  no  visible  honest  means  of 
getting  their  living ;  and  if  any  person  shall  be  impressed  con- 
trary hereunto,  that  then  the  person  so  impressed,  or  any  other 
person  on  his  behalf,  procuring  a  certificate  from  one  or  more 
assistant,  justice  of  the  peace,  or  warden,  that  he  is  not  such  a 
person  as  above  described,  and  allowed  to  be  impressed,  that 
then  the  officer  whu  hath  impressed  oi-  detained  such  person^ 
shall  immediately  discharge  him. 


1745.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  Il5 

And  it  is  further  enacted,  that  each  soldier  who  shall  be  en- 
listed, or  impressed  as  aforesaid,  shall,  as  soon  as  can  be  con- 
veniently sent  to  the  town  of  Newport,  and  there  be  placed  in 
such  convenient  place  for  their  subsistence  by  the  commissary 
a,s  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  shall  direct,  at  the  charge  of  the' 
government. 

And  it  is  further  enacted,  that  Capt.  Jonathan  Nichols  and 
Capt.  George  Wanton,  be  a  committee  to  hire  a  convenient 
vessel  or  vessels  to  transport  the  said  officers  and  soldiers,  as 
well  to  the  said  island  of  Cape  Breton,  as  back  again  to  this 
colony ;  and  that  the  commissary  procure  a  sufficient  quantity 
of  provisions,  stores,  arms,  ammunition,  and  all  other  necessa- 
ries for  the  aforesaid  number  of  soldiers,  during  the  said  expe- 
dition, allowing  to  each  soldier  the  same  allowance  of  provi- 
sions and  rum  as  is  allowed  by  the  law  of  this  colony  to  the 
men  serving  on  board  of  the  colony  sloop  ;  and  that  the  com- 
missary make  use  of  the  colony's  arms  for  the  use  of  the  said 
expedition,  if  there  be  a  sufficient  number  over  and  above 
what  is  necessary  for  the  use  of  the  men  ordered  to  be  at  the 
fort ;  and  that  each  soldier  shall  be  armed  with  a  small  arm, 
cutlass  and  cartouch  box. 

And  it  is  further  enacted,  that  the  aforesaid  number  of  men 
to  complete  the  said  three  companies,  shall  be  raised  and  ready 
to  embark  within  twenty  days  after  the  publication  of  this  act. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  for 
a  present  supply  of  the  treasury,  for  the  defraying  the  charges 
and  expense  of  enlisting  and  paying  the  said  soldiers,  and  all 
other  expenses  relating  thereto,  the  grand  committee  shall  cause 
to  be  struck  off  from  the  great  plate,  the  sum  of  £3,750,  in 
bills  of  the  new  tenor ;  and  shall  sign  the  same,  and  deliver  it 
to  the  general  treasurer  ;  which  sum  shall  be  appropriated  for 
the  uses  aforesaid  ;  and  shall  be  called  in  and  sunk  by  a  tax  on 
the  polls  and  ratable  estates  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony, 
in  the  following  manner,  viz.  : 

One-third  part  thereof,  in  the  year  1750;  one-third  part, 
in  the  year  1751 ;  and  the  remaining  third  part,  in  the  year 
1752;  which  taxes  shall  be  proportioned  to  the  several  towns 


116  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

in  this  colony,  according  to  the  number  of  polls  and  the  value 
of  ratable  estates  in  each  respective  town. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  forces  to  be  raised  as  aforesaid,  be  joined  to  the  regiment 
of  the  colony  of  Connecticut ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Gov- 
ernor, Avrite  to  Lieutenant  General  Wolcot,  and  advise  him 
thereof;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  put  out  proclama- 
tions in  print  forthwith,  agreeably  to  this  act  for  encouraging 
soldiers  to  enlist. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be  request- 
ed to  give  the  necessary  order  for  all  prisoners  of  war  within 
the  county  of  Newport,  to  be  apprehended  and  kept  in  safe 
custody. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be  re- 
quested to  write  to  Capt.  Daniel  Fones,  commander  of  the 
colony  sloop  Tartar,  and  give  him  instruction  to  continue  in 
the  expedition  against  Cape  Breton,  as  long  as  the  nature  and 
circumstances  of  said  expedition  shall  require  ;  unless  he  shall 
have  instructions  from  the  General  Assembly  to  the  contrary. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be  re- 
quested to  write  to  the  agent,  and  direct  him,  that  for  the 
future,  when  he  writes  to  the  Governor  of  this  colony,  upon  the 
public  affairs  thereof,  that  he  superscribe  his  letters  to  the  Gov- 
ernor and  Company  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  Samuel  Rodman,  Teddeman  Hull  and  Abel 
Franklin,  were,  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session,  held 
in  May  last  past,  appointed  a  committee  to  view  the  pier, 
at  Block  Island,  and  see  if  the  same  was  completely  fin- 
ished, did  now  make  report,  that  pursuant  to  the  aforesaid  vote 
of  the  General  Assembly,  they  had  viewed  the  said  pier,  and 
found  it  to  be  completely  finished. 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  said  report  be  ac- 
cepted. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Benjamin  Hassard,  Peter  Bours 
and  Daniel  Updike,  Esq.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a 
committee,  to  take  into  consideration  the  last  petition  of  the 
Massachusetts  agent,  to  the  Bight  Honorable  the  Lords  of  the 


1745.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  117 

Committee  of  His  Majesty's  Most  Honorable  Privy  Council,  re- 
specting the  controversy  about  the  boundaries  between  the  said 
Province  of  the  Massachusetts  and  this  colony;  and  make 
such  remarks  and  form  such  instructions  thereon,  as  they  shall 
think  necessary,  and  present  the  same  to  His  Honor,  the  Gov- 
ernor, in  order  to  be  sent  to  the  agent  by  the  first  opportunity, 
and  lay  a  copy  thereof,  before  this  Assembly,  at  their  next 
session. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  appointed  to  revise 
the  laws  of  this  colony,  and  get  them  printed,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby  empowered  and  directed  to  get  all  the  books  bound 
with  marble  paper,  in  the  same  manner  as  that  which  is  pre- 
sented to  this  Assembly,  at  the  charge  of  the  colony. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  George  Wanton  and  Josias 
Lyndon,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to 
procure  a  draught  or  plan,  of  Fort  George,  and  the  harbor  of 
Newport,  in  order  to  be  sent  home,  for  the  information  of  the 
board  of  ordnance,  in  respect  to  the  petition  of  this  colony,  to 
His  Majesty,  for  a  number  of  cannon. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  ilie  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Netvport,  the  \Wi  day  of 
June,  1745. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Robinson,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  raising  marines  to  serve  on  board  the  ship  Vigilant, 
a  man-of-war,  now  in  His  Majesty's  service,  before  the  har- 
bor of  Louisbourg,  on  the  island  of  Cape  Breton. 
Whereas,  Peter  Warren,  Esq.,  commodore   of  His  INIajesty's 
fleet  at   Cape  Breton,  has  taken  a  large  French  man-of  war, 
called  the  Vigilant,  the  manning  of  which  ship  with  able  sea- 


118  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

men,  will  be  greatly  for  the  service  of  His  Majesty,  and  con- 
tribute much  to  the  blocking  up  of  Louisbourg,  and  reducing 
the  same,  which  this  government  being  informed  of,  and  being 
ready  to  promote  His  Majesty's  service  in  general,  and  to  pre- 
vent the  good  design  of  the  said  commodore  from  being  de- 
feated, are  willing  to  give  all  due  encouragement  of  able  bodied 
sailors  to  enter  immediately  into  His  Majesty's  service,  on 
board  said  ship  Vigilant ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  the 
colony,  aforesaid,  and  by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted, 
that  a  number  of  able  bodied  seamen,  not  exceeding  two  hun- 
dred, be  immediately  enlisted  into  His  Majesty's  service,  for 
manning  the  said  ship ;  and  that  each  man  who  shall  so  enlist, 
shall  be  entitled  to  a  bounty  of  £17,  old  tenor,  to  be  paid  by 
this  colony ;  and  that  all  the  sailors  that  shall  be  enlisted  as 
aforesaid,  be  sent  to  Boston,  by  the  22d  day  of  this  instant 
June ;  and  they  shall  be  upon  their  enlistment,  exempted  from 
all  arrests  and  restraints  in  the  same  manner  as  those  who  en- 
list in  the  land  service,  to  go  to  Cape  Breton,  are  by  act  of  As- 
sembly of  this  colony  exempted. 

And  that  ]Mossrs.  Ezekiel  Hubbard  and  Seth  Harvey,  of  said 
Newport,  mariners,  be,  and  they  hereby  are  appointed  to  enlist 
seamen,  in  manner  as  aforesaid ;  and  that  said  two  gentlemen 
be  recommended  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor  of  this  colony, 
to  the  Honorable  Commodore  AVarren,  as  persons  very  suitable 
to  serve  His  Majesty  on  board  said  ship. 

And  that  Capt.  Benj.  Wickham,  be,  and  he  hereby  is  appoint- 
ed to  receive  of  the  commissary  for  this  colony,  the  bounty  mon- 
ey, and  to  pay  the  same  to  such  seamen  as  shall  enlist  themselves 
aforesaid ;  and  that  he  take  the  care  and  charge  of  such  en- 
listed men,  in  behalf  this  colony,  and  conduct  them  to  Boston 
in  the  best  and  most  expeditious  manner  he  can,  in  order  to  be 
forthwith  sent  to  the  said  Commodore  Warren,  in  the  aforesaid 
service  ;  applying  to  His  Excellency,  Governor  Shirley,  for  a 
certificate,  that  he  has  discharged  his  duty  herein. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write  to 
His  Excellency,  William  Shirley,  Esq.,  Governor    of  the  Prov- 


1745.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  119 

ince  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  and  inform,  him  what  this  gov- 
ernment has  done,  in  order  to  raise  a  number  of  seamen  for 
manning  the  ship  Vigilant,  and  that  he  request  of  His  Excel- 
lency a  certificate  that  all  such  seamen  as  shall  he  raised  in 
this  colony,  be  entitled  to  the  same  privileges  as  those  raised 
in  the  province,  aforesaid  -,  and  that  he  also  write  to  the  Hon. 
Commodore  Warren,  and  inform  him  in  the  same  manner,  and 
request  of  him  the  same  privileges. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  no  ferryman,  boatman,  or  any  other 
person,  transport  any  seaman  off  from  Rhode  Island,  for  the 
space  of  three  days  from  the  19th  day  of  June  instant,  upon 
the  penalty  of  £20  fine  for  every  seaman  that  shall  be  trans- 
ported as  aforesaid,  (except  by  certificate  from  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,)  to  be  recovered  by  the  general  treasurer ;  and  that 
the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Newport  notify  every  ferryman  on 
the  island  of  Rhode  Island  thereof,  immediately. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  no  ferryman,  boatmen,  or  any 
other  person,  carry  or  transport  any  seaman  ofi"  from  the  island 
of  Conanicut  (unless  to  land  them  at  Newport)  for  the  space 
of  three  days,  upon  the  penalty  of  £'20,  for  every  person  that 
shall  be  carried  or  transported,  as  aforesaid,  from  said  Conani- 
cut, (unless  by  a  certificate  from  His  Honor,  the  Governor,)  to 
be  recovered  by  the  general  treasurer  ;  and  that  the  sheriif  of 
the  county  of  Newport,  send  a  copy  of  this  vote  to  each  of  the 
ferrymen  at  Conanicut. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  captain  of  Fort  George,  be,  and 
he  is  hereby  directed  and  empowered  to  stop  all  sloops,  boats, 
canoes  and  all  other  vessels  whatsoever,  from  going  out  of  the 
harbor  of  Newport,  until  the  23d  day  of  June  instant,  (Avithout 
the  special  license  of  the  General  Assembly,)  and  that  he  take 
the  most  effectual  method  for  the  same,  ferry  boats  excepted. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  give  out 
warrant  immediately  to  impress  forty  seamen  to  man  His  Maj- 
esty's ship  Vigilant ;  and  if  any  of  those  who  shall  be  impress- 
ed, shall  afterwards  enlist,  they  shall  be  entitled  to  the  bounty 
as  though  they  were  not  impressed  ;  and  that  tJie  whole  be 
executed  between  this  and  3  o'clock,  to-morrow  in  the  after- 


120  RECOKDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

noon ;  and  the  officer  who  shall  impress  seamen,  as  aforesaid, 
is  hereby  empowered  to  confine  them  at  the  fort,  or  in  prison^ 
as  he  shall  think  proper. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Capt.  Benjamin  Wickham,  be,  and 
he  is  hereby  empowered  to  receive  of  the  commissary  what 
money  may  be  sufficient  to  pay  the  expenses  of  carrying  the 
seamen  to  Boston,  who  are,  and  shall  be  enlisted,  to  man  the 
ship  of  war  Vigilant. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  time  for  completing  the  three 
companies,  (as  well  by  impressing  as  enlisting,)  to  go  in  the 
expedition  against  Cape  Breton,  and  getting  them  ready  to 
embark,  be  lengthened  out,  not  to  exceed  the  30th  day  of  this 
instant  June  ;  but  that  the  same  be  done  as  much  sooner  as 
possible. 

Whereas,  it  has  been  represented  to  this  General  Assembly 
that  Ann  Franklin  has  printed  a  number  of  colony  law  books 
for  herself,  over  and  above  what  she  was  employed  to  print  for 
the  colony,  without  the  consent  of  the  committee,  appointed  to 
get  the  same  printed  ; — 

It  is  therefore  resolved,  that  the  said  Ann  Franklin,  or  any 
person  in  her  behalf,  do  not  sell  any  of  said  books  within  one 
y^ear  from  the  rising  of  this  Assembly,  upon  the  penalty  of  £5 
for  every  book  that  shall  be  sold,  as  aforesaid ;  to  be  recovered 
by  the  general  treasurer ;  and  that  a  copy  of  this  vote  be  de- 
livered to  her  by  the  secretary. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  no  ferryman,  boatman,  or  any  other 
person,  carry  or  transport  any  seamen  off  from  Rhode  Island  or 
Connanicut,  till  the  2Gth  day  of  this  instant  June,  at  3  o'clock, 
in  the  afternoon,  upon  the  penalty  of  £20  fine,  for  every  sea- 
man that  shall  be  transported,  as  aforesaid ;  to  be  recovered  by 
the  general  treasurer,  (except  by  a  certificate  from  His  Honor, 
the  Governor.) 

And  that  tlic  captain  of  Fort  George,  be,  and  he  is  hereby 
directed  and  empowered,  to  stop  all  sloops,  boats,  canoes  and 
nil  other  vessels  whatsoever,  going  out  of  the  harbor  of  New- 
port, until  the  20th  day  of  tliis  instant  June,  at  3  o'clock,  in 
Die  afternoon,  without  the  special  license  of  the  Governor  ;  and 


1745.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  121 

that  the  said  captaiQ  of  the  fort  take  the  most  effectual  care 
for  the  same,  excepting  ferry  boats  ;  and  that  the  sheriff  of  the 
county  of  Newport  inform  the  several  ferrymen  of  what  relates 
to  them  in  this  act. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  colony  law  books,  when  fin- 
ished, be  lodged  in  the  hands  of  the  general  treasurer,  and  by 
him  to  be  sold  for  thirty  shillings  apiece. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  soldiers  who  are  enlisted  for 
the  expedition  against  Cape  Breton,  be  forthwith  sent  to  the 
fort,  with  their  blankets,  there  to  remain  till  they  embark ;  and 
if  they  can't  conveniently  lodge  there,  that  they  lodge  on  board 
the  transport. 

Whereas,  Benjamin  Hassard,  Peter  Bours  and  Daniel  Up- 
dike, Esqs.,  were  at  the  last  session  of  this  Assembly,  appointed 
a  committee,  to  take  into  consideration  the  last  petition  of  the 
Massachusetts  agent,  to  the  Right  Honorable,  the  Lords  of  the 
Committee  of  His  Majesty's  Most  Honorable  Privy  Council,  re- 
specting the  controversy  about  the  boundaries  between  the  said 
Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay  and  this  colony,  and  make 
such  remarks  and  form  such  instructions  thereon,  as  they 
should  think  necessary,  in  order  to  be  sent  to  the  agent  by  the 
first  opportunity,  did  now  make  report,  and  presented  some  re- 
marks on  the  petition  of  Christopher  Kilby,  Esq.,  the  said 
Massachusetts  agent,  which  they  judged  proper  for  His  Honor, 
the  Governor,  to  transmit  to  our  agent,  for  this  colony  ; — 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  same  be  ac- 
cepted and  approved  of;  and  that  a  fliir  draught  be  signed  by 
His  Honor,  the  Governor,  and  sent  to  our  said  agent. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  George  Wanton  and  Jonathan  Nichols, 
Avere  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  at 
their  last  session,  as  a  committee,  to  hire  a  suitable  vessel  for 
transporting  of  the  forces  to  be  raised  to  go  in  the  expedition 
against  Cape  Breton,  did  report,  that  they  had  hired  of  Messrs. 
AVilliam  Ellery  and  Philip  Tillinghast,  both  of  Newport,  in  the 
county  of  Newport,  merchants,  a  brigantine,  called  the  Success, 
for  transporting  the  said  forces  to  Cape  Breton,  aforesaid,  as  by 

VOL.  V.  16 


122  KECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

a  charter  party  from  said  Ellery  and  Tillinghast,  will  more  fully 
appear,  being  herewith  presented  ; — 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved^  that  the  said  report  be 
accepted. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Ezekiel  Hubbard  and  Seth 
Harvey,  be  allowed  and  paid,  each  of  them,  the  sum  of  £40 
by  the  commissary,  for  their  extraordinary  trouble  in  enlisting 
seamen,  &c.,  for  manning  the  ship  of  war  A^gilant,  to  be  em- 
ployed in  the  expedition  against  Cape  Breton,  to  procure  them 
sea  stores,  &c. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  Ann  Franklin, 
amounting  to  £6  10^.,  for  printing  proclamations  and  extracts 
of  letters  for  encouragement  of  soldiers  and  seamen  to  enlist^ 
be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  James  Davis,  keeper  of  His  Majesty's  jail,  in  New- 
port, presented  an  account  to  this  General  Assembly,  of  £40 
Is.  Sd.,  for  keeping  seven  French  prisoners  of  war,  of  which 
said  account  was  allowed  to  be  paid,  £30  Is.  lOcl,  to  the  said 
James  Davis,  in  full  satisfaction  thereof;  but  he  afterwards,  at 
the  same  session,  setting  forth,  that  the  said  prisoners  were  very 
sick,  and  not  one  of  them  able  to  help  himself,  nor  walk  alone, 
without  assistance,  required  particular  diet,  care  and  attend- 
ance, which  was  performed  faithfully,  and  therefore  prayed  to 
be  allowed  his  whole  account ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved, that  the  said  sum  of  £3  01s- 
IQd.,  and  considering  the  extraordinary  trouble  and  charge  the 
said  James  Davis  had  with  said  prisoners,  they  being  in  such  a 
low  and  weak  condition,  the  further  sum  of  £9  125.  and  Sd.,  be 
both  paid  to  the  said  James  Davis,  out  of  the  general  treasury, 
in  full  satisfaction  for  his  account. 

Whereas,  George  Ninegret,  sachem  of  the  Narragansett 
Indians,  did  represent  to  this  General  Assembly,  that  his  late 
deceased  brother,  Charles  Ninegret,  (who  was  sachem  of  the 
said  Narragansett  Indians,)  did,  in  his  life  time  give  twenty 
acres  of  land,  as  a  glebe  to,  and  for  the  church  of  England,  in 
Charlestown,  in  said  colony  ;  but  his  Siiid  brother  dying  before 


1745.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  123 

lie  had  made  and  executed  a  deed  for  the  same,  the  said  George 
Ninegret  therefore  requested  leave  of  the  General  Assembly, 
that  he  might,  by  a  proper  deed  for  that  purpose,  establish  said 
twenty  acres  to,  and  for  said  church  ;  and  also,  to  give  and 
convey  twenty  acres  more  of  his  land,  in  said  Charlestown,  for 
the  same  use,  in  such  place  as  shall  be  agreed  on  by  himself 
and  trustees  ; — 

Upon  consideration  whereof,  it  is  voted  and  enacted,  that  the 
said  George  Ninegret,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  allowed  to  pass  a 
deed  for  the  said  twenty  acres  of  land  given  by  his  said  broth- 
er Charles  Ninegret ;  and  also,  for  the  twenty  acres  of  land? 
that  he  gives  himself,  to,  and  for  the  use  of  the  church  in 
Charlestown,  aforesaid,  in  such  place  or  places  as  he  and  his 
trustees  shall  think  proper ;  and  that  such  deed  or  deeds  so 
given  by  him,  as  aforesaid,  shall  be  good  and  valid  in  the  law? 
for  the  uses  therein  designed,  to  all  intents  and  purposes 
whatever. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be  re- 
quested, and  he  is  hereby  fully  empowered  to  continue  out  his 
impress  warrant  for  filling  up  the  companies  raised  to  go  in  the 
expedition  against  Cape  Breton,  until  the  transport  is  sailed,  if 
there  be  occasion. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  master  of  the  transport  proceed 
with  the  forces  to  Nantasket,  for  the  advantage  of  convoy  to 
Cape  Breton  ;  and  if  no  convoy  is  there  to  be  had  soon,  that 
he  proceed  directly  from  Nantasket  to  Cape  Breton,  and  there 
continue  till  the  expedition  against  Cape  Breton  is  over. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Peter  Bours,  John  Calen- 
der and  Daniel  Updike,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a 
committee,  to  extract  from  the  records,  the  several  acts  and 
votes  passed  by  the  General  Assembly,  respecting  the  expedi- 
tion against  Cape  Breton,  in  order  to  be  sent  to  the  agent ; 
and  that  they  write  a  letter,  to  be  signed  by  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  and  to  be  sent  home,  with  said  votes,  setting  forth 
the  reasons  of  this  colony's  conduct  in  respect  to  their  not  join- 
ing in  the  expedition  sooner  than  they  did,  to  be  made  use  of 


124  RECOKDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

in  the  defence  of  this  colony,  if  there  be  occasion,  and  present 
a  copy  of  said  letter  to  the  next  session  of  this  Assembly. 

Voted,  that  Peter  Bours  and  Josejjh  Scott,  Esqs.,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby  appointed  commissioners  for  the  taking  care  of 
French  and  Spanish  prisoners  that  shall  be  brought  during  the 
continuance  of  the  war,  into  the  port  of  Newport,  in  the  county 
of  Newport. 

Voted,  that  Messrs.  Henry  Paget  and  Archibald  Young,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby  appointed  commissioners  for  taking  care 
of  French  and  Spanish  prisoners,  that  shall  be  brought  during 
the  continuance  of  the  war,  into  the  port  of  Providence,  in  the 
county  of  Providence. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  JSfeivport,  the  third  Tues- 
day in  August,  1745. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Robinson,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  captain  of  the  colony  sloop  be 
directed  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  to  purchase  provisions, 
and  other  necessaries,  at  Louisbourg,  for  said  sloop  and  compa- 
ny, at  the  best  rate  he  can,  and  draw  upon  the  commissary  for 
paying  the  same  ;  and  that  he  make  the  best  dispatch  he  can? 
home,  as  soon  as  he  can  get  a  discharge  from  the  Honorable 
Commodore  Warren ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write 
to  the  said  Commodore  Warren,  and  inform  him  that  our  colony 
sloop  is  the  only  guard  vessel  we  have  for  protecting  the  trade 
and  navigation  of  this  colony,  and  request  him  to  discharge 
said  sloop  as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be. 


1745.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  125 

And  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  also  write  to  the  captains 
of  our  land  forces,  in  answer  to  their  letter,  that  it  is  uncertain 
until  the  King's  pleasure  is  known,  whether  they  will  tarry  at 
Louisbourg  all  winter  •  and  that  if  they  do  at  the  charge  of 
this  colony,  all  due  care  will  be  taken  to  supply  them  with 
provisions  and  other  necessaries,  in  season. 

And  that  tlis  Honor,  the  Governor,  likewise  give  orders  to 
the  captain  of  the  transport  brigantine,  that  he  come  directly 
home  as  soon  as  conveniently  he  can,  unless  advice  should  be 
arrived  at  Louisbourg  from  His  Majesty,  and  our  land  forces 
thereupon  like  to  be  discharged. 

Whereas,  William  Rice,  Samuel  Wickham  and  John  Rice, 
Jr.,  Esqs.,  were  appointed  a  committee  at  the  present  session 
of  this  Assembly,  to  prepare  the  draughts  of  two  letters,  the 
one  to  be  sent  to  the  Honorable  General  Pepperell,  and  the 
other  to  the  Honorable  Commodore  Warren,  both  at  Louis- 
bourg, on  the  island  of  Cape  Breton,  who  accordingly  presented 
the  same ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  said  draughts  be  ac- 
cepted, and  that  said  letters  be  signed  by  His  Honor,  the  Gov- 
ernor, and  sent  as  before  directed. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  commissary  pay  to  the  soldiers 
at  Cape  Breton,  in  the  service  of  this  colony,  or  to  their  orders, 
their  monthly  wages,  upon  producing  proper  certificates  from 
their  respective  captains,  or  commanding  officers,  that  there  is 
so  much  due ;  and  that  the  officers  be  paid  in  like  manner. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £150  be  allowed 
to  the  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Esq.,  Messrs.  John  Callender 
Samuel  Wickham  and  Edward  Scott,  for  revising  the  colony 
laws  and  preparing  them  for  the  press ;  £30  more  to  the  said 
John  Callender,  for  correcting  the  press,  and  the  sum  of  £6 
more  to  the  said  Samuel  Wickham,  for  firewood,  and  the  use 
of  his  room,  the  whole  to  be  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  Samuel  Fowler^ 
amounting  to  the  sum  of  £14,  being  for  four  Aveeks'  board, 
and  extraordinary  attendance  on  John  Righton,  who  received  a 
desperate  wound  in  the  service  of  this  colony,  when  one  of  the 


126  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

sheriff's  aid  to  impress  men  for  the  service  of  His  Majesty's 
ship  of  war  Vigilant,  be  allowetl,  and  paid  out  of  the  general 
treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  Joseph  Scott,  Esq., 
sheriff  of  the  county  of  Newport,  amounting  to  £20,  being  for 
stopping  the  ferries,  impressing  soldiers  and  seamen,  and  ex- 
penses on  his  officers  and  press-gang,  be  allowed,  and  paid  to 
the  said  Joseph  Scott,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  William  Dyre,  depu- 
ty sheriff  for  the  county  of  Newport,  amounting  to  £14  IO5., 
for  several  journeys  by  him  made  to  the  sheriffs  of  the  other 
counties,  for  impressing,  &c.,  and  for  his  time  and  attendance 
for  impressing  men  in  this  county,  be  allowed,  and  paid  to  the 
said  William  Dyre,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  Job  Bennett,  Jr.? 
amounting  to  £11,  for  notifying  the  general  council  several 
times,  and  for  assisting  the  sheriff  in  impressing  soldiers  and 
seamen,  be  allowed,  and  paid  to  the  said  Job  Bennett,  Jr.,  out 
of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  Col.  John  Cranston,  (as  late  captain  of  Fort 
George,)  presented  to  the  General  Assembly,  an  account, 
amounting  to  £808  95.,  being  for  the  wages  and  board  of  the 
gunner  and  eight  other  men,  for  six  months,  and  for  wood  sup- 
plied them ;  also,  for  his  allowance  as  captain,  and  for  his  care 
and  trouble  in  repairing  the  south  battery,  &c.,  at  said  fort, 
craving  an  allowance  for  the  whole  ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  sum  of 
£800  9^.,  be  allowed,  and  paid  to  the  said  John  Cranston,  out 
of  the  general  treasury,  for  himself  and  the  other  persons  men- 
tioned in  said  account,  and  to  be  in  full  satisfaction  of  the 
same. 

God  save  the  Kinjr. 


1745.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  127 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemble/,  held  for  the  Colon}/  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivjjort,  the  fourth 
Tuesday/  in  September,  1745. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Robinson,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  raising  recruits  to  fill  up  the  three  companies  of 
soldiers  now  at  Cape  Breton,  in  the  pay  of  this  colony,  and 
for  continuing  the  said  companies  there,  and  for  supplying 
them  with  provisions,  bedding  and  other  necessaries,  until 
His  Majesty  shall  take  the  place  into  his  own  hands,  or  till 
further  orders  from  this  government. 

Whereas,  the  securing  the  important  acquisition  of  the  for- 
tress of  Louisbourg,  and  island  of  Cape  Breton,  w^ith  its  depen- 
dencies, from  falling  again  into  the  possession  of  the  French,  is 
of  the  last  consequence  to  His  Majesty,  as  well  as  to  all  the 
northern  colonies  in  America ;  and  it  being  uncertain  whether 
His  Majesty  can  take  the  place  into  his  own  hands,  and  settle 
a  garrison  therein,  before  the  next  spring,  and  lest  it  should 
be  lost  for  want  of  a  sufficient  force  in  the  mean  time,  to  de- 
fend it  against  the  attacks  of  the  enemy  ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the 
authority  thereof,  that  the  said  three  companies  of  soldiers, 
now  at  the  island  of  Cape  Breton,  in  the  pay  of  this  colony? 
with  their  officers,  shall  remain  at  said  place,  until  His  Majesty 
shall  take  it  into  his  own  hands ;  or,  until  they  shall  receive 
further  orders  from  this  government. 

And  that  Capt.  Joshua  Champlin,  Lieut.  Richard  Smith  and 
Ensign  Joseph  Weeden,  three  of  the  officers  belonging  to  said 
companies,  be,  and  they  hereby  are  appointed  enlisting  officers 
to  enlist  a  number  of  able  bodied  volunteers,  not  exceeding  the 


128  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1745. 

number  of  twenty-eight,  as  recruits,  to  fill  up  the  said  compa- 
nies, which  are  diminished  by  sickness  and  death ;  and  that 
the  said  recruits  be  enlisted  in  the  same  manner,  and  entitled 
to  the  same  bounty  and  the  same  pay,  and  all  other  advan- 
tages that  were  allowed  by  the  law  of  this  colony,  to  those  who 
were  originally  enlisted  in  the  said  companies ;  which  recruits 
shall  be  enlisted  and  ready  to  embark  for  the  said  place  by  the 
20th  day  of  October  next,  at  furthest. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  commissary  of  this  colony  do  forthwith  procure  a  quantity 
of  provisions  of  all  sorts,  sufficient  for  the  said  three  companies, 
for  eight  months,  according  to  the  allowance  stated  by  the  law 
of  this  colony ;  saving  that  instead  of  the  full  allowance  of  rum, 
stated  by  law,  the  said  commissary  shall  provide  one  half 
thereof  in  rum,  and  the  other  half  in  molasses  ;  which  provi- 
sions shall  be  upon  their  arrival  at  Louisbourg,  delivered  to  the 
captains  or  commanding  officers  for  the  time  being,  in  each  of 
the  said  companies,  to  be  by  them  distributed  or  given  out  to 
their  respective  companies. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  commissary  provide  two  bolts  of  Osnaburg,  in  order  to  be 
used  together  with  the  tents  already  at  said  place,  in  making 
beds  for  the  said  companies  of  soldiers  ;  and  also,  one  blanket 
for  each  soldier  ;  which  beds  and  blankets,  shall  be  returned 
and  remain  to  the  use  of  the  colony  when  the  said  soldiers  are 
discharged  from  the  service  and  pay  of  this  government. 

And  for  a  further  encouragement  to  render  the  said  soL 
diers  and  officers  easy  in  their  duty,  the  commissary  shall 
also  provide  for  their  use,  one  cask  of  rice,  one  barrel  of 
sugar,  a  suitable  quantity  of  hooks  and  lines  for  catching 
of  fisli,  and  one  hundred  pounds  weight  of  shot  for  fowling. 

And  l)c  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  sum  of  £';5.0()()  bo  remitted  by  the  commissary  to  the 
captains  or  commanding  officers  of  the  said  companies  for  the 
time  being,  that  is  to  say  £1,000  to  each  company  ;  which 
remittance  shall  be  made,  the  one-fourth  part  thereof,  in  bills 
of  public  credit,  and  the    other  three-fourth  parts    in  coarse 


1745.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  129 

clothing,  stockings,  shoes,  &c..  which  shall  be  purchased  at 
the  cheapest  wholesale  price,  and  shall,  together  with  the  bills 
of  public  credit,  be  consigned  to  the  respective  captains  or 
commanding  officers,  as  aforesaid,  and  shall  by  them  be  paid 
and  delivered  out  to  their  respective  soldiers,  towards  the  pay- 
ment of  their  wages  ;  and  no  soldier  shall  pay  any  greater  or 
higher  price  for  any  clothing,  which  he  shall  receive  towards 
his  wages,  as  aforesaid,  than  the  prime  cost  of  the  said  goods, 
without  any  advance  or  charge  for  transportation. 

And  the  said  captains  or  commanding  officers,  shall  be  ac- 
countable to  the  government  for  the  said  sums  of  money,  and 
quantities  of  goods,  which  they  shall  respectively  receive  for 
the  payment  of  their  companies,  as  aforesaid ;  and  in  case  any 
of  the  said  goods  shall  remain  upon  their  hands  unsold,  at  their 
return  or  discharge  from  the  service  of  the  colony,  that  then 
the  commissary  shall  receive  them  back  at  the  same  rates  they 
were  delivered,  and  discount  so  much  out  of  the  sums  charged 
to  the  said  officers. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  Messrs.  George  Wanton  and 
Jonathan  Nichols,  be  a  committee  to  hire  a  suitable  vessel  for 
the  transporting  of  the  men,  provisions  and  all  other  stores  and 
goods  mentioned  in  this  act,  to  the  said  island  of  Cape  Breton, 
at  the  charge  of  this  government,  or  make  use  of  the  colony 
sloop  for  that  purpose,  if  they  think  proper,  in  case  she  return 
timely. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  and  it  is  further  enacted  by  the  au- 
thority aforesaid,  that  in  case  advice  should  come,  that  His  Maj- 
esty has  taken  said  fortress  of  Louisbourg,  into  his  own  hands, 
before  the  recruits,  provisions  and  other  necessaries  mentioned 
in  this  act,  are  sent  from  this  colony,  so  that  they  will  thereby 
be  rendered  unnecessary,  that  then  in  such  case.  His  Honor, 
the  Governor,  with  the  advice  of  the  council,  is  hereby  author- 
ized to  stop  the  same,  and  discharge  the  said  recruits ;  and 
His  Honor,  the  Governor,  is  hereby  further  directed  to  give  in. 
structions  to  the  master  of  the  vessel,  who  shall  transport  the 
said  men,  provisions  and   other  necessaries,  to  Cape  Breton, 

VOL.  V.  17 


130  KECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

that  if,  at  his  arrival  at  said  place,  it  shall  be  taken  into  His 
Majesty's  hands,  as  aforesaid,  that  then  he  return  back  Avith  his 
said  transport  vessel,  men,  provisions,  &c.,  to  this  colony,  with- 
out delivering  any  of  them  for  the  uses,  aforesaid. 

An  Act  for  supplying  the  general  treasury  with  money  for  de- 
fraying the  charge  of  supplying  the  colony  sloop,  and  the 
three  companies  of  soldiers  in  the  pay  of  this  colony,  at 
Cape  Breton. 

Whereas,  the  colony  sloop  and  the  soldiers  sent  to  the  island 
of  Cape  Breton,  in  the  pay  of  this  colony,  are  obliged  to  remain 
at  said  place  much  longer  than  was  expected,  when  they  were 
sent,  whereby  the  money  appropriated  for  that  service,  f\ills 
greatly  short  of  defraying  the  charge  and  expense  of  said  ex- 
pedition, so  that  a  further  supply  of  the  general  treasury  is 
become  absolutely  necessary  for  the  making  up  of  the 
deficiency ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  of  the  same,  that  the  sum  of  £5,000,  in  bills  of 
public  credit,  of  the  new  tenor,  be  immediately  struck  off  upon 
the  large  plate,  that  was  made  for  the  last  bank,  and  that  the 
same  be  signed  by  the  grand  committee,  and  delivered  to  the 
general  treasurer,  for  the  uses  abovesaid  ;  and  that  the  same 
be  called  in  and  suid<:  by  a  tax  upon  the  inhabitants  of  this 
colony  ;  one-half  thereof,  in  the  year  1747  ;  one-fourth  part,  in 
the  year  1 748  ;  and  tlie  remaining  fourth  part,  in  the  year 
1749;  which  taxes  shall  be  assessed  upon  the  inhabitants  of 
this  colony,  according  to  the  polls  and  value  of  ratable  estates 
in  each  town. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  did  take  into 
consideration  several  letters  received  from  the  Hon.  Jonathan 
Law,  Esq.,  Governor  of  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  respecting 
some  counterfeit  plates  for  impressing  bills  in  imitation  of  the 
bills  of  public  credit  of  this  colony,  and  the  persons  concerned 
therein,  requesting  a  reward,  who  made  a  discovery  thereof; 
and  as  our  bills  of  public  credit  pass  in  the  other  govern- 


1745.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  131 

merits,  and  they  having  penal  laws  for  punishing  persons 
counterfeiting  the  bills  of  this  colony,  in  the  same  manner  as 
for  counterfeiting  their  own  ; — 

It  is  therefore  the  opinion  of  this  General  Assembly,  that 
all  charges  arising  on  prosecuting  and  convicting  persons 
guilty  of  the  aforesaid  crimes,  should  be  paid  by  the  govern- 
ment where  such  crimes  are  perpetrated. 

And  thereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  tliat  Ilis  Honor,  the 
Governor,  write  to  the  aforesaid  Governor  Law,  informing  him 
of  this  result ;  and  that  this  government  has  frequently  been 
at  the  expense  of  prosecuting  offenders  that  have  been  accused 
of  making  and  uttering  bills  of  the  neighboring  governments. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be  re- 
quested to  send  for  Messrs.  Jos.  Harrison  and  Peter  Harrison, 
who  have  presented  this  Assembly  with  a  handsome  draught 
of  Fort  George,  and  the  harbor  of  Newport,  very  ingeniously 
drawn,  and  give  them  the  thanks  of  this  Assembly. 

Whereas,  Daniel  Goddard,  of  Newport,  in  the  county  of 
Newport,  did,  by  petition,  set  forth  to  this  Assembly,  that 
eight  French  prisoners  of  war,  viz. :  four  men,  two  women  and 
two  children,  had  been  boarded  by  him,  and  found  in  provi- 
sions, fire  wood,  candles  and  all  other  necessaries,  for  the  space 
of  twenty-six  weeks,  in  all  for  one  person ;  that  is  to  say,  one 
man  and  his  wife  and  two  children,  four  weeks ;  one  other 
man  and  his  wife,  two  weeks  ;  and  the  two  other  men,  three 
weeks  ;  which  amounts  in  the  whole,  to  twenty-six  weeks,  and 
for  which  he  humbly  prayed  to  be  allowed  a  just  and  reasona- 
ble satisfaction ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  Daniel 
Goddard  be  allowed,  and  paid  twenty-five  shillings  per  week 
for  boarding  the  aforesaid  persons  ;  and  that  the  whole  being 
£*32  lO-s.,  be  paid  to  the  said  Daniel  Goddard,  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  John  Pearse, 
amounting  to  £30  \os.  4d.,  as  deputy  sherilf  of  the  county 
of  Providence,  for  the  horse  hire,  expenses  and  time  of  himself 
and  aid  in  impressing  men   for   the  expedition  against  Cape 


132  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

Breton,  carrying  them  to  Providence,  and  from  thence  bringing 
them  to  Newport,  be  allowed,  and  paid  to  the  said  John  Pearse, 
out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  appointed  to  build 
a  bridge  over  Weybosset  river,  in  Providence,  in  the  county  of 
Providence,  go  on  and  build  said  bridge  as  soon  as  conveniently 
may  be,  and  as  good  an  one  as  they  can  with  the  money  ap- 
propriated to  that  use. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  that  was  appointed 
to  procure  a  plan  of  Fort  George  and  the  harbor  of  Newport, 
procure  another  draught  or  plan  of  said  fort  and  harbor  exactly 
as  the  same  now  are,  without  any  alterations,  and  present  the 
same  to  the  next  session  of  this  Assembly. 

God  save  the  King. 

Order  of  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  to  the  respective   Governors  of  the 
colonies  in  North  America. 

Whitehall,  January  3d,  1744-5. 

Sir  : — His  Majesty  having  thought  it  necessary  for  the  security  of  the  colonies  in 
North  America,  and  particularly  of  the  Province  of  Nova  Scotia,  (which  has  been 
already  invaded  by  the  French,  and  upon  which  there  is  great  reason  to  apprehend 
that  they  will  early  in  the  spring,  renew  their  attempts  by  the  attack  of  Annapolis 
Royal,)  to  employ  such  a  strength  of  ships  of  war,  in  those  seas,  under  the  command 
of  Commodore  Warren,  as  may  be  sufficient  to  protect  the  said  province,  and  the 
other  neighboring  colonies  in  North  America,  and  the  trade  and  fishery  of  His 
Majesty's  subjects  in  those  parts  ;  and  may  also,  as  occasion  shall  offer,  attack  and 
distress  the  enemy  in  their  settlements,  and  annoy  their  fishery  and  commerce. 

I  have  His  Majesty's  commands  to  signify  to  you  his  pleasure,  that  if  Mr.  Warren 
shall  apply  to  you  for  assistance,  either  of  men,  provisions,  or  shipping,  to  enable 
him  to  proceed  either  to  the  relief  and  succor  of  Annapolis  Royal,  or  of  any  other 
of  His  Majesty's  forts  or  settlements,  or  for  making  any  attempts  on  the  enemy,  you 
should,  in  all  such  cases,  to  be  aiding  and  assisting  to  him  in  the  most  effectual  man. 
ner :  and  according,  as  upon  consultation  together,  shall  be  judged  proper  for  car- 
rying on  His  Majesty's  service  ;  and  you  will  be  ready  to  concert  and  advise  with 
Mr.  Warren  upon  all  occasions  that  may  arise,  which  shall  have  relation  to  the  ser- 
vices on  which  he  is  employed  ;  and  particularly  you  will  procure  and  communicate 
to  him  the  best  intelligence  you  shall  be  able  to  obtain  of  the  state  and  condition  of 
the  enemy's  settlements,  and  of  the  ships  in  their  harbors,  that  he  may  be  enabled 
to  judge  whether  it  may  be  practicable  and  advisable  to  make  an  attempt  upon  any 
of  their  ports.  HOLLES  NEWCASTLE. 

To  the  Governor  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island. 


1745.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  133 


[The  following  letters  chiefly  relate  to  the  expedition  against  Louisbui-g  and  Cape 
Breton,  and  other  events  growing  out  of  the  war  with  France.] 

Governor  Shirley  of  Massachusetts  to  Governor  Greene. 

Boston,  28th  March,  1745. 
Sir  : — I  am  informed  that  your  government  have  agreed  to  raise  one  hundred  and 
fifty  men  for  the  expedition  against  Cape  Breton,  and  to  send  your  colony  sloop  in  the 
same  service  ;  and  as  the  government  of  Connecticut  will  have  their  forces  ready 
early  in  the  next  month,  and  are  solicitous  for  their  getting  safe  to  Cape  Breton,  I 
cannot  but  think  it  will  be  for  the  convenience  of  both  governments,  if  you  could  join 
your  forces,  and  proceed  together  upon  this  voyage  ;  and  in  case  any  thing  should 
hinder  your  raising  the  forces  proposed,  yet  I  hope  you  will  think  it  necessary  for 
His  Majesty's  service,  to  send  your  colony  sloop  for  the  safeguard  of  the  troops  from 
Connecticut.  I  am,  sir,  Your  Honor's  most  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

P.  S.  Sir  : — I  hope,  if  you  can't  otherwise  man  your  sloop,  you  will  not  scruple, 
upon  this  extraordinary  occasion,  to  impress  seamen,  as  this  government  has  done  ; 
and  if  it  should  happen  that  the  one  hundred  and  fifty  land  forces  are  not  raised, 
pursuant  to  the  vote  of  your  Assembly,  Your  Honor  will  at  least  make  up  the  com- 
plement of  your  colony  sloop,  one  hundred  and  thirty  men,  as  at  first  voted. 

Hon'ble  William  Greene,  Esq.,  or  in  his  absence, 
the  Hon'ble  Joseph  Whipple,  Esq. 

Governor  Clinton,  of  Neio  YorJc,  to  Governor  Greene. 

New  York,  15th  April,  1745. 

Sir  : — I  have  just  received  an  authentic  account  from  the  West  Indies,  of  the  ar- 
rival of  the  Chevalier  de  Cailus,  at  Martinique,  with  seven  sail  of  ships  of  war ; 
two  ef  seventy-four  guns,  two  of  sixty-four,  two  of  fifty-six,  and  a  frigate  of  thirty- 
six  guns,  with  upwards  of  twenty  sail  of  transports,  and  thirty-six  hundred  troops, 
with  an  intent  to  make  an  attack  on  some  of  the  British  islands  there  ;  and  as  I  find 
the  intelligence  of  the  expedition  now  carrying  on  against  Cape  Breton,  is  generally 
spread  in  these  parts,  it  is  very  probable  that  the  French  commander  will  not  be 
long  without  the  accourt,  which  I  apprehend  may  divert  the  thoughts  of  his  original 
intentions  to  come  to  the  defence  of  that  place  ;  and  in  case  the  English  forces 
should  be  defeated,  it  highly  behoves  all  the  governments  upon  this  continent  to 
consider  well  what  may  be  the  consequences  of  such  an  event. 

I  have  therefore  thought  it  necessary  to  give  you  this  information,  that  you 
may  be  upon  your  guard,  and  in  readiness  not  only  to  defend  yourselves,  but  to 
assist  your  neighbors  with  your  utmost  force,  both  by  sea  and  land,  in  case  of 
need.  I  am,  sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

GEO.  CLINTON. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Esq. 


134  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1745. 


Governor  SliirUy  to  Governor  Greene. 

Boston,  May  3,  1745. 

Sir : — The  occasion  of  this  letter  is  something  that  has  lately  happened  in  the 
county  of  Bristol,  which  tends  much  to  the  obstruction  of  His  Majesty's  service  in 
this  Province. 

I  gave  orders  to  Col.  Bowen  and  Col.  Willis,  to  impress  a  number  of  men  out  of 
their  respective  regiments,  for  the  defence  of  the  frontiers  of  this  Province  ;  and  the 
said  orders  were  executed  accordingly  ;  but  the  greatest  number  of  [the]  men  that 
(vere  impressed,  absconded  after  their  impressment,  which  is  contrary  to  the  laws 
of  this  Province ;  and  many  of  them  are  supposed  to  be  retired  into  your 
government. 

I  need  not  take  much  pains  to  show  Your  Honor  of  what  pernicious  consequence 
it  must  be,  if  these  men  should  meet  with  the  least  encouragement  within  your  gov- 
ernment ;  a  few  days  delay  may  cost  the  lives  of  many  innocent  people  on  the  fron- 
tiers, that  now  want  the  protection  of  this  government ;  I  have  enclosed  a  list  of 
those  mens'  names  belonging  to  Col.  Bowen's  regiment,  who  are  supposed  to  be 
gotten  into  your  colony  ;  and  I  desire  that  Your  Honor  would  give  effectual  orders 
to  your  ofScers,  forthwith  to  search  for  the  said  persons,  and  if  any  of  them  may  be 
found,  to  secure  them,  and  convey  them  safe  into  this  Province,  and  there  deliver 
them  to  Col.  Thomas  Bowen,  that  so  they  may  be  put  into  His  Majesty's  service 
abovementioned,  or  suffer  the  penalty  of  the  law,  in  that  case  provided. 

I  am  the  more  earnest  in  this  allair,  because  if  such  disobedience  to  the  authority 
of  His  Majesty's  government,  be  not  discouraged,  but  the  offenders  finally  escape 
from  justice,  these'  examples  will  soon  be  multiplied  ;  and  what  detriment  will  arise 
to  His  Majesty's  service,  thereupon.  Your  Honor  will  easily  judge. 

I  am,  sir,  Your  Honor's  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  SHHILEY. 

To  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Governor  Slihioj  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Boston,  May  IS,  1745. 

Sir  :— I  am  obliged  once  more  to  make  application  to  you,  for  the  assistance  of 
your  government  in  the  immediate  raising  of  some  troops  for  supporting  the  expe- 
dition against  Cajje  Breton  ;  which  the  general  of  our  land  forces,  and  the  commo- 
dore of  the  fleet  have  represented  to  me  very  necessary  for  the  reduction  of  the 
plai'c'. 

How  fir  Providence  has  hitherto  favored  us  in  this  attempt,  and  what  encouratre 
nient  we  have  to  proceed  in  it,  you  will  find  by  the  enclosed  copy  of  a  letter  I  have  just 
now  received,  from  the  general  of  our  forces  ;  and  as  I  am  informed  it  is  pretended, 
to  color  the  backwardness  in  some  of  the  colonies  and  provinces,  to  join  with  us  in 
this  enterprise,  that  the  undertaking  of  it  witliout  His  Majesty's  express  order) 
would  be  so  far  from  recommending  us  to  his  favor,  that  it  would  tend  to  incur  his 
displeasure,  I  am  now  able  to  remove  that  objection,  and  to  acquaint  Your  Honor 
that  upon  my  letter    to   His  Grace,  the    Duke    of  Newcastle,  intbrmin;,' him  of  our 


1745.] 


AND  PEOVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  135 


resolution  to  undertake  this  affair,  and  how  far  we  had  proceeded  therein,  (which 
letters  were  laid  before  His  Majesty,)  His  iNlajesty  and  his  ministers  were  pleased 
so  far  to  manifest  their  approbation  of  our  undertaking,  that,  without  the  least  loss 
of  time,  two  ships  of  war  were  ordered  to  proceed  directly  to  Louisbourg,  to  sup- 
port us  herein  ;  and  a?  they  had  before,  upon  my  more  general  intimation  of  a  de- 
sign of  this  nature,  ordered  commodore  Warren  to  come  from  the  West  Indies,  and 
attend  this  service,  who  is  now  before  Louisbourg,  with  five  of  His  Majesty's  ships 
of  war ;  and  will,  in  a  few  days,  be  joined  with  two  other  of  His  Majesty's  ships ; 
one  of  sixty,  and  the  other  of  forty  guns,  which  are  already  sailed  from  hence,  upon 
that  service ;  and  I  am  fully  assured  that  His  Majesty  has  the  success  of  this  expedi- 
tion much  at  heart. 

And  now,  sir,  as  this  Province  has  (in  conjunction  with  the  Province  of  New 
Hampshire,  and  the  colony  of  Connecticut,)  at  an  immense  charge,  undertaken  this 
important  expedition,  and  so  far  proceeded  therein,  under  the  favorable  aspects  of 
Divine  Providence,  and  the  gracious  approbation  and  assistance  of  His  Majesty,  I 
must  desire  that  your  government  would  maturely  consider  how  great  a  benefit  the 
acquisition  of  this  place  will  be  to  the  future  safety  and  tranquillity  of  all  these 
northern  colonies  ;  and  how  justly  His  Majesty  may  resent  a  refusal  of  any  of 'em 
to  join  in  the  common  cause,  and  how  much  such  government  may  hereafter  regret 
their  unseasonable  frugality,  if  by  denying  at  this  crisis  to  contribute  their  just 
quota  for  the  carrying  on  and  support  of  this  expedition,  which  is  now  brought  so 
near  to  an  happy  event,  they  should  prove  the  means  of  its  fatal  miscarriage. 

This  representation  of  the  state  of  our  case,  my  duty  to  His  Majesty  obliges  me 
to  make  ;  and  I  must  earnestly  press  your  government  to  give  it  a  full  considera- 
tion, and  send  me  a  speedy  answer,  as  to  their  resolutions  thereupon. 

I  am,  sir,  Your  Honor's  humble  obedient  servant, 

W.  SHUILEY. 

The  Hon'ble  Gideon  Wanton. 

Governor  SUrlcij  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Boston,  June  5,  1745. 
Sir : — I  have  herewith  enclosed  two  proclamations,  which  I  have  just  now  issued 
on  occasion  of  the  expedition  against  (Jape  Breton,  with  an  extract  of  my  letter 
from  Commodore  Warren,  and  a  vote  of  the  General  Court  here,  for  encouraging 
the  enlistment  of  seamen  for  manning  the  ship  Vigilant,  prize,  by  which  you  will 
know  what  want  there  is,  both  of  soldiers  and  seamen,  for  this  service. 

As  to  the  first,  I  have  already  written  fully  to  Your  Honor  thereon  ;  and  you 
will  likewise  know  what  encouragement  this  government  has  offered  for  both.  I  am 
persuaded  your  colony  can  furnish  a  good  number  of  seamen,  and  must  therefore 
desire  that  you  would  use  your  best  endeavors  for  providing  as  many  as  can  be  had 
in  your  colony,  and  that  as  soon  as  may  be. 

1  am,  sir,  Your  Honor's  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 
To  the  Hon'ble  Governor  Wanton. 

Li  the  House  of  Representatives,  June  1,  1745. 
Voted,  that  His  Excellency,  the  Captain  General,  be  desired,  as  soon\is  may  be, 
to  cause  to  be  impressed  such  seamen  as  are   foreigners,  belonging  to  all  invvard 


136  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

bound  vessels,  (coasting  and  provision  vessels  coming  from  the  northward  of  South 
Carolina,  on  the  continent,  excepted,)  in  order  for  manning  the  Vigilant,  a  ship  of 
•war,  lately  taken  by  the  Hon'ble  Commodore  Warren,  from  the  French ;  and  that 
there  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  public  treasury,  the  sum  of  £3,  to  every  other 
able  bodied  man  that  shall  voluntarily  enlist  himself  in  His  Majesty's  service,  for 
the  manning  the  said  ship,  the  Vigilant,  to  make  up  in  the  whole,  with  those  im- 
pressed, the  number  of  three  hundred  men. 

Governor  Shirley  to  Governor  V/aiiton. 

Boston,  June  6,  1745. 

Sir : — Notwithstanding  I  have  but  five  days  ago  applied  to  you  for  the  assistance 
of  your  government  in  manning  the  Vigilant  prize,  for  His  Majesty's  service,  at 
Cape  Breton,  I  find  it  necessary  to  trouble  you  with  a  second  letter  upon  that  af- 
fair ;  for  although  the  General  Assembly  of  this  Province  has  granted  a  bounty  of 
£3,  in  bills  of  the  new  tenor,  to  each  volunteer  that  shall  enlist;  and  I  have  besides 
issued  my  warrants  for  impressing  seamen  for  this  service,  I  find  my  endeavors  will 
be  to  little  purpose,  whilst  all  mariners  subject  to  be  impressed  here  into  His  Maj- 
esty's service,  fly  to  Rhode  Island  to  avoid  it,  (as  indeed  has  been  long  the  prac- 
tice,) and  are  there  sheltered  and  encouraged,  where  (I  am  credibly  informed,) 
there  are  at  this  time  many  hundreds  of  foreign  seamen  daily  walking  the  streets  of 
Newport,  whilst  scarce  one  is  to  be  found  in  Boston  ;  from  whence  I  am  assured  in 
particular,  that  upwards  of  twenty  have  secretly  fled  towards  your  colony  from  my 
impress  warrants,  within  these  last  two  or  three  days. 

This  being  the  case,  sir,  I  think  it  necessary  to  inform  you  of  it ;  and  as  I  have 
the  honor  of  receiving  (among  other  instructions  from  His  Majesty,  upon  this  oc- 
casion,) his  express  commands  to  supply  Commodore  AVarren  with  what  men  and 
shipping  he  shall  want  for  the  protection  of  His  Majesty's  subjects  in  his  northern 
colonies,  and  the  annoyance  of  his  enemies,  and  their  settlements  in  these  parts  ; 
and  i\lr.  AVarren  has  applied  to  me  to  furnish  him  with  seamen,  to  man  the  Vigilant, 
for  His  Majesty's  service,  at  Cape  Breton,  I  hope  you  will  excuse  me  if  I  repeat 
my  application  to  your  government  for  that  purjiose  ;  and  that  particularly  at  so 
critical  a  conjuncture  for  His  Majesty's  service,  and  the  general  interest  of  all  his 
northern  colonies,  (in  which  your  own  has  a  very  considerable  share,)  as  the  present 
emergency  plainly  is,  you  will  exert  yourselves  in  the  most  effectual  manner,  for 
furnishing  Mr.  Warren  with  seamen,  which,  I  am  satisfied,  it  is  in  the  power  of 
your  government  to  do,  either  by  offering  the  same  bounty  to  volunteers  as  this 
government  has  done,  or  by  impressing;  and  that  you  will  not  permit  your  colony 
to  be  an  assylum  to  all  mariners  coming  into  New  England,  for  screening  them- 
selves from  His  JMajesty's  service  ;  especially,  when  Mr.  Warren  has  offered  all 
volunteers  the  advantageous  terms  of  entering  into  pay  from  the  time  of  their  en- 
listment ;  and  being  discharged,  il  they  desire  it,  at  the  end  of  the  expedition,  or 
his  sooner  return  to  Boston  ;  which  makes  their  declining  to  serve  their  king  and 
country,  upon  this  occasion,  wholly  inexcusable. 

1  am,  sir.  Your  Honor's  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  the  Hon'ble  Gideon  Wanton,  Esq. 


1745.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  137 

Commodore  Sir  Peter  Warren  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Superbe,  in  Loiiisbourg  Harbor,  the  24th  June,  1 745. 
Sir  :— 

I  have  now  the  pleasure  to  acquaint  you,  that  we  are  in  quiet  possession  of  the  town 
and  garrison  of  Louisbourg,  and  the  territories  thereunto  belonging;  and  that  it  is 
my  duty,  pursuant  to  the  orders  I  have  received,  to  apply  to  you,  and  the  different 
governors  upon  the  continent,  for  such  provision  and  men  as  I  may  want;  and  I 
never  had  more  occasion  for  your  assistance  than  at  present,  in  order  to  keep  pos- 
session of  a  garrison  that  is  a  key  to  all  the  French  settlements  upon  the  continent, 
and  of  which  possession  every  colony  will  feel  the  good  effect ;  therefore  hope  you 
will  send  with  all  speed,  your  quota  of  men,  armed  and  victualed  for  at  least  seven 
or  eight  months,  to  remain  here  for  the  support  of  this  garrison,  till  His  Majesty's 
pleasure  is  known  ;  till  which  time  I  shall  continue  here. 

You  will  please  to  advertise,  all  His  Majesty's  subjects  that  are  willing  to  come  to 
this  port,  to  trade  with  the  garrison  and  inhabitants,  shall  have  free  liberty,  without 
any  duty  or  imposition,  whatsoever ;  and  that  none  of  fheir  people  shall  be  molested 
or  impressed  into  His  Majesty's  ships  of  service  ;  and  there  are  several  prizes  here, 
which  will  be  condemned  and  disposed  of,  and  many  more  will  no  doubt  fall  in 
daily,  by  our  cruisers. 

I  make  this  application  to  all  your  neighboring  governors,  and  have  begged  them 
to  recommend  the  consideration  of  this  my  request,  to  their  different  legislatures, 
who  can't  in  any  manner,  give  greater  proofs  of  their  loyalty  to  His  Majesty,  their 
love  to  their  country,  and  their  care  of  posterity,  than  by  assisting  me  with  the 
means  of  keeping  possession  till  His  Majesty  can  make  provision  for  it  of  a  garrison 
and  a  colony,  that  in  its  consequence  will  be  the  means  of  extirpating  so  dangerous 
an  enemy  as  the  French  are,  out  of  the  continent ;  and  of  uniting  such  nations  of 
Indians  to  us,  and  to  one  another,  as  will  greatly  increase  our  fur  and  fish  trade ; 
and  secure  us,  and  our  posterity,  in  the  quiet  possession  of  our  civil  and  religious 
rites.  I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  and  humble  servant,         P.  WARREN. 

To  the  Governor  or  Commander-in-chief  of  Rhode  Island. 

Governor  Shirleij  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Boston,  June  24,  1745. 
Sir  : — The  siege  of  Louisbourg  having  quite  exhausted  all  our  magazines  of  pow- 
der, except  a  necessary  store  for  Castle  William,  and  it  being  uncertain  what  fur- 
ther demand  of  powder  there  may  be,  for  His  Majesty's  service  at  that  place,  and 
when  any  further  supplies  of  it  may  be  brought  in  here  ;  I  must  desire  Your  Honor 
to  lay  an  embargo  upon  all  the  powder  now  lying  in  your  stores  or  magazines,  (as 
I  have  done  for  several  months  past,  in  this  Province,)  so  as  to  secure  it  for  some 
time  for  the  service  of  the  present  expedition  against  Cape  Breton,  at  the  market 
price,  in  case  it  should  be  wanted. 

I  am,  sir.  Your  Honor's  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 
To  His  Honor,  Governor  Wanton. 
VOL.  V.  18 


138  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 


Governor  Shirk)/  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Boston,  July  3d,  1745. 
Sir: — I  have  now  the  pleasure  to  send  Your  Honor,  by  express,  the  news  of  the 
reduction  of"  Louisbourg  to  the  obedience  of  His  Majesty,  and  the  surrrender  of 
it  accordingly.  But  to  maintain  our  conquest  there,  which  is  of  the  utmost  impor- 
tance, will  require  the  assistance  of  all  His  Majesty's  colonies  and  provinces  in 
North  America,  for  furnishing  men,  ammunitions  and  provisions,  for  garrisoning 
and  provisioning  the  place  till  His  Majesty  shall  order  troops  from  Great  Britain,  or 
Otherwise  signify  his  pleasure  in  this  affair  ;  and  I  apprehend  this  to  be  the  most 
critical  juncture  for  securing  it  from  the  attempts  of  the  enemy  to  recover  it;  for 
it  cannot  be  doubted  but  that  the  French  king  will  soon  send  a  strong  force,  both  of 
ships  and  troops  to  reduce  it  before  we  can  be  well  secured  in  the  possession  of  it ; 
and  you  may  reasonably  judge  that  this  Province  is  already  drained  of  men,  provi- 
sions and  ammunitions. 

However,  we  are  still  so  heartily  engaged  in  this  service,  that  we  have  lately  sent 
four  hundred  troops,  who  I  suppose  arrived  at  Louisbourg  since  the  surrender  of  it, 
besides  upwards  of  sixty  seamen  for  manning  of  His  Majesty's  ship  Vigilant ;  and  have 
about  two  hundred  soldiers  more  embarked,  and  ready  to  embark,  whom  I  shall  get 
away  with  all  possible  despatch  ;  and  I  cannot  but  hope  Your  Honor  and  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  of  Rhode  Island,  will,  in  duty  to  His  Majesty,  and  in  regard  to  the 
common  interest  of  all  his  subjects  in  North  America,  make  provision  for  the  rais- 
ing of  a  number  of  soldiers  immediately  for  this  service,  and  have  them  transported 
without  delay  ;  and  likewise  give  orders  for  the  taking  up  and  purchasing  all  the 
gunpowder  and  provisions  that  can  be  got  for  the  garrison  at  Louisbourg,  and  the 
ships  employed  there  ;  of  both  which  they  are  in  want,  as  the  general  and  commo- 
dore inform  me ;  as  also  provisions  for  the  French  prisoners  to  be  sent  home  to 
France  ;  and  as  this  will  require  a  vast  quantity,  (of  provisions  especially,)  it  is  my 
opinion  that  no  provisions  ought  to  be  allowed  to  be  shipped  off  from  the  plantations 
where  they  are  raised,  to  the  West  Indies,  or  any  foreign  parts  whatsoever,  till  this 
want  be  supplied. 

It  will  also  be  requisite  that  all  the  gunpowder  that  can  be  found  in  your  colony 
except  what  may  be  absolutely  necessary  for  your  own  defence,  should  be  secured 
for  His  Majesty's  service. 

And  I  should  think  if  Your  Honor  will  employ  some  merchants  in  your  place  for 
the  purchasing  of  the  powder,  who  will  be  able  to  find  it  out  better  than  your  own 
officers,  it  will  be  the  most  likely  of  being  furnished  with  a  good  quantity  of  it,  of 
which  this  Province  is  almost  entirely  exhausted  ;  having  sent  off  for  the  expedition 
against  Louisbourg  about  twelve  hundred  barrels;  and  I  hope  that  you  will  con- 
sider that  both  the  garrison  and  ships  will  want  a  considerable  supply. 

I  am,  sir,  Your  Honor's  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  SllIRLF.Y. 
To  the  lion.  Gideon  Wanton,  Esq. 

Capt.  Wickliam  arrived  here  some  days  ago,  with  seventy-four  sailors,  raised  in 
your  colony,  by  your  government,  for  the  Vigilant ;  sixty-one  of  whom,  are  em- 
barked on  board  the  Snow ,  Capt.  Griffith ;  and  I  hope  you  will  procure  the 


1745.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  139 

whole  two  hundred  voted  by  your  Assembly  ;  and  some  more  landsmen,  if  possible  ; 
for  there  is  certainly  great  danger  of  Louisbourg's  being  instantly  snatched  from  us, 
or  at  least  attempted  to  be  so,  before  His  Majesty  shall  garrison  it,  and  the  fortifica- 
tions be  repaired. 

And  I  must  particularly  press  Your  Honour  to  procure  all  the  powder  you  possi- 
bly can  for  this  service,  the  want  of  which  must  prove  fatal  to  us,  notwithstand- 
ing our  strong  naval  force.  ^\r,  g. 

Sir  Peter  Warren  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Louisbourg,  July  25,  1745. 
Sir : — I  have  the  pleasure  to  tell  you,  that  two  of  my  squadron  have  taken  a  rich 
East  India  ship,  and  that  we  proposed  to  sell  her  cargo  here,  if  the  merchants  will 
come  from  the  colony  to  purchase  it. 

Herewith  I  enclose  you  an  advertisement,  which  I  desire  you  will  get  printed, 
and  distributed  about  your  government,  in  order  to  the  people's  being  here  in  time, 
as  the  season  is  now  far  advanced. 

I  am  in  daily  expectation  of  the  provisions  and  men,  that  I  wrote  to  you  for,  for 
the  protection  of  this  important  garrison. 

I  am,  with  great  regard,  sir, 

Your  most  obdient  humble  servant, 

P.  WARREN. 
Honorable  Gideon  Wanton,  Esq.,  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Governor  Wanton  to  Commodore  Sir  Peter  Warren. 

Newport,  August  23,  1745. 

Sir : — Since  my  last  to  you,  I  have  had  the  opportunity  of  laying  before  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  of  this  colony,  your  letters,  with  a  copy  of  His  Majesty's  orders,  sig- 
nified by  His  Grace,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  to  the  respective  Governors  of  the 
colonies  in  North  America,  to  assist  you  with  men,  provisions  and  shipping,  for  the 
relief  of  any  of  His  Majesty's  settlements,  or  for  making  any  attempts  upon  those  of 
the  enemy. 

And  I  am  directed  by  them,  to  assure  you,  that  none  of  His  Majesty's  subjects  more 
sincerely  rejoice  at  the  glorious  success  of  His  Majesty's  arms  in  the  reduction  of  a 
place  of  such  vast  importance  to  his  obedience,  than  this  colony  ;  and  that  none  of 
His  Majesty's  provinces  or  colonies,  will  be  more  ready  than  this  to  give  you  their 
utmost  assistance  in  making  any  attempts  against  His  Majesty's  enemies,  or  in  the 
securing  and  defending  this  most  important  acquisition  ;  but  as  this  colony  is  very 
small,  and  by  its  situation  very  much  exposed  to  the  attacks  of  the  enemy  by  sea, 
and  great  numbers  of  our  men  employed  on  board  our  privateers  to  distress  the 
enemy  in  their  trade  and  navigation,  and  as  they  have  already  been  at  a  very  great 
expense  in  keeping  their  only  vessel  of  war  at  Cape  Breton,  ever  since  the  begin- 
ning of  this  expedition,  and  in  sending  and  victualling  three  companies  of  soldiers 
to  assist  in  defending  Louisbourg ;  and  also  in  allowing  a  large  bounty  to  a  number 
of  seamen  to  enlist  and  serve  in  the  squadron  of  His  Majesty's  ships  under  your 
command;  they  hope  these  will  be  looked  upon  as  their  full  quota,  and  as  sufficient 
demonstrations  of  their  duty  and  loyalty  to  His  Majesty. 


140  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

1  am,  sir,  farther  directed  to  assure  you,  that  if  His  Majesty's  service  should  re- 
quire our  three  companies  of  soldiers  to  remain  in  garrison  at  Louisbourg,  all  winter, 
in  the  pay  of  this  colony,  that  all  due  care  will  be  taken  by  the  government  to  send 
them,  in  season,  provisions,  and  all  other  necessaries,  for  their  subsistence. 

The  General  Assembly  thank  you  for  the  favor  and  respect  you  have  shown  to 
Capt.  Fones,  the  commander  of  our  colony's  sloop  Tartar ;  and  they  hope  you'll  be 
so  good  as  to  discharge  her  as  soon  as  the  nature  of  His  Majesty's  service  will  admit 
of  it,  she  being  the  only  vessel  of  war  that  we  have  for  the  protection  of  the  trade 
and  navigation  of  this  colony. 

Your  known  generosity  leaves  us  no  room  to  doubt  but  that  you  will  do  justice  to 
this  colony,  in  letting  His  Majesty  know  what  assistance  we  have  given  in  this  ex- 
pedition ;  and  we  the  rather  request  this  favor  of  j'ou,  sir,  because  we  have  reason 
to  believe  that  some  of  our  neighbors  have  no  great  inclination  to  represent  our 
conduct  in  the  best  light. 

We  heartily  congratulate  you,  sir,  upon  the  success  of  His  Majesty's  ships  under 
your  command,  in  taking  so  many  rich  and  valuable  prizes.  May  zeal  and  fidelity 
in  His  Majesty's  service  be  always  thus  rewarded,  and  may  success  attend  you  in 
all  your  attempts,  until  your  name  become  a  terror  to  a  haughty  and  insolent 
enemy. 

I  heartily  wish  you  health,  and  am,  with  best  regards, 

in  behalf  of  the  General  Assembljs  sir,  yours,  GIDEON  WANTON. 

To  the  Honorable  Commodore  Warren. 

P.  S.  Sir : — As  the  General  Assembly  have  ordered  the  brigantine,  which 
transported  our  soldiers  to  Louisbourg,  to  return  home  immediately,  unless  any  di- 
rections should  be  come  from  His  Majesty  to  dismiss  our  soldiers  in  a  short  time, 
they  have  directed  me  to  desire  you'd  be  pleased  to  give  her  a  pass  to  depart. 


Cajil.  Fones  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Sloop  Tartar,  in  Louisbourg  harbor,  July  18,  1745. 

Honored  Sir : — I  heartily  congratulate  you  on  your  accession  to  the  gov- 
ernment. 

Your  letter  per  Capt.  Champlain,  I  received  yesterday,  (but  you  forgot 
to  date  it,)  Avherein  you  inform  me  that  you  would  have  me  wait  the  commo- 
dore's pleasure  ;  he  will  by  no  means  give  me  my  dismission,  and  I  am  entirely  out 
of  stores  of  every  kind  ;  and  am  obliged  to  take  up  provisions  for  present  subsist- 
ence here,  and  draw  home,  which  will  be  very  expensive. 

I  wrote  home  several  times,  which  I  hope  were  delivered  safe,  but  received  no 
letter  from  l''our  Honor  before  yesterday  ;  I  arrived  here  the  evening  before  last» 
from  the  Bay  of  Vert,  and  have  the  pleasure  of  walking  Louisbourg  streets,  which  is 
the  strongest  place  I  ever  saw  ;  for  news,  it  is  impossible  to  give  you  an  account,  in 
a  letter,  but  refer  you  to  the  prints ;  my  people  are  all  alive,  and  most  of  them'well. 
I  am,  honored  sir,  your  humble  servant,  to  command, 

DANIEL  FONES. 

To  the  Hon.  Gideon  \Vanton. 

P.  S.     The  forces  from  Rhode  Island  arrived  safe,  the  day  before  yesterday. 


1745.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  141 


General  Sir  Wm.  Pepperell,  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Sir: — 1  received  your  favor  of  29th  June,  per  Capt.  Mumford,  and  take  tlils  op- 
portunity, per  Capt.  Griffith,  to  congratulate  you  and  the  gentlemen  of  Rhode  Is- 
land colony  upon  the  happy  success  of  His  Majesty's  arms,  in  the  reduction  of  this 
place  and  territories  adjacent,  to  his  obedience  ;  the  account  of  which,  I  am  sensible 
has  reached  you  some  time  since,  and  am  persuaded  was  received  with  that  pleasure 
which  must  fill  the  breast  of  all  His  Majesty's  loyal  subjects,  and  of  every  well 
wisher  to  the  prosperity  of  the  colonies,  upon  the  acquisition  of  so  strong  a  fortress 
and  of  so  much  consequence  to  trade  and  security  of  all  His  Majesty's  subjects  in 
North  America  ;  the  good  eflFects  of  which,  I  trust,  will  be  as  lasting  as  extensive. 

The  three  companies  raised  in  your  colony  for  our  assistance,  with  commission 
from  you,  (whose  advancement  to  the  chair  of  government  I  beg  leave  to  con<Tratu- 
late  you  on,)  arrived  here  last  week,  and  you  may  be  assured  shall  have  my  favor 
and  countenance  in  every  thing  in  my  power. 

I  have  transmitted  to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  an  account  of  our  success,  and  the 
present  condition  of  this  place,  and  am  persuaded  speedy  measures  will  be  taken  for 
the  support  and  defence  of  it ;  but  till  His  Majesty's  pleasure  is  known,  it  will  be  ab- 
solutely necessary  to  keej)  a  large  body  of  troops  here  ;  and  as  many  of  those  who 
first  came,  have  been  detained  beyond  what  they  expected,  they  will  be  impatient 
to  return  to  their  families,  which  will  render  a  supply  of  fresh  troops  necessary,  as 
it  is  something  doubtful  whether  any  can  be  sent  from  Europe  this  year. 

A  great  stock  of  provisions  and  warlike  stores  to  be  laid  in  here,  before  the  fall 
advances  too  far,  is  also  of  necessity.  I  think  there  ought  to  be  at  least  twelve  or 
fifteen  months'  provisions,  for  three  or  four  thousand  men  ;  and  I  flatter  myself  that 
those  governments  who  have  been  ready  to  join  their  assistance  for  the  reduction  of 
this  place,  will  not  be  backward  in  affording  their  aid  in  what  may  be  necessary  for 
keeping  it  from  ever  fiilling  into  the  hands  of  the  French  again. 

I  have  nothing  remarkable  to  communicate  to  you,  moi-e  than  you  will  be  made 
acquainted  with  by  way  of  Boston  ;  except  the  taking  a  ship  off  this  harbor,  two 
days  since,  which  proved  a  very  rich  East  Indiaman  ;  and  am. 

Sir,  your  most  humble  servant,  W.  P. 

Louisbourg,  July  25th,  1845. 

Sir  : — The  above  is  copy  of  my  last ;  since  which,  have  nothing  remarkable  to 
inform  you  of,  but  the  capture  of  another  Indiaman,  and  a  vastly  rich  South  Sea- 
man. I  hope  your  government  will  not  omit  to  do  their  proportionable  part  for  the 
maintenance  of  this  garrison,  until  His  Majesty's  pleasure  is  known. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

August  13th,  1745.  WM.  PEPPERELL. 

The  Hon'ble  Governor  Wanton,  &c.,  &c.,  &c. 

Cajit.  Fones,  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Sloop  Tartar,  in  Louisbourg  harbor,  July  30th,  1745. 
Honored  Sir  : — Since  my  last,  we  have  had  the  good  fortune  of  taking  two  India 
merchant  ships  ;  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  them  both  taken  ;  I  have  buried  three 
of  my  people,  and  have  several  others  sick. 


142  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

As  you  have  ordered  me  to  wait  the  commodore's  pleasure,  I  am  obliged  to  buy 
provisions  at  an  extravagant  rate  ;  and  am  this  day  stripping  my  rigging,  -which 
proves  very  defective  ;  so  that  you  must  think  my  bills  on  the  government  will  be 
many  and  great ;  and  when  we  shall  be  released,  I  know  not ;  lor  the  commodore 
likes  the  sloop  so  well,  that  he  will  by  no  means  part  with  her,  unless  Your  Honor 
sends  express  orders  to  the  contrary. 

For  my  own  part,  I  wait  your  and  the  commodore's  orders  with  the  greatest  of 
pleasure,  And  am,  honored  sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

danip:l  fones. 

To  the  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton. 


Governor  Phijjps  io  Governor  Wanton. 

Boston,  August  14,  1745. 

Sir  : — At  the  desire  of  His  Majesty's  council  of  this  Province,  I  am  now  to  ac- 
quaint Your  Honor  with  the  present  state  of  the  garrison  at  Louisbourg,  (as  it  is 
represented  by  a  letter  from  Lieut.  General  Pepperell,  directed  to  Governor  Shir- 
jey,  dated  the  6th  instant,  this  day  received,)  which  garrison  consists  principally  of 
the  inhabitants  of  this  Province. 

In  the  proclamation  issued  by  His  Excellency,  Governor  Shirley,  to  encourage 
the  raising  of  levies  for  this  expedition,  the  men  that  should  enlist  were  promised 
to  be  discharged  at  the  end  of  the  expedition  ;  the  greatest  part  of  the  soldiers,  as 
well  as  oflicers,  are  substantial  men,  and  many  of  them  masters  of  families  ;  and  a 
considerable  number  were  drawn  olF  from  the  frontiers,  where  their  families  are 
every  day  liable  to  be  murdered  by  the  Indians.  These  circumstances,  as  well  as 
the  extreme  toils  and  labors  of  the  siege,  the  ill  state  of  their  health,  consequent 
thereupon,  and  the  wearing  out  of  their  apparel  in  this  service,  gives  a  general  dis- 
content to  the  soldiers,  upon  the  prospects  of  a  longer  detention  therein. 

And  as  this  Province  is  exhausted  of  men,  provisions,  clothing,  ammunition  and 
other  things,  necessary  for  the  support  of  the  garrifeon,  at  Louisbourg,  if  His  Majes- 
ty's other  provinces  and  colonies  will  not  do  something  more  than  they  have  done, 
for  the  maintaining  of  this  conquest,  we  apprehend  great  danger  that  the  place  will 
fall  into  the  enemy's  hands  again  ;  for  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  but  that  the  French 
will  make  a  vigorous  attempt  for  regaining  it. 

I  must  therefore  pray  Your  Honor  to  make  a  full  representation  of  the  state  of 
{his  affair,  and  how  ill  it  must  be  resented  by  His  Majesty,  if  after  this  Province 
(with  the  assistance  of  Connecticut  and  New  Hampshire,)  has  been  at  the  charge 
of  above  £200,000  for  the  reducing  this  place,  besides  the  great  loss  and  damage  by 
taking  off  so  many  of  the  substantial  inhabitants  of  this  Province  from  their  busi- 
ness, and  the  general  stagnation  of  trade  here,  occasioned  by  this  expedition ;  I  say^ 
if  after  this  place  has  been  gained  at  so  vast  an  expense,  and  so  unspeakable  a  loss 
in  other  respects,  to  this  Province,  the  other  provinces  (saving  Connecticut  and 
New  Hampshire,  as  abovementioned,)  should  apprehend  they  have  done  their  duty, 
by  being  at  the  charge  of  a  few  thousand  pounds;  and  if  this  place  should  be 
finally  recovered  by  the  French,  for  want  of  a  sufCcient  strength  to  defend  it,  the 
blame  must  lie  upon  those  colonies  that  refuse  to  bear  their  part  in  the  charge  and 
dangers  of  this  important  enterprise. 

Your  Honor  having  from    the    beginning    manifested    so  hearty  a  disposition  to 


1745.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  14^ 


promote  tliis  great  affair,  leaves  us  no  room  to  doubt  but  you  -will  do  every  tliino-  in 
your  power  to  bring  your  Assembly  into  such  measures  as  are  necessary  for  the 
preservation  of  Louisbourg  to  His  Majesty  ;  and  more  especially,  for  raising  of  re- 
cruits for  the  garrison  there,  and  taking  up  provisions  and  ammunition  necessary 
for  their  supply. 

By  the  express  boat  now  arrived  from  Louisbourg,  we  have  certain  intelligence 
that  besides  the  first  Indiaman  taken  by  Commodore  Warren's  squadron,  (of  which 
we  were  advised  the  last  week,)  they  have  taken  another  Indiaman,  richly  laden 
and  a  South  Seaman,  with  £400,000  in  money,  besides  a  valuable  cargo  of  mer" 
chandise  ;  all  which  were  taken  in  sight  of  the  garrison  ;  so  that  it  is  judged  that 
the  value  of  the  captures  made  on  that  coast,  by  His  Majesty's  ships,  is  near 
£1,000,000,  (if  not  more),  which  it  is  probable  would  never  have  fallen  into  our 
hands  if  this  expedition  had  not  been  attempted. 

I  am,  sir,  Your  Honor's  most  obedient  humble  servant. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Esq.  PHIPPS. 

Sir  William  Pejjperell  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Sir : — I  received  with  pleasure,  your  letter  congratulatory,  in  the  name  of  your 
colony,  upon  the  success  of  His  Majesty's  arms  and  my  command  here ;  and  as  you 
express  the  full  sense  your  colony  has  of  the  consequences  of  this  acquisition  to  the 
trade  and  security  of  the  plantations,  &c.,  and  your  readiness  to  support  the  troopg 
lately  sent  here  by  your  government,  if  His  Majesty  shall  judge  it  necessary,  I  take 
this  opportunity  to  say  to  you,  that  it's  uncertain  when  His  Majesty's  pleasure  will 
be  known  ;  but  it's  my  opinion  that  the  continuance  of  your  troops  here,  and  your 
support  of  them  till  that  time,  will  be  acceptable  to  the  King,  and  that  therefore 
you  make  the  speediest  provision  for  them  during  the  approaching  winter,  of  provi. 
sions  of  various  kinds,  of  good  bedding  and  serviceable  and  warm  clothing,  fit  for 
soldiers,  in  the  most  inclement  climate. 

There  is  a  deficiency  of  twenty-eight  men  in  the  companies  you  sent,  occasioned 
as  per  the  enclosed  note,  a  memorandum  given  me  in,  per  Capt.  Smith.  I  hope  you 
will  not  fail  to  supply  that  vacancy  as  soon  as  possible  ;  and  especially  since  there  is 
a  squadron  of  French  men-of-war  on  or  near  this  coast,  who  may  make  some  sudden 
and  bold  push,  to  our  disadvantage,  if  the  garrison  be  not  well  manned  ;  or  should 
they  return,  and  not  attempt  it  this  fall,  we  may  the  more  reasonably  expect  the 
strongest  efforts  of  that  kind  the  next  spring,  even  before  recruits  may  arrive  here 
from  New  England.  I  am,  with  great  regard,  honorable  sir. 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

Louisbourg,  Sept.  13th,  1745.  WM.  PEPPERELL. 

The  man  [who]  deserted  out  of  Capt.  Champling's  company,  is  one  Joseph 
Story,  whom  I  hope  you  will  secure,  and  send  here  ;  otherwise,  it  may  be  a  great 
encouragement  for  others  to  desert. 

I  am  this  day  informed,  that  one  John  Wood,  who  deserted  from  Boston,  out  of 
Capt.  Chaplin's  company,  and  sent  here  by  Capt.  Thomas  Burden,  never  was 
landed  here,  but  carried  off  by  said  Burden.  I  hope  you  will  call  him  to  account 
for  this,  otherwise,  this  place  may  be  lost  by  such  vile  actions.  W.  P. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Esq. 


144  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 


Admiral  Warren  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Louisbourg,  September  13,  1745. 

Sir: — I  have  the  honor  of  your  favor  of  the  23d  August,  informing  me  of  your 
having  laid  before  the  Assembly  of  your  colony,  my  letters,  with  the  copy  of  His 
Majesty's  order,  by  His  Grace,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  to  the  respective  governors 
of  the  colonies  in  North  America,  to  assist  me  with  men,  provisions  and  shipping 
for  the  relief  of  any  of  His  Majesty's  settlements,  or  for  making  any  attempts  upon 
those  of  the  enemy's. 

Human  prudence  could  not  have  formed  a  more  advantageous  expedition,  for  the 
f^ood  of  the  British  colonies  in  particular,  nor  for  our  country's  interest  in  general) 
than  this ;  the  great  merit  of  which,  I  must  in  justice  attribute  to  the  indefatigable 
pains  taken  by  Governor  Shirley,  who  concerted  and  carried  this  great  design 
into  a  thorough  and  most  successful  execution,  with  the  assistance  of  a  very  few  of 
the  colonies,  and  a  squadron  ot  His  Majesty's  ships,  which  must  be  by  latest  pos- 
terity thought  of  with  the  highest  gratitude  and  honor,  of  those  who  contrived,  as- 
sisted and  executed  so  glorious  an  expedition  ;  upon  the  success  of  which,  the  ease 
and  happiness  of  us  and  our  descendants  does  in  a  very  great  measure  depend. 

You  see,  sir,  I  speak  here,  as  an  American,  and  a  well  wisher  to  the  colonies ; 
and  am  therefore  really  sorry,  the  particular  one  I  mean,  New  York,  to  which  I  am 
nearest  related,  has  not  had  a  greater  share  in  this  great  acquisition  ;  for  it's  a  mis- 
taken notion  in  any  of  the  colonies,  if  they  think  they  are  not  greatly  interested, 
even  the  remotest  of  them,  in  the  reduction  and  support  of  this  conquest,  which  will 
quiet  them  all  in  their  religious  and  civil  rights  and  liberties,  to  latest  times,  against 
a  designing,  encroaching,  and  powerful  enemy,  and  increase  our  trade  in  the  fish, 
fur,  and  many  other  valuable  branches,  to  such  an  advantageous  degree  to  the  colo- 
nies, and  our  mother  country,  as  must  ever  induce  them  to  be  extremely  grateful 
to  those  who  have  opened  so  fair  a  channel  for  the  increase  of  wealth  and  power. 

I  have  now  tired  your  patience  with  my  inaccurate  manner  of  letting  you  into 
the  importance  of  this  acquisition  to  His  Majesty's  dominion,  which  will  no  doubt 
be  on  the  other  hand  looked  upon  by  our  enemies,  as  the  greatest  loss  they  could 
have  sustained ;  and  there  is,  therefore,  the  greatest  room  to  believe  they  will  use 
all  their  efforts  to  regain  it,  and  that  as  soon  as  possible ;  and  may  be  before  His 
Majesty  can,  under  the  many  difficulties  he  labors  at  home  in,  [in]  a  war  against 
two  powerful  nations,  and  especially  so  late  In  the  season,  take  the  protection  of  it 
upon  himself. 

It  will  therefore  be  of  the  highest  consequence,  and  will  greatly  endear  all  bis 
American  subjects  concerned  in  this  atfalr  to  His  Majesty,  if  animated  with  the 
same  zeal  with  which  they  gloriously  undertook  to  reduce  this  conquest  to  his  obe- 
dience, they  support  it  till  his  royal  pleasure  shall  be  known ;  when,  I  make  no 
doubt,  the  heavy  expense  that  has  attended  (he  colonics  upon  this  occasion,  will,  to 
a  sliUling,  be  reimbursed.  These  arc  all  circumstances,  that  in  my  weak  ap- 
prehension, are  worthy  of  your,  and  your  legislature's  most  serious  attention. 

As  to  the  number  of  your  troops,  that  you  imagine  will  be  necessary,  as  your 
quota  for  the  support  of  this  garrison,  I  beg  leave  to  refer  that  to  Governor  Shirley? 
as  the  better  judge,  who  informs  me  he  will  write  to  you  on  that  head. 

I  hope  you  will  dn  me  the  honor  to  return  my  hearty  thanks  to  your  Assembly  for 


1745.] 


AND    PKOVIDENGE    PLANTATIONS.  145 


their  kind  expressions,  and  good  opinion  of  me,  and  assure  tliem  nothin-r  shall  be 
wanting  that  may  ever  be  within  the  compass  of  my  power,  or  poor  capacity  for 
their  service,  and  that  of  the  colonies  in  general,  but  in  particular  those  most  con- 
cerned in  the  reduction  of  this  strong  fortress,  which  must  plainly  convince  His 
Majesty,  and  all  the  people  of  Great  Britain,  of  their  love  and  loyalty. 

That  you  and  your  legislature  may  ever  act  consistently  with  the  general  interest 
of  our  mother  country,  and  that  of  your  own,  and  all  her  colonies,  which  I  look 
upon  as  inseparable,  is  the  sincerest  wish  of,         Hon'ble  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant. 

To  the  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Esq.  p.  WARREN. 

As  I  expect  to  leave  these  seas  ere  long,  you'll  please  to  address  for  the  return  of 
Capt.  Fones,  and  on  any  future  service,  to  the  commanding  officer  of  this  garrison- 
Its  greatest  danger,  I  apprehend,  will  be  from  the  latter  end  of  February,  till  May  or 
June  ;  and  to  be  sure  till  that  time,  or  till  succors  arrive  from  England,  the  colonies 
should  not  keep  less  than  four  or  five  thousand  men  to  support  it. 

I  am  yours,  as  before,  P.  WARREN. 

Governor  Wanton,  to  the  Agent  of  Rhode  Island,  in  London. 

Newport,  on  Rhode  Island,  Xber  20th,  1746. 

Sir: — The  conduct  of  this  colony  relating  to  the  Cape  Breton  expedition,  having 
been,  as  your  letters  advise,  very  unjustly  misrepresented  at  home,  with  a  view  to 
prejudice  the  ministry  against  us,  the  General  Assembly  have  directed  that  a  true 
account  thereof  should  be  transmitted  to  you,  which  we  doubt  not,  will  enable  you 
fully  to  vindicate  our  colony,  which  hath  always  distinguished  itself  by  joining  with 
readiness  and  zeal  in  all  expeditions  ordered  by  the  crown. 

The  reduction  of  Louisbourg,  we  always  thought  would  be  of  very  great  impor- 
tance, as  well  to  the  trade  and  commerce  of  Great  Britain,  as  of  the  northern  plan- 
tations, and  thei-efbre  expected  and  hoped  it  would  be  undertaken  at  home  in  the 
course  of  the  war  ;  but  we  judged  the  attempt  to  reduce  that  prodigiously  strong  town, 
regularly  fortified,  and  furnished  with  a  garrison  of  regular  forces,  to  be  much  too 
hazardous,  as  well  as  too  expensive  for  New  England,  as  not  having  one  officer  of 
experience,  or  even  an  engineer ;  and  the  people  being  entirely  ignorant  in  the  art 
of  encamping  and  besieging  towns,  and  were  therefore  greatly  surprised  at  hearing 
that  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  had  voted  to  make  said  attempt. 

At  first,  while  it  was  supposed  that  Governor  Shirley  had  secret  instructions  to 
raise  men,  and  an  assurance  of  a  sufficient  addition  of  sea  and  land  forces  from 
Great  Britain,  our  people  were  zealous  in  the  affair  ;  but  when  it  was  known  that 
he  had  no  orders  at  all,  not  so  much  as  a  discretionary  power  to  stop  some  of  His 
Majesty's  ships  then  at  Boston,  a  thing  of  the  last  importance  to  the  blocking  up  the 
harbor  of  Louisbourg,  no  assurance  that  the  ministry  would  approve  of  the  under- 
taking, or  make  any  provision  to  support  it,  or  that  the  state  of  affairs  in  Europe 
would  permit  the  sending  such  a  force  from  Great  Britain,  as  seemed  necessary,  to 
render  the  expedition  successful,  surely,  'tis  no  wonder  that  our  zeal  abated,  and 
that  we  were  not  very  forward  to  precipitate  an  attempt,  in  which  a  failure  must 
needs  have  been  of  fatal  consequence,  as  it  would  have  exposed  the  weakness  of  the 
northern  plantations,  and  disabled  them  from  assisting,  if  the  crown  should  thmk  fit  to 
order  such  au  expedition  ;  that  the  Massachusetts  themselves  were  very  doubtful  of 

VOL.  V.  10 


146  RECOUDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    KHODE    ISLAND  [1745. 

success,  cannot  be  denied,  for  the  undertaking  of  the  expedition  was  carried  but  by 
one  single  voice,  in  their  house  of  representatives. 

When  they  first  applied  to  us  for  assistance,  the  colony  had  anticipated  all  their 
funds,  to  defray  the  charge  of  the  fatal  expedition  against  Carthagcna ;  the  tax  for  put- 
tin"-  the  colony  in  a  posture  of  defence,  was  unpaid,  the  people  burthened  with  the 
expense  of  defending  our  charter  privileges  and  carrying  on  the  suitaboutour  boun- 
daries, and  the  bill  depending  in  Parliament  about  paper  currency  of  such  a  nature, 
as  made  it  hazardous  to  emit  at  this  juncture  any  large  sums  :  and  also  the  colony 
was  then  drained  of  men  to  an  uncommon  degree  ;  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  sent 
away  in  the  West  India  expedition,  not  twenty  had  returned  ;  we  had  lost  many  in 
our  privateers,  and  had  eight  or  ten  sail  then  cruising  ;  so  that  it  was  not  practicable 
to  raise  such  a  number  as  was  desired  ;  besides,  we  had  not  the  same  dependence  up- 
on, and  expectation  of  advantages  from  the  fishery  as  the  Massachusetts  and  New 
Hampshire  had,  which  undoubtedly  was  a  main  inducement  to  their  people  to  list 
so  cheerfully  as  they  did. 

But  notwithstanding  all  this,  the  General  Assembly  voted  to  send  our  colony  sloop, 
well  manned,  permitted  the  Governor  of  Boston  to  endeavor  to  raise  men  in  the 
pay  of  the  Province ,  and  voted  an  additional  bounty  of  forty  shillings  a  man  to  in- 
duce them  to  list,  but  to  no  efiect. 

On  further  application  to  us,  in  March  last,  the  General  Assembly  voted  to  raise 
three  companies,  of  fifty  men  each,  exclusive  of  officers ;  and  offered  as  large  pay, 
and  a  higher  bounty  than  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  had  given  ;  but  it 
being  found  impracticable  to  fill  the  companies  in  season,  the  then  Governor,  after 
we  had  been  at  a  considerable  expense,  ordered  the  men  that  were  raised,  to  be 
disbanded.  However,  our  colony's  sloop,  mounting  fourteen  carriage  and  twelve 
swivel  guns,  well  fitted  and  manned,  convoyed  the  Connecticut  forces,  and  provtd 
of  singular  service,  by  preventing  their  entire  ruin  from  a  French  two-and-thirty 
gun  ship  ;  and  afterwards  in  the  Gut  of  Canso,  by  repelling,  in  conjunction  with 
two  other  cruisers,  a  large  body  of  French  and  Indians,  who  were  going  to  the  re- 
lief of  Loulsbourg. 

Some  merchants  and  other  inhabitants  of  this  town,  subscribed  about  i!  7,000 
towards  the  pay  of  a  privateer,  manned,  and  in  part  owned  here  ;  but  the  greater 
part  of  said  sum  being  still  to  pay,  and  it  being  probable  that  the  whole  never  will 
be  paid,  the  subscription  being  a  private  one,  not  countenanced  by  any  authority, 
we  lay  no  great  stress  on  that  particular. 

In  May,  we  had  advice  that  the  ministry  approved  of  the  expedition,  and  that  Com. 
modore  Warren  was  arrived  ofV  Louisbourg  with  a  squadron  of  His  Majesty's  ships. 
The  General  Assembly  did  then  renew  their  vote  to  raise  three  companies ;  and  that 
it  might  be  effectual,  increased  the  bounty,  and  raised  the  pay  to  £10  per  month  a 
man,  double  of  what  the  Massachusetts  allowed  theirs.  But  to  complete  said  com- 
panies, [we]  were  notwithstanding  obliged  to  order  that  men  should  be  impressed 
into  the  service,  as  several  actually  were  ;  a  thing  not  done  by  order  of  Assembly, 
in  any  other  part  of  New  England,  and  scarce  ever  practiced  here  before  ;  and  on 
notice  that  seamen  were  wanted  to  man  the  ship  Vigilant,  voted  to  raise  two  hun- 
dred, allowing  a  bounty  of  £17  to  a  man.  But  such  was  the  scarcity  of  men,  that 
though  the  bounty  was  so  large,  and  the  most  effectual  means  used,  (for  we  had 
again, recourse  to  impressing,  and  allowed  said  bounty  even  to  the  impressed  men.) 
that  we  could  raise  only  about  seventy.  The  good  news  of  the  surrender  of  Louls- 
bourg, had  reached  Boston   before  our  transports  sailed   from  thence,  having  lain 


1745.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  147 


there  some  days  for  convoy ;  yet  they  proceeded  [on]  the  voyage,  and  are  now  in 
garrison  ;  and  we  have  lately  sent  a  vessel  to  Louisbourg,  with  clothin<T  and  provi- 
sions sufficient  tor  their  support,  till  late  in  the  spring. 

This  is  the  assistance  we  have  given,  which  was  really  the  utmost  we  were  able 
to  give,  the  colony  having  never  exerted  itself  with  more  zeal  and  vigor  on  any  oc- 
casion ;  and  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that  no  other  of  the  neighborino-  trovernments, 
besides  Connecticut  and  New  Hampshire,  could  be  induced,  at  the  first,  to  give  any 
assistance  at  all ;  nor  afterwards,  of  all  of  them  together,  to  give  so  much  and  such 
effectual  assistance,  as  this  little  colony  cheerfully  afforded,  at  the  hazard  of  leaving 
our  sea  coast  unguarded,  and  our  navigation  exposed  to  the  enemy's  privateers 
from  the  beginning  of  April  to  the  latter  end  of  October,  during  which  time,  our 
colony's  sloop  was  in  the  service. 

We  herewith  enclose  the  several  acts  of  Assembly,*  whereby  you  will  be  ac- 
quainted with  our  whole  proceedings  in  this  affair  ;  and  you  may  make  use  of  them 
as  you  shall  think  necessary,  to  set  the  conduct  of  the  colony  in  a  true  light ;  we 
also  send  you  two  original  letters,  one  from  General  Pepperell,  the  other  from 
Commodore  Warren,  directed  to  the  Governor,  wherein  you  will  find  their  ac- 
knowledgments of  receiving  the  three  companies  of  land  forces,  and  the  seamen  for 
manning  the  Vigilant.  The  commodore  particularly  mentions  our  colony's  sloop 
being  serviceable  ;  but  for  full  proof  of  the  great  and  extraordinary  assistance  she 
has  given,  we  refer  you  to  the  enclosed  certificate,  signed  by  Major  General  Wol- 
cot;  so  you  have  vouchers  from  the  three  principal  commanding  officers  in  the  ex- 
pedition, v/hich  fully  and  clearly  prove  the  absolute  falsehood  of  that  aspersion  cast 
on  us  by  our  enemies,  viz. :  that  we  afforded  no  assistance  in  the  undertaking. 

When  our  conduct  is  truly  represented,  and  the  smallness  of  our  colony  consid- 
ered, being  not  a  fourth  part  so  large  as  Connecticut,  we  are  persuaded  all  impartial 
judges  must  allow  that  we  have  contributed  our  full  (juota ;  but  at  the  same  time,  we 
cannot  but  think,  that  if  we  had  afforded  no  assistance  at  all,  we  could  not  therefore 
have  justly  been  deemed  disloyal,  inasmuch  as  we  had  no  orders  from  His  Majesty 
relating  to  this  expedition,  those  signified  by  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  to  assist  Com- 
modore Warren,  not  being  received  till  the  12th  of  July. 

And  'tis  really  surprising,  that  this  colony,  which  thus  generously  assisted  the 
Massachusetts  in  gaining  and  securing  this  important  conquest,  should  not  escape 
their  unjust  censures  and  aspersions,  when  they  arc  so  sparing  of  their  reflections 
on  the  neighboring  governments,  namely.  New  York,  New  Jersey  and  Pennsylva- 
nia, which  gave  them  little  or  no  assistance,  though  they  were  as  much  exposed  to  the 
privateers  from  Cape  Breton  as  we,  and  will  reap  the  same  advantages  by  the  re- 
duction of  it.  This  makes  it  evident,  that  our  avowed  enemies,  the  Massachusetts, 
are  for  catching  at  every  shadow  of  advantage,  whereby  they  imagine  they  may 
prejudice  us,  and  gain  their  point,  concerning  the  boundaries  ;  but  surely,  'tis  no  re- 
commendation of  a  cause,  that  it  stands  in  need  of  calumny  and  slander  for  its 
support. 

As  to  the  complaint  of  our  harboring  and  countenancing  deserters  from  His  Maj- 
esty's ships,  we  say  that  the  charge  is  absolutely  false  and  injurious ;  we  challenge 
our  adversaries  to  prove  any  one  instance  of  it ;  on  the  contrary,  we  have  at  all 
times  shown  the  utmost  respect  to  the  captains  of  His  Majesty's  ships,  when  they 


*  Tlie  acts  are  printed   at  length   iu   tliese   Records,  or  will  be  found  in  the  public  laws, 
for  17 17. 


148  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE    ISLAND  [1745. 

have  put  into  this  port,  and  have  been  always  ready  to  assist  them  in  the  apprehend- 
ing deserters,  and  furnishing  them  with  every  thing  in  our  power,  for  the  service 
of  His  Majesty. 

We  agree  with  you,  in  the  opinion,  that  when  the  Parliament  meets,  the  expense 
of  this  expedition,  or  great  part  of  it,  will  be  paid  by  the  nation,  if  authentic  ac- 
counts thereof,  are  sent  over,  and  proper  application  made  ;  and  for  that  purpose^ 
herewith  transmit  to  you  the  accounts  of  what  expense  this  colony  has  been  at,  in 
the  most  complete  manner  we  can  at  present ;  but  as  our  forces  are  not  yet  re- 
turned, but  still  remain  at  Louisbourg,  in  our  pay,  we  cannot  tell  what  further  ex- 
])ense  we  shall  be  at. 

We  make  no  doubt  of  your  zeal,  not  only  in  vindicating  the  colony  against  the 
aspersions  of  our  enemies,  but  also  in  making  proper  application  for  obtaining  the 
reimbursement  of  what  we  have  expended  in  this  expedition,  in  the  same  manner 
as  shall  be  granted  to  the  other  governments  concerned  therein.  And  if  the  ac. 
counts  we  now  send,  should  want  any  further  explanations  or  vouchf  rs,  we  expect 
you  will  immediately  give  us  notice  thereof,  that  we  may  furnish  you  with  every 
thing  necessary  to  render  them  authentic. 

T  am,  &c.,  &c.,  GIDEON  WANTON. 

To  I\Ir.  Eichard  Partridge,  merchant,  in  London. 

P.  S.  Please  to  observe  that  we  have  made  no  charge  of  arms  or  beds  for  our 
soMiers  ;  both  those  articles  being  to  be  returned  after  the  service  is  over.  We 
could  not  come  at  an  absolute  certainty,  about  the  pay  of  our  forces.  You  will  see 
we  have  charged  for  three  full  companies  for  six  months,  which,  though  it  is  not 
strictly  true,  one  of  our  captains,  and  several  of  the  soldiers  having  died  at  Louis- 
bourg, before  they  had  been  so  long  in  the  service,  and  our  three  companies  re- 
duced to  two,  by  act  of  Assembly  ;  yet,  we  apprehend  that  the  sum  carried  out,  ia 
not  too  large,  and  that  there  will  be,  at  least,  so  much  due  to  our  forces  before  they 
are  dismissed. 


Admiral  Sir  Peter  Warrm,  to  Governor  Wanlou. 

Louisbourg,  November  iOtli,  1745. 

Sir:— His  Grace,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  having,  by  his  letter  of  the  10th  Au- 
gust, signified  to  me,  that  their  Excellencies,  the  Lords  Justices,  had  been  pleased 
to  recommend  me  to  His  Majesty,  (then  at  Hanover),  to  be  appointed  governor  of 
Louisbourg,  and  that  I  may  expect  my  commission  for  that  purpose,  by  the  next 
opportunity ;  therefore,  as  this  garrison  is  much  weakened  by  the  return  home  of 
several  of  the  New  England  forces,  and  by  sickness,  which  is  common  to  all  towns 
that  have  been  for  any  time  besieged,  though  otherwise  very  healthy,  as  is  the  case 
of  this,  by  all  accounts. 

And  as  His  Majesty  has  shown  the  highest  satisfaction  in  the  reduction  of  this  im- 
portant garrison  to  his  obedience,  by  his  American  subjects,  in  conjunction  with  a 
s(iuadron  of  his  ships  ;  so  he  has  manifested  his  royal  intention  to  ])rolect  it  against 
any  attempts  that  may  be  made  by  the  French  to  recover  it,  by  ordering  immedi- 
ately two  regiments  from  Giijraltar,  under  a  strong  convoy,  and  several  ordnance 
and  other  store  ships,  from  England,  with  all  manner  of  necessaries  proper  for  the 
support  of  the  troops  and  garrison  ;  all  which,  may  be  daily  expected  here,  if  the 


1745.]  AND   PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  149 

season  should  not  prevent  them.  In  such  case,  'tis  probable  they  may  winter  in  the 
West  Indies,  where  those  regiments  may  be  disabled  by  sickness  and  other  disasters 
and  possibly  not  arrive  so  early  in  the  spring  as  to  prevent  any  attempt  upon  us  by 
the  enemy,  who,  I  am  credibly  informed,  are  at  this  time  in  motion,  at  Canada,  with 
a  design  to  attack  us  this  winter,  or  very  early  in  the  spring. 

Therefore,  in  order  to  frustrate  all  their  designs,  and  do  every  thing  that  human 
prudence  can  suggest,  for  the  security  of  this  important  acquisition,  I  hope,  upon 
this  my  representation,  the  same  laudable  zeal  which  animated  you  and  your  le'^is- 
lature  to  undertake  this  expedition,  will  induce  you  to  take  all  proper  measures  to 
preserve  an  acquisition  of  such  consequence  to  our  country  in  general,  and  all  the 
colonies  in  particular. 

The  properest  method  I  can  think  of,  to  support  it,  is  immediately  to  raise  in 
your  government  as  many  men  as  you  can,  to  be  here  [by]  the  beginning  of  March, 
at  farthest,  provided  with  a  quota  of  provisions  for  their  own  support,  for  two  or 
three  months,  lest  by  any  means  we  should  be  shortened  here. 

Any  expense  that  you  may  be  at  upon  upon  this  occasion,  or  any  other,  for  the 
support  of  this  garrison,  I  apprehend  it  in  the  power  of  General  Pepperell  and  me, 
to  defray,  by  bills  ot  exchange  upon  the  government  at  home  ;  and  that  you  may 
be  the  clearer  in  this  my  apprehension,  I  send  you  the  paragraph  of  His  Grace,  the 
Duke  of  Newcastle's  letter,  that  empowers  us  to  draw  for  the  expenses  of  this  garri- 
son. Whatever  terms  you  shall  make  with  such  men  as  you  raise  for  this  serviiie, 
shall  be  punctually  observed  and  complied  with,  whether  they  choose  to  serve  the 
King  for  any  limited  time  in  the  American  forces,  (of  whom  His  Majesty  has  it 
under  his  royal  consideration  to  establish  one  or  more  regiments,  for  the  encourage- 
ment of  the  officers  and  men  that  have,  or  shall  distinguish  themselves,)  or  return,  or 
choose  to  stay  as  inhabitants,  and  settle  here,  upon  such  encouragement  as,  by  His 
Majesty's  instructions,  I  shall  be  hereafter  be  empowered  to  give. 

I  am  sorry  that  the  terms  of  Governor  Shirlev  's  proclamation  upon  the  first  en- 
listment of  the  soldiers  for  this  expedition,  could  not  be  complied  with,  in  the  sense 
in  which  many  (I  don't  say  with  what  color  of  reason,)  have  [construed]  them. 
The  only  way  to  have  obviated  this  subject  of  complaint  would  have  been  (as  His 
Majesty  could  not  immediately  take  this  place  under  his  own  protection.)  to  have 
raised  and  sent  a  freshbody  of  men,to  have  relieved  such  of  the  troops  as  had  an  in- 
clination to  return  home. 

The  disappointment  the  trading  people  have  met  with  here,  has  given  no  one 
more  uneasiness  than  myself  When  the  government  is  put  upon  a  regular  footing, 
a  free  port  opened,  and  a  civil  government  established,  as  I  imagine  the  case  will 
be,  (having  recommended  it  in  the  strongest  manner,)  the  traffic  that  may  be  car- 
ried on  here,  must  be  of  very  considerable  advantage  to  the  neighboring  colonics. 

I  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  you,  upon  the  happy  success  Governor 
Clinton,  and  the  other  commissioners  have  had  in  their  negotiations  with  the  Six 
Nations. 

Governor  Shirley  and  I  have  sent  some  captive  Indians,  to  consult  with  those  of 
Nova  Scotia,  upon  the  terms  of  a  peace  which  they  themselves  have  proposed.  I 
dare  hope  this  step  will  have  a  good  effect,  especially  as  I  have  the  assurances  of 
the  Duke  of  Newclastle,  that  proper  presents  may  be  expected  from  England,  for 
those  people. 

I  cannot  conclude  without  observing,  that  it  appears  to  me  to  be  of  the  greatest 
moment  towards  securing,  and  rendering  this  acquisition  most  extensively  useful  to 


150  RECOKDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

His  Majesty's  subjects,  that  the  getleman  with  -whom  the  government  of  this  garri- 
son is  entrusted,  should  (at  least  during  the  war,  or  till  the  country  is  well  peopled,) 
be  an  officer  who  has  the  command  at  sea,  who  would  by  that  means  always  be  sure 
of  men,  as  well  as  shipping  and  materials  requisite  to  annoy  the  enemy  in  their 
navigation  to  Canada  ;  and  I  flatter  myself  it  is  no  unfortnate  event  for  this  place, 
or  the  colonies  in  general,  (whose  interest  I  have  greatly  at  heart,)  that  I  am  (at 
this  critical  juncture,)  appointed  to  act  in  both  those  stations  ;  though  that  of  gov- 
ernor is  so  disagreeable  to  me,  that  I  shall  use  all  my  endeavors  to  be  relieved  aa 
soon  as  possible. 

You  will  do  me  the  justice  to  believe  that  my  zealous  attachment  to  the  interests 
of  His  Majesty,  and  his  American  provinces,  would  alone  induce  me  to  promote,  to 
the  utmost  of  my  abilities,  everything  I  judged  conducive  thereto ;  be  pleased) 
nevertheless,  to  observe,  that  I  am  authorized  in  the  fullest  manner,  by  His  Grace' 
the  Duke  of  Newcastle's  circular  letter,  which  I  formerly  sent  you,  dated  at  White- 
hall, January  3d,  1 744-5,  to  make  this  application  to  you. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

P.  WARREN. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Esq. 

Sir  Peter  Warren  and  Gen.  Sir  Wni.  Pepinrell  io  Governor  Wan- 
ton, of  Bhode  Island. 

Louisbourg,  January  25th,  1745-G. 

Sir: — By  letters  from  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  of  the  10th  of  August  last,  we 
were  advised  that  His  Majesty  was  determined  forthwith  to  provide  for  the  effectual 
support  of  this  valuable  acquisition  ;  and  that,  in  order  thereto,  two  regiments  were 
ordered  here  from  Gibraltar,  and  several  vessels  with  stores,  from  England  ;  but 
none  of  them  are  yt  t  arrived  here,  and  we  apprehend  it  probable  that  the  troops 
are  not  yet  embarked  ;  and  as  it  must  be  expected  that  the  enemy  will  make  the 
earliest  and  most  vigorous  efTorts  possible,  to  regain  this  important  fortress  next 
spring,  we  may  probably  be  blocked  up  before  those  troops  can  gain  their  passage 
from  Gibraltar  hither ;  and  as  a  mortal  sickness  (chiefly  a  fever)  has  for  some  time 
past  prevailed  in  the  garrison,  and  has  carried  off  considerable  numbers,  and  still 
continues  to  do  so,  Cthough  we  hope  it  is  abating,)  our  duty  to  His  Majesty  re- 
(juires  us  to  acquaint  you  (as  the  protection  of  this  acquisition  for  the  present,  and 
till  ]Mr.  Warren's  commission  for  the  government,  which  is  daily  expected,  arrives, 
is  recommended  to  our  joint  care,)  that  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  His  Majesty's 
service,  as  well  as  the  honor  and  interest  of  the  colonies,  that  new  levies  of  men  be 
raised  there,  for  the  support  of  this  garrison,  until  a  sufficient  number  of  British 
troops  shall  arrive  here. 

We  have,  by  an  express,  who  sailed  the  23d  instant,  for  England,  to  inform  the 
ministry  of  the  circumstances  of  this  garrison,  acquainted  them  that  we  should  make 
application  to  you  and  the  other  governments  in  the  colonies,  for  the  necessary  as- 
sistance herein. 

And  we  cannot  doubt  but  that  your  loyalty  and  zeal  for  His  Majesty's  service, 
and  the  interest  of  your  own  and  neighboring  governments,  will  prompt  you  to  use 
your  utmost  endeavors  (as  you  have  already  shown  your  readiness  to  contribute  to 
tiie  security  as  well  as  conquest   of  this  place,)  that  a  proper  quota  of  troops  from 


1745.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  151 


your  government,  be  accordingly  sent  here  as  early  in  the  spring  as  the  season  will 
possibly  admit  of,  (which  may  be  the  beginning  of  March,)  sufficient  not  only  to 
sustain  the  place  against  any  attack  of  an  enemy,  but  also  to  relieve  the  troops  now 
here,  who  have  (most  of  them)  undergone  the  fatigues  of  the  siege,  as  well  as  the 
duty  of  protecting  the  place  since,  and  who  justly  expect  to  be  relieved,  and  allowed 
to  return  home  in  the  spring,  agreeably  to  the  terms  upon  which  they  first 
enlisted. 

If  no  Bi'itish  troops  arrive,  (which  may  be  the  case,)  four,  or  at  least  three  thou- 
sand men,  will  be  necessary  to  be  raised  for  the  defence  of  this  place  next  year ; 
and  as  the  garrison  is  already  much  weakened  by  the  sickness  and  mortality  among 
us,  and  may  possibly  be  much  more  so,  we  must  press  your  most  speedy  and  vigor- 
ous endeavors  to  assist  in  reinforcing  it,  before  the  arrival  of  an  enemy's  force  shall 
render  it  hazardous  or  impracticable  ;  as  a  neglect  herein,  may  prove  of  the  most 
fatal  consequence,  and  justly  render  those,  at  whose  door  the  fault  shall  lie,  highly 
obnoxious  to  His  Majesty's  displeasure. 

You  may,  sir,  assure  such  levies  as  shall  be  raised  for  this  purpose,  that  they  shall 
not  be  detained  here  contrary  to  their  will,  after  the  arrival  of  a  British  force  suffi- 
cient for  the  security  of  the  place ;  and  that  they  may  depend  upon  the  strictest  jus- 
tice, and  all  the  good  offices  in  our  power  ;  and  we  make  no  doubt  but  great  encour" 
agement  will  be  given  to  them  and  others  to  settle  this  island. 

We  have  lately  had  the  disagreeable  news  of  one  of  the  store  ships  bound  to  this 
place,  being  cast  away,  and  entirely  lost  on  this  island,  on  the  27th  of  December 
last.  By  three  seamen,  who  were  the  only  persons  saved  of  twenty-four  on  board, 
we  learn  that  she  saded  from  England  about  the  last  of  October,  in  company  with 
several  other  ships,  bound  here  with  stores,  under  convoy  of  the  Kinsale  man-of- 
war,  and  lost  company  with  them  near  the  Banks  of  Newfoundland,  about 
three  weeks  before  their  disaster ;  since  which  we  have  heard  of  nothing  of  the 
others,  nor  any  further  account  of  the  troops  we  had  reason  to  expect  from 
Gibraltar.  We  are,  with  great  regard,  sir, 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servants. 

P.  WARREN, 
WM.  PEPPERELL. 

[Sir  William  Pepperell,  was  an  American  merchant,  living  in  the  state  of  Maine. 
About  the  year  1727,  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  His  Majesty's  council,  of  the 
Province  of  Massachusetts,  to  which  place  he  was  annually  elected  until  his  dcath^ 
a  period  of  thirty-two  years.  Possessing  a  vigorous  frame,  firm  mind,  and  great 
coolness  when  in  danger,  he  was  admirably  adapted  for  a  residence  in  a  country  ex- 
posed to  a  ferocious  enemy,  and  soon  attained  the  rank  of  colonel.  He  commanded 
the  expedition  against  Louisburg,  at  the  time  it  capitulated.  After  this  brilliant 
achievement,  he  went  to  England,  where  he  received  a  first  colonency,  in  the 
army;  in  1755,  the  rank  of  Major  General;  and  two  years  after  that,  of  Lieut. 
General.  He  Avas  also  rewarded  with  the  dignity  of  baronet,  the  thanks  of  the 
ministry,  and  a  peculiar  token  of  respect  from  the  royal  family.  Portraits  of  Sir 
William  and  his  wife,  are  preserved  at  Portsmouth,  New  Hampshire,  and  at  Sa- 
lem, Massachusetts.  He  died  at  his  residence,  near  Portsmouth,  June  6,  1759,  at 
the  age  of  sixty-three  years.  Sir  William  was  succeeded  by  his  grandson,  William 
H.  Sparhawk,  who  assumed  his  name,  and  was  created  a  baronet.  He  was  a  loy- 
alist during  the  Revolution,  and  died  in  London,  December  17,  181G,  when  the 
title  became  extinct. — J.  R.  B.] 


152  EECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1745. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Asscmbl/j,  held  for  ihe  Colomj  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Soidh  Kimjstoimi,  the 
last  Wednesday/  of  October,  174.5. 

The  lion.  Gicleou  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Robinson,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  the  regulation  of  the  soldiers  that  remain  alive  at 
Louisbourg,  on  the  island  of  Cape  Breton,  and  appointing  a 
commissary  for  the  care  of  the  provisions,  and  other  necessa- 
ries, for  their  subsistence. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 
by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  soldiers  remain- 
ing alive,  belonging  to  the  company  lately  commanded  by 
Capt.  Joshua  Champlin,  at  the  island  of  Cape  Breton,  be  added 
to  the  other  two  companies  in  the  service  of  this  colony ;  and 
that  the  officers  of  said  company  be  allowed  half  pay  till  further 
orders  from  the  General  Assembly ;  provided,  that  they  stay 
there. 

And  that  a  commissary  be  appointed  for  the  forces  there,  in 
tlie  service  of  this  colony,  who  shall  keep  an  exact  account  of 
what  provisions  he  shall  receive  and  deliver  out ;  and  for  said 
service  shall  be  allowed  £18  per  month;  and  for  the  due  per- 
formance of  his  office,  shall  give  bond,  with  sureties,  to  the 
general  treasurer,  in  the  full  value  of  the  provisions  he  shall 
reccivo. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
tlio  paragraph  of  an  act  passed  by  the  General  Assembly,  at 
their  session  held  on  the  fourth  Tuesday  in  September  last 
])ast,  directing  the  provisions  to  be  delivered  to  the  captains  or 
commanding  officers,  for  the  time  being,  of  each  of  the  afore- 
said companies,  to  be  by  them  distributed  and  given  out  to  the 


1745.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  153 

men  belonging  thereto,  be  repealed,  and  it  is  hereby  repealed ; 
the  same  being  the  proper  business  of  the  commissary. 

And  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write  to  Capt.  Daniel 
Fones,  commander  of  the  colony  sloop  Tartar,  at  the  island  of 
Cape  Breton,  and  order  him  with  said  sloop  and  company,  to  re- 
turn home  to  Newport,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Benjamin  Hassard,  Esq.,  INIessrs 
Peter  Bours,  Samuel  Wickhara,  Robert  Hassard  and  Edward 
Scott,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  they,  or 
the  major  part  of  them,  to  take  into  consideration  the  agent's 
letters  now  presented  to  this  Assembly,  and  to  furnish  him  with 
proper  instructions  relating  to  the  matters  therein  contained, 
and  to  be  signed  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  and  sent  home  as 
soon  as  conveniently  may  be ;  and  a  copy  thereof  to  be  laid 
before  this  Assembly,  at  their  next  session ;  and  that  His 
Honor,  the  Governor,  send  home,  with  said  instructions,  such 
original  letters  or  copies  thereof,  as  he  shall  think  proper. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  connmittee  that  was  appointed 
to  procure  a  plan  of  Fort  George  and  the  harbor  of  Newport, 
procure  another  draught  or  plan  of  said  fort  and  harbor,  ex- 
actly as  the  same  now  are,  and  present  the  same  to  His  Honor. 
the  Governor,  to  be  signed  by  him  and  the  surveyor,  to  be 
sent  home,  with  the  plan  already  drawn,  in  order  to  show  the 
present  circumstances  of  said  fort  and  harbor,  as  well  as 
what  alteration  is  proposed  to  be  made ;  and  that  the  said  com- 
mittee procure  a  piece  of  plate,  to  the  value  of  £75,  and  pre- 
sent the  same  to  INIr.  Peter  Harrison,  for  his  trouble  in  surveying 
and  making  a  draught  of  said  fort  and  harbor,  and  draw 
money  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  pay  for  the  same. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Peter  Bours,  Esq.,  be,  and  he  is 
hereby  appointed  to  wait  upon  the  Hon.  Roger  Wolcott,  Esq.^ 
deputy  governor  of  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  and  major  gen- 
eral of  the  forces  that  reduced  Cape  Breton,  and  request  of  him 
a  certificate  of  what  he  knows  respecting  the  conduct  of  this 
colony,  relating  to  the  expedition  against  Cape  Breton,  and 
more  especially  as  to  the  service  that  our  colony  sloop  has 
been  in  said  expedition. 

VOL.  V.  20 


154  EECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

[It  appears  that  complaints  against  Rhode  Island  were  made  to  the  King,  for  the 
backwardness  of  the  latter,  in  sending  assistance  to  the  expedition,  against  Cape 
Breton.  This  fact  was  made  known  to  Richard  Partridge,  the  agent  of  Rhode  Is- 
land, in  London,  by  Mr.  Ramsden,  secretary  to  the  Lords  Justices,  who  at  once 
took  measures  to  refute  the  calumny,  by  addressing  an  ofBcial  note  to  the  secretary, 
dated  the  5  th  month  30th,  1745,  to  be  communicated  by  him  to  the  Duke  of  New- 
castle. In  this,  he  says,  that  "  although  there  are  disputes  depending  between  the 
government  of  Rhode  Island,  (which  is  but  a  small  colony,)  and  that  of  the  great 
province  of  the  Massachusetts;  and  that  said  colony  had  no  orders  about  the  said 
expedition  from  Great  Britain,  and  consequently  it  could  be  no  disobedience  or  dis- 
respect in  them  to  the  crown;  yet  it  is  notorious  and  apparent,  that  there  was  an 
armed  sloop  of  war  belonging  to  Rhode  Island,  at  Cape  Breton,  with  our  ships, 
when  that  place  was  taken,"  etc.  He  also  states,  that  men  were  sent,  "  that  the 
merchants  of  Rhode  Island  advanced  £8,000  amongst  themselves,  and  hired  a 
twenty -gun  ship  to  be  employed  in  that  service."  And  in  alluding  to  the  people  of 
Rhode  Island,  says : 

"  Their  loyalty  and  obedience  to  the  crown  heretofore,  is  well  known  ;  for  that 
whenever  there  has  been  any  expedition  ordered  from  Great  Britain,  to  be  exe- 
cuted in  North  America,  the  Rhode  Islanders  have  always  paid  due  obedience  to 
the  crown,  and  afforded  their  quotas  ;  particularly  in  the  wars  of  the  late  Queen,  in 
the  expedition  against  Annapolis  Royal,  and  against  Canada ;  and  that  in  the  sea 
war  at  that  time,  the  New  Englanders  must  confess  that  the  privateers  from  this 
colony  of  Rhode  Island,  did  more  execution  against  the  enemy's  privateers  that  in- 
fested their  coasts,  than  all  the  ships  of  the  Massachusetts,  or  indeed  of  all  the  colo- 
nies in  those  parts  put  together." 

The  agent,  Mr.  Partridge,  under  date  of  5mo.  23d,  1745,  communicated  these 
same  facts  to  Governor  Wanton,  and  apprises  him  that  he  had  written  to  the  clerk 
of  the  council  about  the  matter,  "  which  he  seemed  to  take  well,  and  reckoned  ne- 
cessary ;"  and  adds,  "  I  wish  thou  couklst  get  a  few  lines  from  Capt.  Warren,  and 
send  me  a  justification  of  the  colony,  to  take  off  the  edge  of  those  assertions,  which  I 
believe  have  been  spread  by  Agent  Shelby,  here  ;  and  perhaps,  too,  the  Boston  peo- 
ple may  have  falsely  prepossessed  Capt.  Warren,  to  make  him  write  home  as  he 
did,  (if  he  wrote  any  thing  at  all  about  it. )  This  I  looked  upon  as  my  duty,  to  ad- 
vertise thee  of  it  in  time,  that  I  may  receive  thy  answer,  with  a  full  vindication." 

Under  date  of  Gmo.  8th,  (August,)  the  agent  again  writes  to  Gov.  AVanton,  and 
reiterates  what  he  had  before  stated.  "  The  rejoicings  in  England,"  he  says 
4'  were  great,  when  the  news  of  the  taking  of  Louisbourg  was  confirmed ;  the 
town  guns  were  fired,  and  the  acquisition  of  Cape  Breton  was  considered  as  of  vast 
importance."  At  the  same  time  he  urged  the  importance  of  Rhode  Island  sending 
provisions  to  the  forces  there.  The  reception  of  these  letters  by  Governor  Wan- 
ton drew  forth  the  resolution  referred  to,  above,  together  with  the  following  letter 
and  certificate  from  Governor  Wolcott,  a  major  general  in  the  Louisburg  ex- 
pedition.] 


1745.] 


AND    PEOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  155 


Certificate  of  Governor  Wokoii,  relative  to  the  expedition  against 

Cape  Breton. 

Colony  of  Connecticut,  Windsor  ss. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly  of  His  Majesty's  colony  of  Khode  Island  and 
Providence  Plantations,  have  represented  to  me,  the  subscriber,  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor of  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  and  major  general  of  the  land  forces  employed 
in  the  late  expedition  against  Cape  Breton,  that  their  conduct  relating  to  the  reduc- 
tion of  that  place,  hath  been  misrepresented  to  the  British  court,  and  therefore  have 
applied  to  me,  to  declare  what  I  know,  relating  to  the  assistance  that  has  been  o-iven 
by  their  colony  ;  and  that  justice  may  be  done  to  that  government,  according  to 
truth,  I  certify  as  follows,  viz. : 

That  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  fitted  out  for  the  expedition  against  Cape 
Breton,  their  guard  sloop,  the  Tartar,  under  the  command  of  Capt.  Daniel  Fones 
mounting  fourteen  carriage  and  twelve  swivel  guns ;  furnished  with  needful 
warlike  stores,  with  ninety  men  on  board. 

That  the  colony  of  Connecticut  fitted  out  their  guard  sloop,  the  Defence,  under 
the  command  of  Capt.  John  Prentice,  mounting  twelve  carriage  and  twelve  swivel 
guns,  furnished  with  warlike  stores,  and  an  hundred  men  on  board. 

That  when  the  forces  from  Connecticut  were  near  ready  to  embark,  at  New  Lon- 
don, it  was  feared  that  Capt.  Prentice  would  not  be  a  sufficient  guard  for  our  trans- 
ports ;  and  thereupon,  from  a  motion  from  the  Governor  of  Connecticut,  to  the 
Governor  of  Rhode  Island,  Capt.  Fones  was  sent  to  New  London,  to  join  Capt. 
Prentice,  to  convoy  our  forces  to  Cape  Breton. 

That  our  fleet,  consisting  of  the  two  guard  sloops,  and  seven  transports,  having 
received  on  board  five  hundred  men,  sent  from  Connecticut,  for  the  land  service 
went  on  our  voyage,  and  off  the  Cape  Sable  shore  we  espied  a  ship  making  towards 
us  ;  and  not  knowing  what  she  might  be,  the  Tartar  went  out  to  speak  with  her ; 
and  upon  exchange  of  some  shot,  she  was  found  to  be  a  French  ship  of  war,  of  about 
thirty-four  guns.  Capt.  Fones  perceiving  her  to  be  a  vessel  of  great  superiority, 
led  her  off  from  the  fleet.  She  proved  to  be  a  very  nimble  ship ;  but  the  Tartar 
being  a  prime  sailor,  and  hauling  close  to  the  wind,  kept  her  in  chase  of  her  all 
day,  and  got  clear  of  her  at  night ;  so  our  fleet,  without  any  damage  from  said 
French  ship,  arrived  safe  at  Canso.  If  this  ship  had  engaged  our  fleet,  it  is  probable 
that  both  the  guard  sloops  would  not  have  been  able  to  withstand  her  ;  and  if  we 
had  had  no  convoy  but  Capt.  Prentice,  it  is  likely  that  we  should  have  been  ruined 
by  her. 

That  during  the  siege,  Capt.  Fones,  Capt.  Becket  and  Capt.  Donahue  were  sent 
to  the  Gut  of  Canso,  to  prevent  the  enemy  that  we  expected  were  coming  from  the 
siege  of  Annapolis,  to  the  relief  of  Louisburg  ;  accordingly,  they  met  them,  and  re. 
pelled  a  great  number  of  them  ;  and  this,  we  judged,  was  the  reason  that  we  did 
not  meet  them  on  the  island  of  Cape  Breton. 

In  testimony  of  the  truth  of  all  the  above  written,  I  have  hereunto 
set  my  hand,  at  Windsor,  in  said  colony  of  Connecticut,  the  15th 
dav  of  November,  Anno  Domini  1745,  ROGER  WOLCOTT 


156  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1745. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  appointed  to  build  a 
bridge  over  Weybosset  river,  at  Providence,  in  the  county  of 
Providence,  do  not  proceed  on  said  business  till  further  orders 
from  the  General  Assembly. 

God  save  the  King. 


[The  following  public  laws,  passed  during  the   year   1745,  are  printed  at  length 
in  the  volume  of  laws  published  in  174  7,  unless  repealed  previous  to  that  time.] 

An' Act  for  the  regulation  of  the  sitting  of  the  General  Assembly. 

An  Act  for  the  more  regular  appointing  of  deputy  sheriffs. 

An  Act  for  regulating  the  service  of  writs  in  case  where  the  sheriff  and  town  ser- 
geant of  such  town  where  the  sheriff  liveth,  are  concerned. 

An  Act  for  allowing  thirty  men  at  Fort  George,  etc. 

An  Act  enabling  creditors  to  recover  their  just  debts  of  such  persons  who  have  re- 
moved out  of  this  colony,  and  of  others,  not  inhabitants  thereof,  or  who  conceal 
themselves  therein. 

An  Act  for  allowing  of  taking  depositions,  and  regulating  the  swearing  to  accounts 
out  of  court. 

An  Act  for  impounding  cattle,  sheep,  horses  and  hogs  ;  and  for  recovering  damages 
done  by  them. 

An  Act  for  the  protection  of  the  members  of  the  General  Assembly  ;  and  of 
persons  chosen  to  serve  on  the  jury,  from  being  arrested  or  sued  during 
service. 

An  Act  appointing  commissioners  to  take  care  of  all  prisoners  of  war  that  shall  be 
brought  to  this  colony. 

An  Act  for  the  better  security  of  the  sheriff,  any  of  his  under  officers  or  aids,  in 
impressing  men  for  His  Majesty's  service. 

An  Act  for  limiting  the  exportation  of  gunpowder  for  a  certain  time,  therein 
mentioned. 

An  Act  allowing  George  Ninegret,  the  Indian  sachem,  (with  the  advice  and  con- 
sent of  his  trustees,)  to  exchange  twenty  acres  of  land  in  Charlestown,  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Church  of  England,  in  that  town. 

An  Act  empowering  George  Ninnegret,  the  Indian  sachem,  to  sell  a  part  of  his 
land  for  the  payment  of  his  debts,  and  the  better  support  of  his  family. 

An  Act  for  the  relief  of  poor  and  distressed  debtors. 

An  Act  empowering  the  captains  of  the  several  companies  of  trained  bands  in  this 
colony,  to  grant  warrants  for  collecting  the  fines  of  delinquents,  etc. 

An  Act  ordering  and  appointing  the  militia,  or  trained  bands  in  this  colony,  to 
muster  but  twice  a  year. 

An  Act  directing  how  tenth  bonds  shall  be  given  for  money  taken  up  by  persons 
dying  without  giving  any. 

An  Act  in  addition  to,  and  in  amendment  of  the  several  acts  relating  to  the  choos- 
ing of  jurymen. 

An';Act  for^the  regulating  the  mending  of  highways,  within  this  colony. 

An  Act  for  the  further  regulating  vendues,  within  this  colony. 

An  Aunnaddition  to  an  act,  granting  writs  ©f  review  in  personal  actions. 


1746.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  157 

An  Act  in  addition  to  an  act,  establishing  the  proceedings  of  actions  not  ex- 
ceeding £5. 

An  Act  empowering  one  of  the  grand  committee  to  have  the  care  of  the  colony's 
bonds  and  mortgages,  etc. 

An  Act  directing  the  sheriffs  the  manner  of  disposing  of  the  real  estate  of  deceased 
persons,  for  the  payment  of  their  debts. 

An  Act  directing  how  the  money  raised  for  the  building  a  bridge  at  Weybosset, 
in  Providence,  shall  be  disposed  of,  and  for  supporting  said  brido-e. 

An  Act  empowering  the  overseers  of  the  poor,  in  Newport,  to  commit  persons  to 
the  work  house. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly  held  for  the  Colomj  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations^  at  South  Kingstoivn,  the 
IWi  dag  of  Fehruarg,  1745-46. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Robinson,  DeiDuty  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  dej^uties  from  the  several  towns. 

Voted  and  resolved,  thit  a  fliir  copy  of  the  draught  of  a  let- 
ter presented  to  this  General  Assembly,  be  made,  and  signed 
by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  and  by  him  sent  to  His  Excel- 
lency, George  Clinton,  Esq.,  Governor  of  the  Province  of  New 
York,  in  answer  to  his  letter  for  appointing  commissioners  to 
meet  and  consult  about  the  French  and  Indian  enemies  on  the 
frontiers. 

Whereas,  Benjamin  Hassard,  Esq.,  Messrs.  Peter  Bours, 
Samuel  Wickham,  Robert  Hassard  and  Edward  Scott,  were  at 
the  last  session  of  this  Assembly,  appointed  a  committee,  they^ 
or  the  major  part  of  them,  to  take  into  consideration  the 
agent's  letters  then  presented  to  the  General  Assembly,  and  to 
furnish  him  with  proper  instructions  relating  to  the  matters 
therein  contained,  and  to  be  signed  by  His  Honor,  the  Gov. 
ernor,  and  sent  home  as  soon  as  conveniently  might  be,  did 
now  report ; — 

That  they  had   extracted  from  the  records,  copies  of  all  the  acts   oi' the  General 
Assembly,  relating  to  the   expedition,  which  they  judged   might   be   necessary,  to 


158  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 

prove  the  assistance  givea  by  this  government  to  said  expedition ;  and  that  they 
had  likewise  stated  a  general  account  of  the  charges  this  colony  has  been  at  in  said 
expedition,  and  accounts  of  all  the  particulars  contained  in  each  article  of  the  gen- 
eral account ;  and  attested  by  the  commissary,  and  put  under  the  colony  seal,  with 
the  copies  of  the  acts  of  this  Assembly,  and  with  an  original  letter  from  Gen.  Pep- 
perell,  and  another  from  Admiral  Warren,  and  a  certificate  from  Major  General 
Wolcott,  with  an  oiiginal  letter  to  the  agent,  delivered  to  His  Honor,  the  Governor' 
to  transmit  them  to  the  agent ;  which  they  thought  sufficient  to  show  the  zeal  of 
this  Toverument  in  the  expedition,  and  for  the  agent  to  obtain  a  reimbursement  of 
the  money  the  colony  has  expended  therein ;  provided,  the  nation  defrays  the 
charges  the  neighboring  governments  have  been  at  on  this  occasion,  and  now  pre- 
sented a  copy  of  said  letter  and  accounts. 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be 
accepted. 

Voted,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  wi'ite  to  the  Honorable 
Peter  Warren,  Esq.,  commander-in-chief  of  His  Majestj^'s  ships 
of  war,  at  Louisbourg,  in  answer  to  his  letter,  of  the  26th  of 
November,  A.  D.  1745,  respecting  a  quota  of  men  for  the  gar- 
rison at  Louisburg,  aforesaid  ;  and  also,  that  His  Honor  write 
to  Messrs.  William  Smith  and  Edward  Cole,  the  captains  of  the 
two  companies  in  the  pay  of  this  colony,  at  Louisbourg,  afore- 
said, in  answer  to  their  letter  of  the  29th  day  of  said  Novem.- 
ber,  respecting  their  soldiers. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  appointed  to  build 
the  colony  house,  proceed  forthwith,  and  finish  the  middle  room 
in  the  chamber,  and  the  stair  cases  as  soon  as  may  be  con- 
veniently. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  captain  of  Fort  George,  be,  and 
he  is  hereby  appointed  to  employ  a  proper  person  or  per- 
sons and  make  such  repairs  at  said  fort,  as  are  necessary  at 
present. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write  to 
the  Hon.  Roger  Wolcott,  Esq.,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  colony  of 
Connecticut,  and  thank  him,  in  behalf  of  this  colony,  for  the 
just  service  he  has  done  the  government  in  giving  a  certificate 
of  what  he  knows  relating  to  the  assistance  this  colony  has 
given  in  the  expedition  against  Cape  Breton. 

Whereas,  tlie  Gcncvnl  Assembly,  at  their  session,  in  October 
last  past,  appointed   l^etcr  Hours,  Esq.,  to  wait  on  the  Honora- 


1746.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  159 

ble   Roger  Wolcott,  Esq.,  Deputy  Governor   of  the  colony  of 
I  Connecticut,  and   major  general    of  the  forces  that   reduced 
!  Cape  Breton,  and  request  of  him  a  certificate  of  what  he  knows 
respecting  the   conduct  of  this  colony  relating  to  the  expedi- 
tion against  Cape  Breton,  who  now  reported  • — 

That  he  had  waited  on  the  said  Roger  Wolcott,  Esq.,  and  obtained  from  him 
three  certificates  of  the  same  tenor  and  date,  of  what  he  knows  relatinj?  to  the 
premises,  aforesaid ;  one  of  which,  he  presented  to  this  Assembly,  and  at  the  same 
time,  also  presented  the  account  of  his  time  and  expenses  about  said  afiair,  amount- 
ing to  the  sum  of  £27  10s. 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  l)e 
accepted ;  and  that  the  said  sum  of  £27  10^.,  be  allowed,  and 
paid  to  the  said  Peter  Bours,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  two  accounts  of  Col.  Peter 
Mawney,  amounting  to  £16  17s.,  for  calling  the  several  com- 
panies together,  in  the  county  of  Providence,  in  the  mouths  of 
March  and  June  last  past,  in  order  to  enlist  soldiers  for  the  ex- 
pedition against  Cape  Breton,  be  allowed,  and  paid  by  the  com- 
missary of  this  colony. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  account  of  Messrs.  Peter  Maw- 
ney, Jabez  Bowen  and  James  Arnold,  field  officers,  in  the 
county  of  Providence,  amounting  to  £32  18s.,  for  the  calling 
together  the  companies  in  the  county  of  Providence,  in  the 
year  1741,  in  order  to  raise  recruits  for  the  West  Indies,  be 
allowed,  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  David  Greene,  of  Jamestown,  in  the  county  of 
Newport,  yeoman,  by  petition,  set  forth  to  this  Assembly,  that 
he  hath  on  the  east  side  of  Jamestown,  a  good  dwelling  house 
for  the  accommodating  travellers,  and  a  good  wharf  for  landing 
passengers  at,  and  for  laying  a  boat,  which  is  also  situated 
in  a  proper  place  for  the  pablic  benefit  of  all  persons  going  to, 
and  coming  from  said  town  of  Newport,  from  the  other  part  of 
the  government;  and  it  being  easily  pei'ceived,  as  well  as 
known  by  long  experience,  that  it  is  a  great  advantage  to  the 
public  to  pass  and  repass  easily  over  the  ferries  to,  and  from 
the  town  of  Newport,  and  that  difficulty  and  delay  in  that  case 


160  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 

is  a  general  disadvautage  to  town  and  country,  and  not  doubt, 
ing  but  this  Honorable  Assembly  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  al. 
lowing  the  petitioner  the  liberty  of  setting  up  a  ferry  at  said 
place  for  the  transporting  passengers  (and  what  they  carry  with 
them  in  travelling,)  to  and  from  Newport,  will  be  for  the  benefit 
and  advantage  of  the  said  town  of  Newport,  and  the  country 
in  general ;  and  therefore  humbly  prayed,  that  he  might  have 
the  liberty  of  setting  up  a  ferry  from  said  Jamestown  to  New- 
port, as  aforesaid,  upon  the  same  terms  as  are  stated,  to  com- 
mence from  the  1st  day  of  March  A.  D.  1746  ;  and  that  he,  in 
the  meantime,  will  provide  himself  with  a  good  and  sufficient 
ferry  boat  for  the  purpose,  and  complete  his  conveniency  of 
keeping  his  boat  so  as  to  be  equal  to  any  place  in  the  govern- 
ment, which  he  apprehends  the  place  will  admit  of;  and  that 
he  is  willing,  and  expects  to  be  laid  under  the  same  restrictions 
as  hath  been  usual,  and  is  established  by  law ; — 

Upon  consideration  whereof,  it  is  voted  and  enacted,  that  the 
said  David  Greene,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  permitted  and  allowed 
to  set  up  a  ferry  from  said  Jamestown,  to  Newport,  aforesaid 
for  transportation  of  persons  and  such  things  as  they  have  with 
them,  upon  the  same  terms,  and  under  the  same  restrictions  as 
the  other  ferry  from  said  Jamestown  to  Newport  is  established, 
and  to  Ijegin  at  the  expiration  of  Mr.  Samuel  Clarke's  present 
lease  of  said  other  ferry. 

Whereas,  the  proprietors  of  the  Long  Wharf,  in  Newport, in  the 
county  of  Newport,  &c.,  by  petition  set  forth  to  this  Assembly, 
that  they  have,  at  a  vast  expense,  built  a  wharf  in  said  New- 
port, loading  directly  up  to  the  colony  house,  and  the  market 
house,  in  said  town,  and  near  about  the  middle  of  the  town, 
whicli  wharf  they  apprehend  is  very  commodious  for  a  public 
ferry,  as  being  most  convenient  both  for  those  who  come  to 
said  town,  a])0ut  public  business;  and  also,  for  those  who  come  to 
bring  theh'  ware  to  market ;  and  therefore  prayed  this  Honor- 
able Assembly  to  grant  to  the  said  proprietors  the  privilege  of 
keeping  a  ferry  at  said  wharf,  upon  the  same  terms,  and  under 
the  same  restriction,  as  tlie  dtlier  ferries  of  said  town  are 
f!;raniod  ; — 


1746.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  161 

Upon  consideration  whereof,  be  it  enacted  by  the  General 
Assembly,  and  by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the 
said  proprietors  of  the  Long  Wharf,  in  Newport,  be,  and  they 
are  hereby  fully  permitted  and  allowed  to  set  up  and  keep  a 
ferry  from  said  Long  Wharf,  in  Newport,  aforesaid,  to  James- 
town, for  transporting  of  persons  and  things,  upon  the  same 
terms  and  under  the  same  restrictions  as  the  other  two  ferries 
in  Newport,  aforesaid,  are  granted ;  and  to  commence  at  the 
expiration  of  the  present  leases  of  the  said  other  two  ferries. 

God  save  the  King. 

Letter  from  the  DiiJce  of  Newcastle,  to  Governor  Wanton. 

WhiteLall,  March  14th,  1745-G. 

Sir : — His  Majesty  having  detormined  to  omit  nothing,  that  might  be  necessary 
'or  the  security,  and  defence  of  Louisbourg;  and  there  having  been  great  reason  to 
ipprehend  that  an  attempt  might  be  made  upon  it,  by  the  French,  early  in  the  spring, 
;he  King  was  pleased  to  order  two  regiments  to  be  sent  thither  from  Gibraltar, 
ivhich  it  is  hoped,  may  be  arrived  there,  before  this  time. 

His  Majesty  has  also  ordered  another  regiment  to  be  sent  from  hence,  to  Louis- 
Dourg ;  part  of  which,  are  now  going  on  board  two  sixty  gun  ships,  that  are  ready 
'0  sail ;  and  the  remainder  will  proceed  to  Louisbourg,  with  the  convoy,  that  will 
^0  from  hence,  in  about  a  fortnight. 

Kear  Admiral  Warren  having  desired  His  Majesty's  leave  to  resign  the  govern- 
nent  of  Louisbourg,  on  account  of  the  ill  state  of  his  health,  His  Majesty  has  been 
)leased  to  appoint  Commodore  Knowles  to  succeed  him  ;  and  I  am  commanded  by 
lis  Majesty,  to  recommend  it  to  you,  in  the  strongest  manner,  that,  in  case  Mr- 
uiowles  should  have  occasion  to  apply  to  you  for  assistance,  for  the  better  raain- 
enance  and  support  of  the  garrison  at  Louisbourg,  either  by  raising  any  number 
>f  men,  to  reinforce  that  garrison,  or  in  any  other  manner,  that  shall  be  thought 
)roper,  you  should  use  your  utmost  endeavors  to  furnish  him  with  it. 

And  as  Mr.  Warren  will  have  the  command  of  a  squadron  of  His  Majesty's  ships,  in 
North  America,  and  will  have  received  His  Majesty's  orders,  to  concert  with  Gov. 
Shirley,  whether  it  may  be  practicable,  to  make  an  attempt  upon  any  other  of  the 
Trench  settlements  in  North  America,  His  Majesty  has  commanded  me  to  signify 
o  you  his  pleasure,  that  in  case  it  shall  be  judged  advisable  to  undertake  any  such 
.ttempt,  and,  in  order  thereto,  to  raise  a  body  of  land  forces  in  North  America, 
•ou  should,  in  that  case,  take  proper  measures  for  raising  such  a  body  of  men,  with- 
n  the  colony  of  which  you  are  Governor,  as  may  be  practicable,  to  make  part  of 
uch  force ;  and  to  act  in  such  manner,  as  shall  be  agreed  on. 

I  need  say  nothing  to  persuade  you  to  exert  your  utmost  endeavors  in  the  per- 
jrmance  of  a  service  which  may  be  of  such  great  importance  to  the  security  of  His 
^lajesty's  dominions  in  North  America ;  the  safety  and  protection  of  which.  His 
.\Iajesty  has  so  much  at  heart. 

I  am,  sir,  you  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

To  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island.  HOLLES  NEWCASTLE. 

VOL.  V.  21 


162  RECORDS    OF   TIIE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 


The  Duke  of  Newcastle,  to  the   Governor   and  Company  of  Rhode 

Island. 

Whitehall,  April  9,  174G. 

Gentlemen : — I  am  commanded  to  acquaint  you,  that  His  Majesty  has  been 
pleased  to  order  five  battallions  of  his  troops,  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant 
General  St.  Clair,  to  go  from  hence,  as  soon  as  possible,  with  a  sufficient  convoy  of 
men-of-war,  to  Louisbourg,  in  order  to  be  employed  together  with  the  regiment  of 
Major  General  Frampton,  which  has  been  some  time  ordered  to  embark  tor  Louis- 
bourg, and  with  the  two  regiments  sent  thither  from  Gibraltar ;  and  also  with  such 
troops  as  shall  be  levied  for  that  purpose,  in  North  America,  for  the  immediate  re- 
duction of  Canada. 

And  I  am  commanded  by  His  Majesty  to  signify  his  pleasure  to  you,  (as  I  shall  do  to 
the  other  Governors  of  the  said  colonies,)  that  you  should  forthwith  make  the  neces- 
sary dispositions  for  raising  as  many  men  as  the  shortness  of  the  time  will  permit 
within  your  government,  to  be  employed  in  conjunction  with  His  Majesty's  regular 
forces,  on  this  important  service.  It  is  to  be  hoped  Lieutenant  General  St.  Clair 
will  be  able  to  sail  from  hence,  with  the  troops  under  his  command,  the  latter  end 
of  this  month,  or  the  beginning  of  May. 

It  is  the  King's  intention  that  the  troops  to  be  raised  in  North  America,  should 
consist  of  companies  of  one  hundred  men  each ;  and  that  the  troops  to  be  raised  in 
Massachusetts  Bay,  New  Hampshire,  Ehode  Island  and  Connecticut,  should  ren- 
dezvous at  Louisbourg,  as  soon  as  possible,  in  order  to  proceed  under  the  command 
of  such  officer  as  shall  be  appointed  by  Lieut.  General  St.  Clair,  and  under  convoy 
of  His  Majesty's  fleet,  to  the  river  of  St.  Lawrence,  and  proceed  up  the  river  im- 
mediately to  Quebec,  with  such  ships  of  war,  sloops,  and  other  armed  vessels,  to  be 
furnished  by  the  provinces,  as  Rear  Admiral  Warren,  who  will  have  the  command 
of  the  squadron  to  be  employed  in  this  expedition,  shall  appoint. 

You  will  theretbre  use  the  utmost  expedition  in  raising  as  many  men  as  possible, 
within  the  Province  of  Rhode  Island,  and  take  the  proper  measures  for  their  arriv- 
ing at  Louisbourg,  before  the  time  Lieut.  General  St.  Clair  may  be  expected  there* 
You  will  also  appoint  proper  officers  to  command  the  men  you  shall  be  able  to 
raise  ;  for  which  purpose,  a  number  of  blank  commissions  will  be  sent  you  by  the 
next  conveyance  ;  and  you  will  transmit  to  Rear  Admiral  Warren,  at  Louisbourg 
accounts,  directed  to  Mr.  St.  Clair,  of  what  you  shall  have  been  able  to  do, herein. 

Y'ou  will  assure  the  troops  that  shall  be  raised,  as  well  officers  as  soldiers,  that 
they  will  immediately  enter  into  His  Majesty's  pay  ;  the  officers,  from  the  time  they 
shall  engage  in  His  Majesty's  service,  and  the  soldiers  from  the  respective  da;s  on 
which  they  shall  enlist ;  and  that  they  shall  come  in  for  a  share  of  any  booty  to  be 
l^aken  from  the  enemy  ;  and  be  sent  back  to  their  respective  habitations,  when  this 
service  shall  be  over,  unless  any  of  them  shall  desire  to  settle  elsewhere. 

As  to  the  article  of  arms  and  clothing  for  the  men  to  be  raised.  His  Majesty  has 
commanded  me  to  recommend  it  to  you  and  the  other  Governors,  to  take  care 
that  the  solJiers  may  be  provided  with  them ;  and  His  Majesty  has  authorized 
and  empowered  Lieut.  General  St.  Clair  to  make  a  reasonable  allowance  for  de- 
fraying that  expense. 

Y''ou  will  recommend  it  to  the  council  and  Assembly,  to  provide  a  sufficient  nuui- 


1746.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  163 

ber  of  transports  to  carry  the  troops  to  be  raised  in  Rhode  Island  to  Louisbourg, 
and  from  thence,  up  the  river  of  St.  Lawrence,  and  a  sufficient  quantity  of  provi- 
sions for  their  subsistence  ;  and  also  to  provide  as  many  armed  vessels  as  can  be 
got,  to  serve  in  the  expedition,  under  the  command  of  Rear  Admiral  Warren. 

I  am  ordered  by  His  Majesty,  to  recommend  it  to  you,  to  make  the  strictest  in- 
quiry  for  any  persons  that  may  be  acquainted  with  the  navigation  of  the  river  of 
St.  Lawrence ;  and  if  you  can  find  any  such,  you  will  engage  them  at  any  rate,  to 
serve  as  pilots  on  board  His  Majesty's  fleet ;  and  you  will  send  them  as  soon  as 
possible,  to  Louisbourg,  for  that  purpose. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 
HOLLES  NEWCASTLE. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company,  of  Rhode  Island. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemllt/,  held  for  the  Colon//  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  Qth  day 
of  Mai/,  1^46. 

The  Plon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  lion.  William  Robinson,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Benjamin  Haszard,  Mr.  James  Arnold, 

Mr.  Gideon  Cornell,  Capt.  William  Rice, 

Mr.  William  Rhodes,  Mr.  Ephraim  Gardner, 

Mr.  Daniel  Howland,  Mr.  Jeremiah  Niles. 
Mr.  Gideon  Durfey, 

Mr.  Peter  Bours,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon,  clerk. 

The  following  are  admitted  freemen  of  the  colony  : 

Of  Newport,  Constant  Bailey,  William  Heffernan,  Jr.,  Oliver 
White,  Samuel  Easton,  Jr.,  John  Pont,  Jared  Caswell,  John 
Warren,  son  of  Joseph ;  Thomas  Creman,  George  Wanton,  Jr.^ 
William  Woodward,  Gindifer  Lindie,  John  Mundou,  John 
Channing,  John   Pike,  David    Moore,  Randall  Eldred,   Clark 


164  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [174G. 

Brown,  Alexander  Swan,  William  Stoddard,  James  NichoL. 
John  Coddington,  son  of  Nathaniel ;  John  Chadwick,  Samuel 
Freebody,  Jonathan  Heath,  Daniel  Vaughan,  Stephen  Hookey, 
Jr.,  George  Shearman,  Peter  Cozens,  James  Nixon,  Gideon 
Wanton,  Jr.,  James  Hill  and  Patrick  Grant. 

Of  Providence,  Henry  Paget,  Jeremiah  Jenckes,  John  Maw- 
ney,  James  Brown,  John  Dexter,  Jr.,  Edward  Serle,  James 
Greene,  Peter  Randall,  Job  Hawkins,  Joshua  Turner,  Jr.,  Peter 
Tift,  Jr.,  Thomas  Kinnicut,  William  Potter,  Arthur  Fenner,  Jr., 
Jonathan  Pike,  John  Scott,  John  Scott,  Jr.,  Thomas  Olney,  son 
of  William ;  John  Tripp,  Joseph  Bartlett,  Thomas  Field,  the 
3d,  Thomas  Whipple,  Jr.,  William  Alverson,  James  Hoyle,  Ste- 
phen Olney,  John  Alverson,  Elisha  Arnold,  PJchard  Olney/ 
Christopher  Brown  and  Jonathan  Burlingame. 

Of  Portsmouth,  Job  Almy  and  Daniel  Howland. 

Of  Warwick,  John  Holdon,  son  of  Charles  ;  Toleration  Har- 
ris, Edward  Casey,  Benjamin  Greene,  son  of  William  ;  James 
Arnold,  son  of  James ;  Benjamin  Talman,  Eleazcr  Whipple, 
Thomas  Greene,  Daniel  Fish,  Thomas  Arnold,  Nathaniel  Ar- 
nold, Israel  Arnold,  son  of  Elisha ;  Nicholas  Battey,  Thomas 
Colegrove,  Caleb  Arnold,  Samuel  Remington,  Samuel  Whit- 
man and  Samuel  Basset. 

Of  Westerly,  Joseph  Pendleton,  Jr.,  John  Hill,  Ezekiel  Bur- 
dick,  Isaac  Babcock,  Joseph  Hiscox,  Thomas  Sisson,  Jr.,  Jere- 
miah Clarke,  John  McCarter,  Reynolds  Borden,  Ebenezer  Bur- 
dick,  Joseph  Sanders,  Samuel  Champlin,  Card  Forster,  John 
Worden  and  James  Clarke. 

Of  New  Shoreham,  Henry  Willis. 

Of  North  Kingstown,  Benjamin  Watson,  Christopher  Hall, 
Nicholas  Northup,  Jr.,  Josiah  Northup,  son  of  Henry ;  Samuel 
Kingsley,  Henry  Tibbets,  Joseph  Jess,  Joseph  Havens,  Job 
Gardner,  Samuel  Brown,  Edward  Gardner,  John  Hammond  and 
Anthony  Dixon. 

South  Kingstown,  William  Congdon,  son  of  Joseph ;  Paul 
Niles,  George  Hassard,  son  of  George,  deceased  ;  Stephen  Ilas- 
sard,  Jr.,  Latham  Clarke,  Peter  Boss,  William  Smith,  Thomas 


1746.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  165 

Gardner,  Jeremiah  Wilcox,  William  Browning,  Jr.,  Nicholas 
Watson,  Job  Reynolds,  Joshua  Card,  Samuel  Barber,  Moses 
Barber,  Ebenezer  Tift  and  Samuel  Whaley. 

Of  East  Greenwich,  Joseph  Edwards,  Richard  Weaver,  Wm- 
Hamilton,  Thomas  Nichols,  son  of  James  ;  Joseph  Hookey, 
Francis  Hopkins,  Samuel  Basset,  Ebenezer  Sweet,  Rufus  Spen- 
cer, Joseph  Spencer,  Henry  Gardner,  John  Roberts,  James 
Fowler,  Thomas  Fiy,  the  3d,  John  Wall  and  Josiah  Jones. 

Of  Jamestown,  George  Franklin,  Joseph  Battey  and  John 
Remington,  son  of  Gershom. 

Of  Smithfield,  Joshua  Phillips,  Moses  Man,  John  Comstockj 
Jr.,  Cornelius  Walling,  Abraham  Scott,  Jeremiah  Arnold,  Jr., 
Amos  Arnold.  John  Man,  Jr.,  Jonathan  Reed,  and  Winchester 
Matthewson. 

Of  Scituate,  Eliakini  Durfey,  Stephen  Smith,  John  Scamans, 
Anthony  Sprague,  Jr.,  Samuel  Smith,  William  Wright,  Jona- 
than Pray,  Jonah  Hopkins.  Charles  Hopkins,  Samuel  Daley 
William  Seamans,  Nicholas  Edwards,  George  Wilbore,  William; 
Edwards,  Henry  Jones,  Samuel  Dickens,  Goliah  Williams-' 
Thomas  Lea,  Oliver  Perkins,  Thomas  Ailesworth,  John  Senians 
Anthony  Sprague,  Jr.,  and  Stephen  Smith. 

Of  Glocester,  Zechariah  Jenckes,  Jeremiah  Steare,  Jonah 
Steere,  Richard  Plummer,  Joseph  Grover,  Benjamin  Comings, 
Samuel  Short,  Jr.,  Enos  Grover,  Nehemiah  Bello,  Jr.,  Abraham 
Smith,  John  Allen,  Isaac  Hicks  and  Peleg  Chace. 

Of  Charlestown,  Samuel  Irish,  Jarith  Mumford,  David  Ke- 
nian,  Jr.,  Thomas  Potter,  Daniel  Kenion,  Enoch  Kenion, 
Joseph  Ilalloway,  Enoch  Kezion,  Jr.,  Joseph  Kenion,  Jr.,  Rob- 
ert Austin,  John  Enos,  Jr.,  John  Enos,  the  3d,  William  King, 
Isaac  Stiles  and  John  Hake. 

Of  West  Greenwich,  Gideon  Elle.s,  Shebna  Spink,  Thomas 
Draper,  Jr.,  Harrison  Weaver,  Benjamin  Anderson,  and  William 
Reynolds. 

Of  Coventry,  John  Wood,  John  Leston,  Isaac  Greene  and 
Caleb  Greene. 

Of  Exeter,  James  Hyams,  son  of  Benjamin  ;  Job  Herring- 


166 


RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND 


[1746. 


ton,  Jr.,  Daniel  Barber,  Stephen  Sweet,  Benjamin  Lawton,  Wil- 
liam Wilcox,  Caleb  Robins  and  Samuel  Codner. 
Of  Middletown,  G  eorsre  LaAvton  and  John  Weaver. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assenibly  held  for  the  Colon//  of 
Rhode  Idand  and  Providence  Plantations,  id  Neivport,  the 
first  Wednesday/  in  May,  1746. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Ptobinson,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 


Neivport. 
Mr.  Samuel  Wickham, 
Mr.  Peter  Bours, 
Mr.  Thomas  Cranston, 
Capt.  George  Wanton, 
]Mr.  Jonathan  Nichols, 
Mr.  James  Sheflield. 

Providence. 
Mr.  George  Brown, 
Mr.  Joseph  Sheldon, 
Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Mr.  Henry  Harris. 

Portsmouth. 
Mr.  Benjamin  Tucker, 
Mr.  Jonathan  Freeborn, 
]\Ir.  David  Anthony, 
Capt.  Jeremiali  Jjawtou. 

Warwick. 
M:ijor  Joseph  Stafford, 
Mr.  Charles  Holdon, 
Mr.  Stephen  IjOW, 
Mr.  Samuel  Gorton. 


DEPUTIES. 

Westerly. 
Mr.  William  Hern, 
Mr.  Silas  Greenman. 

New  Shoreham. 
Capt.  Edward  Sands, 
Mr.  Nathaniel  Littlefield. 

North  Kingstoim. 
Mr.  George  Tibbetts, 
Mr.  Job  Tripp. 

Soidh  Kingstoim. 
Capt.  Robert  Hassard, 
Mr.  William  Potter. 

East  G-reenwich. 
Mr.  John  Spenser, 
]\lr.  Thomas  Fry,  Jr. 

Jamestown. 
Mr.  Thomas  Carr, 
Mr.  John  Eldred. 
Smithficld. 
Mr.  Thomas  Steere, 
Mr.  David  Comstock. 


1746.] 


AND  PKOVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS. 


167 


DEPUTIES. 

Coventry. 
Mr.  Robert  Greene, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Nichols. 

Exeter. 
Mr.  John  Reynolds, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Gardner. 

Middletoivn. 
Mr.  Robert  Nichols, 
Mr.  John  Taylor. 


Scituate. 
Capt.  Job  Randall, 
Mr.  Charles  Harris. 

Glocesier. 
Mr.  Richard  Steere. 
Mr.  Walter  Phetteplace 

Charlestoivn, 
Mr.  Richard  Barley, 
Mr.  Samuel  Perry. 

West  Greenwich. 
Mr.  Caleb  Carr, 
Mr.  Thomas  Streight. 


Mr.  Peter  Bours,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon,  clerk. 

The  following  officers  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 


ASSISTANTS. 


Col.  John  Cranston, 
Mr.  Abraham  Redwood, 
Mr.  John  Comstock, 
Mr.  Robert  Gibbs, 
Mr.  Stephen  Brownell, 


Mr.  Robert  Jjawton, 
Mr.  James  Arnold, 
Mr.  Philip  Greene, 
Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 
Mr.  Jeoffi'cy  Watson. 


SECRETARY.  GENERAL  TREASURER. 

Mr.  James  Martin.  Mr.  John  Gardner. 

ATTORNEY    GENERAL. 

Mr.  Daniel  Updike. 

An  Act  for  fitting    out   the    colony  sloop   Tartar,  in    order  to 
guard  this  coast. 
Be  it  enacted  by  the   General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 


168  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 

by  the  authority  of  the  same;  that  the  colony  sloop  Tartar  be 
immediately  fitted  out  with  a  number  of  men,  not  exceeding 
ninety,  exclusive  of  the  captain,  lieutenants,  master,  mate,  gun. 
ner,  doctor  and  captain's  clerk ;  and  that  the  commissary  fur- 
nish said  sloop  with  a  sufficient  quantity  of  warlike  stores 
and  provisions,  according  to  law ;  and  that  the  captain  be  ac- 
countable for  said  stores ;  and  that  said  sloop  cruise  as  far 
eastward  as  Martha's  Vineyard,  and  as  far  westward  as  Sandy 
Hook ;  and  as  far  from  the  land  as  His  Honor,  the  GovernoPj 
shall  think  necessary,  to  answer  the  end  of  said  cruise. 

And  that  she  continue  cruising  till  the  1st  day  of  October 
and  as  much  longer  as  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  with  the  ad. 
vice  of  his  council,  shall  think  necessary ;  and  that  in  all  other 
respects,  not  herein  particularly  mentioned,  the  act  passed  in 
the  year  1744,  for  the  fitting  out  said  sloop,  &c.,  be  conformed 
to ;  and  that  a  bounty  of  forty  shillings  be  given  to  each  man 
that  shall  enlist  on  board  said  sloop. 

And  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  immediately  write  to  His 
Honor,  the  Governor  of  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  requesting 
that  their  colony  sloop  may  join  with  the  said  sloop  Tartar,  in 
cruising,  agreeably  to  the  above  mentioned  act. 

An  Act  for  the  supply  of  Fort  George  with  thirty  soldiers, 
stating  their  monthly  wages,  and  weekly  allowance. 
Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof,  that  the  captain  of  Fort  George,  as  soon  as  may  be? 
enlist  tliirty  men  to  serve  as  soldiers,  at  said  Fort,  at  the  wages 
of  £'8  per  month,  and  15s.  per  week,  board  wages,  they  finding 
themselves  provisions  ;  and  that  in  case  a  sufiicient  number  of 
men  do  not  enlist  in  fifteen  days  from  the  date  hereof,  that  the 
field  officers  of  the  county  of  Newport,  by  a  warrant  from  His 
Honor,  the  Governor,  cause  so  many  men  as  will  make  up  that 
number,  to  be  impressed  within  the  county  of  Newport,  for  that 
purpose. 

An  Act  appointing  commissioners  to  treat  with  the  commissioners 
that  are,  or  shall  be  appointed  by  the  neighboring  governments 
about  our  mutual  defence,  against  the  common  onomy. 


1746.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  16% 

Whereas,  application  hath  been  made  to  this  colony,  by  the 
Governors  of  the  Provinces  of  New  York  and  the  Massachu- 
setts Bay,  for  appointing  commissioners  to  treat  with  such  com- 
missioners as  are,  or  shall  be  appointed  by  the  neighboring 
governments,  touching  our  mutual  security,  defence  and  con- 
duct during  the  present  war ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  of  the  same,  that  two  commissioners  be  appointed 
by  this  colony  ;  and  that  when  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  shall 
receive  advice  from  the  other  governments  of  the  time  and  place 
■of  the  intended  congress,  he  immediately  direct  said  commission- 
ers to  attend  said  congress,  for  the  purpose  aforesaid,  who  are 
to  make  report  of  their  proceedings,  with  their  opinions  there- 
upon, that  such  measures  may  be  jointly  taken  with  the  several 
governments  as  shall  be  judged  most  expedient;  and  that  His 
Honor,  the  Governor,  advise  His  Excellency,  George  Clinton, 
Esq.,  Governor  of  the  Province  of  New  York,  and  His  Excel- 
lency, William  Shirley,  Esq.,  Governor  of  the  Province  of  the 
Massachusetts  Bay,  of  the  resolution  of  this  Assembly. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  act  passed  at  the  session  of  this 
Assembly,  held  in  February  last,  entitled  "  An  act  directing 
how,  and  in  what  manner  the  money  raised  for  the  building  a 
bridge  at  Weybosset,  in  Providence,  shall  be  disposed  of  for 
supporting  said  bridge,"  be,  and  it  is  hereby  repealed ;  and 
that  the  committee  appointed  to  build  said  bridge,  go  on  and 
do  the  same  as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be,  not  exceed- 
ing the  charge  of  £3,000,  which  is  appropriated  to  that  use, 
and  to  render  an  account  of  their  proceedings  to  the  General 
Assembly,  when  demanded. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write  to 
General  Pepperell  and  Admiral  Warren,  requesting  of  them 
that  all  the  officers  and  soldiers  which  were  sent  to  Cape  Bret- 
on, in  the  pay  of  this  colony,  be  discharged  immediately ;  and 
that  in  his  letter  toAdmiral  Warren,  he  particularly  request  that 
Messrs.  Seth  Harvey  and  Ezekiel  Hubbard,  with  such  other 
seamen  as  went  with  them  from  this  colony,  to  man  the  ship 
Vigilant,  be  also  forthwith  discharged,  (agreeably  to  the  Ad- 

VOL.  V.         22 


170  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1746, 

miral's  promise ;)  and  that  Ilis  Honor,  the  Governor,  also  write 
to  the  commanding  officers  of  the  two  companies,  which  went 
to  Cape  Breton,  that  they  send  hack  to  this  colony  all  their 
soldiers  that  have  not  enlisted  into  the  King's  service,  together 
with  the  provisions,  goods,  small  arms  and  every  other  article  be- 
longing to  this  colony,  by  the  first  opportunity  that  presents  ; 
and  that  he  also  notify  them  of  Capt.  Jordan's  promising  to  take 
them  in,  if  there  be  no  opportunity  sooner ;  and  that  he  write 
to  the  said  Messrs.  Harvey  and  Hubbard,  informing  them  of 
what  he  writes  the  Admiral. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Abraham  Redwood,  Esq.,  Messrs, 
Peter  Bours  and  Stephen  Hopkins,  or  the  major  part  of  them, 
be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  inquire  into 
the  circumstances  of  a  representation  made  to  this  General  As- 
sembly, relating  to  some  English  prisoners  now  confined  at  the 
Havana,  and  make  report  thereon  to  the  next  session  of  this 
Assembly. 

And  that  Capt.  John  Dennis,  commander  of  the  privateer 
brigantine  Defiance,  together  with  the  owners  of  said  brigan- 
tine,  to  which  vessel  the  said  persons  in  captivity  did  belong,  be 
cited  to  appear  at  the  next  session  of  this  Assembly,  to  answer 
to  the  aforesaid  affair ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby  requested,  not  to  give  any  commission  to  said 
Capt.  John  Dennis,  for  a  privateering  voyage,  until  his  said 
owners,  or  some  other  substantial  persons  will  give  sufficient 
security,  to  answer  to  the  aforesaid  affair,  in  behalf  of  said 
Capt.  John  Dennis. 

Voted,  that  Messrs.  Stephen  Hopkins  and  William  EUery, 
be,  and  they  are  hereby  chosen  commissioners,  to  meet  with 
the  commissioners  that  are,  or  shall  bo  chosen  by  the  neighbor- 
ing governments,  in  order  to  treat  about  our  mutual  security 
in  time  of  war. 

God  save  the  Kinjr. 


1746.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  171 


Admiral  Warren  and  Gen.  Pepperell  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Louisbourg,  May  6th,  1746. 

Sir : — The  weak  condition  of  this  garrison,  by  sickness,  put  us  under  a  necessity 
of  applying  to  Your  Honor,  by  our  joint  letter  of  25th  of  January  last,  for  a  reinforce- 
ment as  early  as  possible,  this  spring ;  lest  we  should  be  disappointed  in  the  troops  in- 
tended for  our  relief",  from  Gibraltar ;  but  as  they  happily  arrived  here  21st  of  last 
month,  and  as  the  sickness  is  greatly  abated  in  the  garrison,  we  flatter  ourselves 
that  if  the  colonies,  who  are,  as  well  as  our  mother  country,  greatly  interested  in  the 
safety  and  prosperity  of  this  acquisition,  will  forward  the  raising  and  transporting 
levies,  so  as  to  keep  the  four  regiments  appointed  for  its  protection,  complete,  we 
shall  have  no  further  occasion  to  put  them  to  any  trouble  or  expense  for  the  defence 
of  this  conquest. 

But  as  we  find  that  the  two  Gibraltar  regiments  do  not  consist  of  above  twelve 
hundred  men,  officers  and  all,  including  two  companies  and  a  quarter,  yet  expected 
in  a  transport  from  New  York ;  and  that  (besides  the  old  troops,  for  whose  speedy 
dismission  you  are  sensible  the  faith  of  the  governments  to  which  they  respectively 
belong,  is  engaged,  and  our  promise  also,)  we  have  not  above  four  hundred  men 
belonging  to  the  new  American  regiments,  including  those  that  have  enlisted  here, 
and  that  have  been  sent  from  New  England,  which  makes  in  all  but  about  sixteen 
hundred  men. 

We  hope  the  levies  will  go  on  well  in  all  the  colonies,  that  it  may  be  in  our 
power  to  keep  their  and  our  faith  with  the  old  troops ;  and  as  the  good  of  His  Maj- 
esty's service  is  so  greatly  interested  herein,  we  doubt  not  but  your  government 
will  aflbrd  their  best  assistance,  by  encouraging  the  enlistments  among  them,  and 
transporting  what  men  may  be  raised,  by  such  vessels  as  may  be  bound  here,  from 
your  government. 

We  shall  send  home,  by  every  opportunity,  as  many  of  the  old  troops  belonging 
to  the  several  colonies,  (whose  health  or  other  necessities  most  require  it,)  as  the  ar- 
rival of  the  levies  for  the  new  regiments,  and  the  other  circumstances  of  the  garri- 
son will  admit  of. 

We  are  Your  Honor's  very  humble  servants, 

P.  WARREN, 
WM.  PEPPERELL. 

To  the  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhli/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivportj  the  2d 
day  of  June.,  1746. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 


172  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF  RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 

An  Act  for  raising  forces  for  His  Majesty's  service,  in  the  ex- 
pedition against  Canada. 

Whereas,  His  Majesty  has  been  pleased  to  signify  to  this 
colony,  by  a  letter  from  His  Grace,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  his 
royal  intentions  to  employ  a  considerable  body  of  his  troops^ 
under  the  command  of  Lieutenant  General  St.  Clair,  with  a 
sufficient  squadron  of  men-of-war,  under  the  command  of  Ptear 
Admiral  Warren,  for  the  reduction  of  Canada,  to  his  obedience ; 
and  that  it  is  his  pleasure  this  colony  should  forthwith  raise  as 
many  men  as  the  shortness  of  the  time  will  permit,  and  send 
them  to  the  general  rendezvous,  at  Louisbourg  ;  and  this  gov- 
ernment being  willing  to  give  all  possible  evidence  of  their  loy- 
alty and  gratitude  to  His  Majesty,  and  zeal  for  his  service,  in 
this  important  expedition,  so  wisely  formed,  to  enlarge  the  do- 
minions and  commerce  of  Great  Britain,  and  so  absolutely  ne- 
cessary for  the  security  and  happiness  of  all  His  Majesty's 
subjects,  in  North  America  ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  said 
colony,  and  by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  hereby  enacted,  that 
three  companies  of  able  bodied  soldiers  be  forthwith  raised  in 
this  colony,  consisting  of  one  hundred  men  each,  (including  the 
officers.)  immediately  to  enter  into  His  Majesty's  service,  and 
to  be  transported  with  all  expedition,  to  Louisbourg,  to  join 
His  Majesty's  other  forces  expected  there,  for  the  carrying  on 
said  expedition  against  Canada ;  and  that  each  able  bodied 
man  that  shall  enlist  in  the  aforesaid  service,  shall  have  given 
him  as  an  encouragement,  from  said  colony,  a  bounty  of  £50^ 
in  bills  of  public  credit,  of  the  old  tenor ;  and  shall  have  given 
him  a  suit  of  clothes  to  the  value  of  £20,  old  tenor ;  and  be 
furnished  with  a  small  arm  and  cartouch  box,  over  and  above 
His  JNIajesty's  pay,  and  the  share  of  booty  taken. 

And  that  the  captain  or  commanding  officer  v{'  each  respec- 
tive company  or  trained  band,  within  this  colony,  bo,  and  they 
are  hereby  empowered  and  required  to  enlist  as  many  men  as 
they  can,  and  have  them  at  Newport,  by  the  loth  day  of  June 
instant,  in  order  to  receive  their  bounty. 

And  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  forthwith  aive  orders  to 


1746.]  AND   PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  173 

the  several  colonels  in  tins  colony,  to  direct  the  several  and  re- 
spective captains  or  commanding  officers  of  each  company, 
within  their  regiments,  to  be  as  expeditious  as  possible  in  their 
enlistino;  men  in  the  aforesaid  service. 

And  that  the  commissary  of  said  colony,  forthwith  procure 
said  arms,  cartouch  boxes  and  clothes,  at  the  expense  of  the 
colony ;  and  provide  six  months'  provisions  proper  for  the  sup- 
port of  said  soldiers,  according  to  the  stated  allowance  of  the 
colony ;  and  that  said  soldiers  be  immediately  after  their  en- 
listment, sent  to  Louisbourg. 

And  John  Cranston  and  Abraham  Redwood,  Esqs.,  Messrs- 
Jonathan  Nichols  and  George  Wanton,  are  hereby  appointed  a 
committee  for  the  procuring  proper  transports,  furnished  with 
mariners  and  necessaries,  upon  monthly  hire,  as  they  shall 
agree,  for  the  carrying  said  forces  to  Louisbourg,  and  from 
thence,  up  the  river  of  St.  Lawrence,  to  Quebec,  or  any  other 
place  of  landing  His  Majesty's  forces ;  and  they  are  hereby 
empowered  to  draw  on  the  general  treasurer  for  the  necessary 
expense  thereof,  giving  security  to  the  owners  of  such  trans- 
ports, for  the  payment  of  the  value  of  such  vessels,  if  lost ;  and 
to  be  repaid  the  same,  in  case  by  any  accident,  they  are  obliged 
to  pay  damages. 

And  till  such  time  as  said  soldiers  as  sent  off  from  Louis- 
bourg, they  shall  be  billeted  out  at  Newport,  by  the  field  offi- 
cers of  the  said  county  of  Newport,  at  thirty  shillings'  per 
week,  for  which  they  shall  draw  money  out  of  the  general 
treasury  ;  and  the  necessary  charges  of  enlistment,  and  bring- 
ing the  said  soldiers  to  Newport,  shall  be  paid  to  the  officers 
enlisting  such  men,  by  the  government. 

[The  remainder  of  this  act,  (which  is  quite  long,)  contains 
the  oath  to  be  taken  by  the  officers  and  soldiers  ;  it  also  relates 
to  the  fitting  of  the  sloop  Tartar,  which  was  to  accompany  the 
expedition,  the  expenses  of  enlisting  the  soldiers  and  sailors, 
their  pay,  the  emission  of  £11,250,  in  bills  of  credit,  and  the 
levying  of  a  tax  on  the  pulls  and  ifitjiblo  estates  of  the  inhebit- 
ants  for  the  purpose.] 


174  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1746. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  any  persons,  inhabitants  of  this 
colony,  -who  are  skillful  pilots  in  the  navigation  in  the  bay  and 
river  of  St.  Lawrence,  and  will  undertake  to  serve  as  pilots  in 
His  Majesty's  fleet,  now  going  to  Canada ;  upon  applying 
themselves  to  the  Governor  of  this  colony,  and  proving  them- 
selves to  be  such,  and  that  they  will  go  into  His  Majesty's 
fleet  as  pilots,  shall  receive  from  the  general  treasurer  of  this 
county,  a  bounty  of  £200,  old  tenor,  each,  and  such  wages  as 
shall  be  allowed  by  His  Majesty. 

God  save  the  Kinir. 


Proceedings  of  ihc  General  Assemblt/,  held  for  the  Colonij  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantcdions,  cd  Neivjjorl,  the  \2th  day  of 
June,  1746. 

The  lion.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  to  prevent  soldiers  from  being  rescued  or  detained, 
after  enlistment,  to  go  in  the  expedition  against  Canada. 
Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 
by  the  authority  thereof,  that  if  any  soldier  that  hath  enlisted, 
or  that  shall  enlist  himself  to  go  in  the  expedition  against  Can- 
ada, shall  be  rescued  or  detained  from  His  Majesty's  said  ser- 
vice, upon  information  thereof,  made  to  any  assistant  or  justice 
of  the  peace,  in  the  county  where  such  offence  is,  or  shall  be 
committed,  such  assistant  or  justice  of  the  peace  is  hereby  em- 
powered and  required  to  grant  forth  his  warrant  for  apprehend- 
ing such  soldier,  and  deliver  him  to  the  officer  who  enlisted 
him  ;  and  for  want  of  such  soldier,  to  apprehend  the  person  or 
persons  that  shall  rescue  or  detain  such  soldier,  and  commit 
liim  or  them  to  His  INInjcsty'e  jail  in  tlio  county  where  sucli  ol- 
I'ence  shall  be  committod,  there  to  rem;iiii  till  thu  next  court  of 


1746.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  175 

general  sessions  of  the  peace  ;  who  are  to  take  cognizance  of 
said  offence,  and  to  fine  each  offender  that  shall  be  committed, 
the  sum  of  .£200,  to  and  for  the  use  of  the  colony. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £20,  which  was  allowed 
to  purchase  a  suit  of  clothes,  for  each  of  the  soldiers,  he  aug- 
mented to  £26  ;  and  that  every  soldier,  which  has  a  suit  of 
clothes  sufficient  for  the  expedition  at  the  time  of  his  enlist- 
ment, shall  have  the  liberty  of  receiving  the  sum  of  £26  in  lieu 
of  a  suit  of  clothes ;  and  also,  that  every  soldier,  who  was  part- 
ly supplied  with  a  sufficiency  of  clothing  for  the  expedition  at 
his  enlisting,  shall  be  supplied  by  the  commissary  with  what 
shall  be  wanting ;  and  such  soldiers  shall  have  the  liberty  of 
drawing  the  surplusage  of  the  £26,  in  money ;  and  that  the 
said  commissary,  in  delivering  to  said  soldiers  clothes  and 
money,  be  governed  according  to  a  certificate  that  shall  be  given 
by  the  captain  of  such  company  to  which  the  said  soldier  or 
soldiers  shall  belong ;  who  is  hereby  appointed  to  examine  and 
view  such  soldiers,  and  their  clothing,  and  to  determine  what 
shall  be  wanting  to  each  soldier :  and  that  the  officers  that 
were  appointed  to  enlist  soldiers,  be  still  continued  in  that 
service,  till  Tuesday,  the  25th  day  of  June  instant,  if  a  suffi- 
cient number  be  not  enlisted  before,  and  then  to  make  report 
to  the  General  Assembly. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  New- 
port, upon  application  to  him  made  by  the  committee  appointed 
to  hire  suitable  vessels  for  transporting  the  soldiers  raised,  and 
to  be  raised  for  the  expedition  against  Canada,  be,  and  he  is 
hereby  directed  and  fully  empowered  to  impress  suitable  ves- 
sels for  the  purpose  aforesaid  ;  and  also,  all  such  workmen  as 
shall  be  necessary  for  repairing  and  fitting  said  vessels,  with 
all  expedition  ;  and  that  if  said  committee  and  the  owners  of 
such  vessels  as  shall  be  impressed,  as  aforesaid,  cannot  agree 
upon  the  value  thereof,  indifferent  persons  shall  be  chosen  by 
both  parties,  to  appraise  and  value  the  same  ;  and  the  said 
committee  shall  give  security  accordingly  ;  and  if  they  cannot 
agree  for  the  hire  thereof,  the  same  shall  be  settled  by  the 
General  Assembly. 


176  RECORDS    OP   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 

Whereas,  instructions  have  been  sent  by  His  Majesty  to  this 
government,  for  raising  a  number  of  land  forces,  and  armed 
vessels  to  join  in  the  expedition  against  Canada,  and  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  have  thought  fit  to  send  the  colony  sloop  Tartar 
in  said  expedition,  and  passed  an  act  for  that  purpose ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  act  passed,  di- 
recting said  sloop  to  cruise  with  the  Connecticut  colony  sloop 
the  ensuing  summer  season,  be  repealed ;  and  that  His  Honor, 
the  Governor,  inform  His  Honor,  the  Governor  of  Connecticut, 
of  this  resolution,  and  the  reasons  that  produced  it. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  New- 
port, be,  and  he  is  hereby  directed  and  fully  empowered  to  take 
into  custody,  as  prisoners  of  war,  as  many  of  those  freemen 
subjects  of  the  King  of  Spain,  that  were  taken  by  Capt.  John 
Dennis  and  Capt.  Ptobert  Morris,  in  company,  and  brought  into 
this  colony  and  sold  for  slaves,  as  can  be  found  within  the 
same,  to  be  sent  home  in  a  flag  of  truce,  to  be  commissioned 
by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be, 
for  the  releasement  of  those  of  His  Majesty's  subjects  that  are 
prisoners  at  the  Havana,  and  were  taken  from  Capt.  Dennis ; 
and  that  Daniel  Denton,  (who  was  one  of  said  prisoners,  and 
was  suffered  to  come  away,  in  order  to  procure  the  freemen 
brought  into  and  sold  in  this  government,  as  aforesaid,  to  be 
sent  back  for  the  releasement  of  the  said  prisoners  in  the  Ha- 
vana,) be  sent  to  the  Havana,  in  said  flag  of  truce. 

And  that  the  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Esq.,  Messrs.  John  Cal- 
lender,  Daniel  Updike  and  Edward  Scott,  be  a  committee,  to 
draft  a  letter  for  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  to  sign,  and  send  to 
the  Governor  of  the  Havana,  informing  him  of  what  this  gov- 
ernment has  done,  and  the  reasons  why  it  was  not  done  before  ; 
and  also,  another  letter  to  be  sent  to  the  Governor  of  New 
York,  requesting  him  to  release  so  many  of  the  freemen  sub- 
jects of  the  King  of  Spain,  who  were  taken  with  the  aforemen- 
tioned, as  can  be  found  within  that  government. 

And  that  tlie  owncn's  and  agents  of  the  brigantine  Defiance, 
and  snow,  Duke  of  Marlborough,  privateers,  reimburse  to  those 
persons  who  bouglit  tlie  said  freemen,  who  shall  be  released,  of 


1746.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  177 

those  brought  into  this  government,  as  aforesaid,  the  money 
which  they  paid  for  them ;  and  that  the  same  committee  draft 
another  letter,  to  be  signed  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  in  an- 
swer to  the  letter  of  His  Honor,  the  Governor  of  Pennsyl- 
vania. 

And  that  the  act  passed  at  the  last  session  of  this  Assembly, 
prohibiting  said  John  Dennis  having  a  commission,  be,  and  it 
is  hereby  repealed. 

And  that  the  speaker  of  the  house  of  deputies,  be  empow- 
ered and  requested  to  treat  with  any  persons  within  the  Prov- 
ince of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  who  are  owners  of  any  of  the  said 
freemen  sold  for  slaves,  as  aforesaid,  about  their  releasement ; 
and  that  if  any  of  said  freemen,  who  were  sold  for  slaves  in 
this  colony,  as  aforesaid,  are  dead,  that  evidences  thereof  be 
taken  by  the  aforesaid  sheriff,  and  transmitted  to  the  Havana, 
with  the  letter. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  appointed  to  hire 
transports,  procure  a  doctor  for  the  land  forces,  to  go  against 
Canada,  upon  the  best  terms  they  can ;  and  that  the  commis- 
sary procure  a  doctor,  for  the  colony  sloop  Tartar,  upon  the 
best  terms  he  can ;  and  that  the  commissary  provide  medicines 
for  both  said  doctors ;  and  also  tents  for  the  land  forces,  and  a 
suitable  bed  and  blanket  for  every  two  men. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  general  treasurer  be,  and  he  is 
hereby  directed  and  fully  empowered,  to  borrow  as  much 
money  as  the  government  has  an  immediate  necessity  for ; 
and  in  behalf  of  the  colony  to  give  his  note,  to  pay  the 
same  upon  demand. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Capt.  Joseph  Pendleton  be,  and 
he  is  hereby  fully  empowered  to  enlist  soldiers  to  go  in  the 
expedition  against  Canada ;  and  that  he  have  a  reasonable  al- 
lowance for  the  same. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  secretary  send  an  order  to  each  of 
the  ferrymen,  who  transport  persons  from  Rhode  Island,  forbid- 
ding them  to  carry  any  of  the  soldiei's,  enlisted  in  the  expedi- 

^'OL.  V.         23 


178  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 

tion  against  Canada,  off  from  said  island,  without  a  certificate 
from  their  captain,  or  commanding  officer. 
God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  2Uh  day 
of  June,  1746. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor, 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Hon.  Jos.  Whipple,  Esq.,  Deputy 
Governor,  John  Cranston,  Esq.,  Messrs.  George  Wanton  and 
James  Sheffield,  he,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  commit- 
tee, to  take  up  a  proper  vessel  for  a  flag  of  truce,  for  transport- 
ing the  Spanish  prisoners  (brought  into  this  colony  by  Capt. 
Morris,)  to  the  Havana ;  or  in  case  any  merchant  shall  think 
proper  to  offer  a  vessel  for  that  service,  they  apply  to  said 
committee,  who  are  directed  to  accept  the  same,  if  they  think 
proper. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write  to 
His  Excellency,  the  Governor  of  the  Province  of  the  Massachu- 
setts Bay,  or  in  his  absence,  to  the  Lieutenant  Governor  of  said 
Province  ;  and  also  to  His  Honor,  the  Governor  of  the  colony 
of  Connecticut,  to  know  of  them  when  they  expect  their  forces 
[now]  raising,  to  go  in  the  expedition  against  Canada,  will  em- 
bark ;  and  whether  any  convoy  will  be  provided  for  them. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  New- 
port be,  and  he  is  hereby  directed  and  empowered,  upon  re- 
quest of  the  committee  appointed  to  procure  vessels  to  trans- 
port the  soldiers  raised  and   to  be  raised,  to  go  in  the  expedi. 


1746.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  179 

tion  against  Canada,  to  impress  as  many  men  as  the  said 
committee  shall  think  proper,  for  manning  said  vessels. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  captains  of  all  the  companies 
in  this  colony  continue  enlisting  soldiers  till  the  8th  day  of 
July  next ;  and  that  all  the  soldiers  that  shall  be  enlisted,  be 
brought  to  Newport,  by  that  day;  and  that  the  sum  of  £1,000 
old  tenor,  be  lodged  in  the  hands  of  each  of  the  colonels  of  the 
regiments,  in  this  colony,  to  be  distributed  amongst  such  of 
their  captains  as  they  shall  think  proper,  for  paying  the  boun- 
ties to  such  soldiers  as  shall  be  enlisted ;  and  said  captains  to 
be  accountable  to  the  colonels,  and  the  colonels  to  be  accounta- 
ble to  the  General  Assembly,  for  what  money  they  shall  receive 
for  the  purpose,  aforesaid ;  and  that  said  captains  return  what 
soldiers  they  shall  enlist,  to  the  respective  colonels,  with  their 
names  ;  and  that  the  colonels  take  care  of  them,  and  see  that 
they  are  all  at  Newport,  by  the  said  8th  day  of  July  next. 

An  Act  for  stating  the  ferriage  over  Weybosset  river,  in  the 
■    town  of  Providence. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  the  colony,  afore- 
said, and  by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  Amaziah 
Waterman,  of  said  Providence,  keep  a  ferry  on  the  east  side 
and  Henry  Sweeting,  of  said  Providence,  keep  a  ferry  on  the 
west  side  of  said  Weybosset  river,  for  transporting  persons 
horses,  chaises,  chairs,  and  other  things  over  said  river ;  and 
that  they  take  for  ferriage,  two  pence,  for  a  single  person,  four 
pence  for  a  person  and  horse ;  one  shilling  and  sixpence,  for  a 
chaise  or  chair,  with  a  horse,  and  the  persons  riding  therein ; 
and  so  to  continue  until  a  bridge  be  built  over  said  river ;  and 
that  no  other  person  presume  to  ferry  over  said  river  for  hire. 

God  save  the  King. 


180  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Ehods 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  the  Sih  day 
of  July,  1746. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  a  lieutenant  colonel  be  appointed  to 
command  the  land  forces,  raising  in  this  colony,  for  the  expedi- 
tion against  Canada. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Robert  Gibbs,  Esq.,  Messrs.  Stephen 
Hopkins  and  Daniel  Updike,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed 
a  committee  to  draw  a  letter  in  answer  to  the  letter  from  Ad- 
miral Warren,  to  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  and  present  the 
same  to  this  Assembly. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  captains  of  the  three  companies 
which  are  going  in  the  expedition  against  Canada,  or  any  two 
of  them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee  to 
view  and  examine  the  arms  purchased  for  said  companies ;  and 
that  those  which  will  do  for  said  expedition,  be  immediately 
put  in  good  order,  and  those  which  are  not  good,  be  returned 
to  the  persons  of  whom  they  were  purchased,  and  others  that 
are  good,  be  procured  by  the  commissary  in  their  room  ;  and 
that  those  arms  which  were  purchased  as  good  arms,  and  in 
good  order,  and  are  not  so,  be  repaired  at  the  charge  of  those 
persons  who  sold  them ;  and  that  the  committee  employ  as 
many  gunsmiths  to  fit  said  arms  as  shall  be  necessary  to  do  the 
same,  with  the  greatest  expedition. 

Upon  the  petition  of  John  Beard,  Randall  Eldrcd  and  Rob- 
ert Durfey,  masters  of  the  three  vessels  hired  by  this  colony 
for  transporting  the  soldiers  raised  for  the  expedition  against 
Canada,  craving  an  allowance  for  the  necessaries  of  their  cabin, 
during  their  continuance  in  the  service ; — 


1746.]  AND    PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  181 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £20,  be 
allowed,  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  for  the  cabin 
expenses  of  each  of  the  transports  which  are  to  carry  the  sol- 
diers to  Canada,  and  that  the  same  be  paid  to  each  of  the  cap- 
tains of  said  transports. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  in  case  the  other  governments  send 
their  soldiers  to  Louisbourg,  without  His  Majesty's  commissions 
to  their  officers,  that  our  officers  and  soldiers  be  also  sent  to 
Louisbourg ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  give  commis- 
sions to  our  officers  to  continue  till  they  receive  His  Majesty's 
commissions ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write  to  Gen. 
St.  Clair,  or  any  other  person,  to  whom  His  Majesty's  commis- 
sions shall  be  sent,  requesting  him  to  deliver  commissions  to  all 
our  officers,  agreeably  to  their  respective  nominations  here. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  commissary  procure  proper 
arms  for  the  commissioned  officers  of  the  companies  raising  in 
this  colony,  for  the  expedition  against  Canada. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  time  for  enlisting  soldiers  for 
the  expedition  against  Canada,  be  continued  till  further  orders, 
or  advice  shall  come  to  this  colony  for  embarking  the  soldiers, 
unless  the  companies  be  filled  up  before  that  time  ;  and  if  said 
companies  be  not  then  full,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor, 
forthwith  give  out  a  warrant  for  impressing  a  sufficient  number 
of  soldiers  to  fill  up  said  companies,  in  the  counties  of  Newport 
and  Providence,  in  the  following  manner,  viz. : 

Capt.  Sayer's  company  to  be  filled  up  in  the  county  of 
Newport. 

Capt.  Rice's  company  in  the  county  of  Providence. 

Capt.  Cole's  company  to  be  filled  up  equally  in  the  counties 
of  Newport  and  Providence. 

And  that  none  of  the  inhabitants  of  King's  county,  be  im- 
pressed ;  but  that  any  other  persons  may  be  impressed  that 
can  be  found  in  any  part  of  the  colony  ;  and  that  all  the  sol- 
diers be  ordered  to  Goat  Island,  as  soon  as  sufficient  beds, 
blankets  and  tents  are  provided  for  them  ;  and  that  from  this 
time,  the  lieutenant  colonel  and  other  officers  of  the  several 


182  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 

companies,  going  in  the  expedition  against  Canada,  be  the  en- 
listing officers,  and  no  other. 

I,  the  subscriber,  dissent  from  that  part  of  the  vote  above,  re- 
specting the  impress.  CALEB  CARR. 

Voted,  that  the  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Esq.,  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, Daniel  Coggeshall,  Esq.,  Messrs.  John  Spenser,  Samuel 
Perry  and  David  Anthony,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  chosen 
trustees  for  the  care  and  management  of  the  rents  and  profits 
of  the  estate  submitted  to  this  government  by  the  late  Nine- 
gret,  sachem,  deceased,  in  the  year  1713,  for  the  use  of  the 
proper  heir. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  King's  attorney  draw  a  proper 
instrument,  to  be  signed  by  Ilis  Honor,  the  Governor,  under 
the  colony  seal,  empowering  the  agent,  in  behalf  of  the  Gov- 
ernor and  Company  of  this  colony,  to  apply  to  His  Majesty's 
ministers  and  Parliament,  to  receive  the  money  for  the  expense 
of  the  expedition  against  Cape  Breton,  and  to  give  discharge 
or  discharges  for  the  same,  in  behalf  of  the  colony ;  and  that 
the  same  be  transmitted  to  the  agent,  with  a  copy  of  the  Duke 
of  Newcastle's  letter,  to  this  government  the  last  year,  to  assist 
Commodore  Warren. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  John  Cranston  and  Abraham  Red- 
wood, Esqs.,  Messrs.  Peter  Bours,  Geo.  Wanton  and  Jonathan 
Nichols,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  ap" 
pointed  a  committee  to  act,  transact  and  direct  every  thing 
which  shall  be  needful  and  necessary  respecting  the  expedition 
against  Canada,  which  shall  be  left  undone  by  this  Assembly 
at  their  rising  ;  and  that  said  committee,  or  the  major  part  of 
them,  examhie  the  accounts  of  the  officers  going  in  said  expe- 
dition, and  order  the  general  treasurer  to  pay  what  they  think 
reasonable  and  just ;  and  that  the  commissary  provide  one 
more  bhmket  for  every  two  soldiers  going  in  said  expedition ; 
and  that  if  any  person  who  shall  be  impressed  for  said  expedi- 
tion, shall  afterward  enlist  and  swear  as  the  law  directs,  he  shall 


1746.] 


AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  183 


be  entitled  to  the  bounty  and  all  other  advantages  which  the 
other  enlisted  soldiers  were  entitled  to. 
God  save  the  King. 

Admiral  Warren  to  Governor  Greene. 


Boston.  29th  June,  1746. 

Sir : — I  came  hither  from  Louisbourg,  to  concert  measures  with  Gov.  Shirley, 
for  carrying  on  the  intended  operations  against  Canada  with  all  jDossible  despatch 
as  directed  by  His  Majesty's  instructions. 

Upon  looking  over  the  votes  of  the  different  colonies  interested  in  the  success  of  this 
important  enterprise,  I  find  the  number  of  men  proposed  by  your  government,  as 
their  quota,  to  be  much  fewer  than  we  hoped  from  thence,  upon  this  glorious  occa- 
sion given  the  colonies  to  extirpate  so  dangerous  an  enemy  as  the  French  have  al- 
ways been,  and  will  ever  prove  to  them  ;  by  which  means,  a  lasting  foundation  to 
latest  generations  will  be  laid  for  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  all  His  Majesty's 
American  dominions,  in  competition  with  which  no  expense  can  be  adequate,  nor 
should  be  once  thought  of  by  the  colonies  or  our  mother  country,  as  a 
successful  attempt  must  make  them  ample  amend  for  the  greatest  debts  that  can 
be  the  consequence  of  this  great  undertaking. 

I  am  of  opinion,  that  all  the  seamen  should  be  engaged,  that  you  can  possibly  meet 
with,  to  go  in  the  armed  vessels  from  each  colony ;  and  that  no  time  be  lost,  as  the 
season  will  very  soon  render  it  impracticable  to  make  the  attempt  this  year ;  in  which 
case,  however,  I  hope  Crown  Point,  from  whence  all  our  frontiers  are,  and  have 
been  annoyed,  may  be  reduced  as  a  proper  place  of  rendezvous,  and  stores  for  the 
army  destined  to  go  to  Montreal. 

Though  my  health  is  very  much  impaired,  nothing  shall  be  wanting  in  me  to 
act  the  part  allotted  me  in  this  expedition.  The  ministry  appointing  me  so  sud- 
denly after  I  had,  with  the  most  earnest  application,  procured  His  Majesty's  leave 
to  resign  the  government  of  Louisbourg,  for  the  recovery  of  my  health,  is  owing  to 
their  opinion  of  my  great  regard  and  attachment  to  the  colonies,  in  which  they  do 
me  but  common  justice  ;  for  no  man  has  their  prosperity  more  at  heart ;  which  shall 
be  manifested  by  my  actions  as  well  as  words,  when  occasion  offers,  which  I  hope 
will  be  very  soon. 

I  shall  be  proud  to  receive  your  commands ;  and  any  intelligence  you  can  pro- 
cure about  the  situation  of  Canada,  or  if  you  have  any  pilots  acquainted  with  the 
navigation  thither.  I  am,  with  very  great  regard,  sir, 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

P.  WARREN. 

To  the  Hon.  William  Greene,  Esq.,  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Governor  Greene  to  Admiral  Sir  Peter  Warren. 

Providence,  July  — ,  174G. 
Sir : — I  acknowledge  the  favor  of  yours,  upon  your  arrival  in  Boston,  and  would 
beg  leave  to  observe  to  you,  that    however    small    the   quota    of  meu  proposed  by 


184  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OP    RHODE    ISLAND  [1746. 

Rhode  Island  may  seem,  when  the  votes  of  the  several  governments  for  raising  men 
are  compared,  yet  if  the  smallness  of  this  government  be  considered,  and  its  present 
circumstances,  the  quota  of  men  voted,  must  be  looked  upon  as  many  as  in  reason 
could  be  expected  from  this  small  colony. 

Upon  a  fair  and  exact  computation,  the  number  of  men  in  the  colony  of  Rhode 
Island,  proper  for  bearing  arms,  cannot  be  computed  to  be  more  than  three  thou- 
sand ;  which  number,  must  be  greatly  lessened  within  these  few  months  past  by  the 
number  of  vessels  fitted  out  and  cruising  against  His  Majesty's  enemies. 

There  being  out  of  this  colony,  and  fitting  out  on  that  account,  three  ships,  of 
about  twenty  guns  each ;  one  snow,  and  four  brigantines,  of  about  sLxteen  guns 
each  ;  and  four  sloops,  of  about  twelve  guns  each  ;  which  are  all  manned  from  this 
place,  and  are  actually  out  on  their  cruise,  saving  one  brigantine  and  two  sloops, 
now  fitting  out,  and  which  in  this  small  government,  must  necessarily  greatly  ex- 
haust the  number  of  men  fit  for  His  Majesty's  service  on  the  present  occasion. 

However,  this  government  considered  the  expedition  intended  for  the  reduction 
of  Canada,  as  an  undertakmg  of  the  utmost  consequence  to  all  His  Majesty's  colo- 
nies in  America ;  and  that  they  might  be  aiding  and  assisting  as  far  as  the  strength 
and  circumstances  of  this  small  government  would  admit,  cheerfully  ordered  three 
hundred  able  bodied  soldiers  to  be  raised  and  sent  to  join  His  Majesty's  land 
forces  ;  and  one  hundred  seamen  in  the  sloop  Tartar,  lately  in  His  Majesty's  ser- 
vice, at  Louisbourg,  to  attend  on  the  sea  force. 

And  that  the  soldiers  might  enter  the  service  with  the  greater  cheerfulness, 
and  resolution,  the  government  ordered  a  large  bounty,  and  have  taken  care  that 
they  should  be  well  clothed  ;  by  which  means,  notwithstanding  the  scarcity  of  men 
in  the  colony,  the  companies  are  nearly  filled  up,  and  are  daily  under  discipline, 
and  will  be  ready  for  embarkation  immediately  upon  the  officers'  receiving  their 
commission  ;  and  therefore  it  may  be  proper  that  timely  notice  be  given  whether  it 
be  expected  that  these  forces  be  sent  directly  to  Louisbourg,  or  attend  a  convoy  at 
the  Massachusetts. 

And  I  am  well  assured,  that  this  government  had  such  a  sense  of  His  Majesty's 
gracious  intentions  by  this  expedition,  and  of  the  lasting  consequence  of  the  efl'ect 
of  it,  if  well  executed,  that  they  acted  with  an  intention  of  sending  a  full  quota,  and 
to  be  no  ways  wanting  on  this  extraordinary  occasion ;  and  I  cannot  but  flatter  my- 
self that  this  matter  will  appear  in  the  same  light  to  you,  when  this  small  colony, 
under  its  present  circumstances,  is  compared  with  the  other  larger  governments  in 
North  America. 

As  it  has  appeared  by  long  and  melanchol}'  experience,  that  the  peace  and  wel- 
fare of  His  Majesty's  subjects  in  North  America  can  never  be  established  as  long  as 
Canada  subsists,  it  was  with  the  greatest  joy  that  His  Majesty's  subjects  in  this  colo- 
ny received  the  news  of  his  intentions  to  reduce  it,  and  the  appointment  of  Admiral 
Warren  to  have  the  chief  command  of  the  sea  force,  made  the  joy  more  universal ; 
and  as  in  this  government,  it  has  been  a  means  of  raising  the  soldiers  and  sailors 
with  the  greater  ease ;  it  is  not  doubted,  but  under  the  influence  of  Providence, 
will  be  of  as  happy  consequence  in  the  designed  effect. 

This  government  has  also  given  due  encouragement  for  the  engaging  any  persons 
that  are  acquainted  with  the  navigation  to  Canada;  but  by  reason  of  the  distant 
situation  of  this  colony,  a  more  exact  account  of  the  situation  of  that  country 
and  more  skdlful  pilots  may  be  had  from  some  of  F^is  MajosfvV  otlier  froviM-n- 
ments,  than  can  be  expected  from  this. 


1746.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  185 


Whatever  dii*ections  shall  be  communicated  respecting  the  forces  from  this  o-qv- 
ernmeat,  will  be  received  with  pleasure,  and  put  in  execution  with  all  possible  ex- 
pedition, by  sir,  Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

,  WILLIAM  GREENE. 

P.  S.  As  the  honor  of  the  government  was  at  stake  for  the  releasement 
of  those  sailors  sent  for  manning  the  ship  Vigilant,  this  government  would  bef  a 
Hne,  by  which  they  may  assure  their  friends  that  that  point  had  been  complied  with- 

To  Admiral  Warren. 


Governor  Shirki/  and  Admiral  Warren  to  Governor  Greene. 

Boston,  July  4th,  1746. 

Sir : — Last  week  Mr.  Warren  came  here  in  the  Chester,  from  Louisbourg,  in  or- 
der to  settle,  with  Mr.  Shirley  (and  Gen.  St.  Clair's  approbation,  when  he  shall  ar- 
rive,) the  plan  of  operations  for  the  expedition  against  Canada,  in  the  most  speedy 
manner,  which  the  advanced  season  of  the  year  requires  to  be  done  without  the  least 
Joss  of  time  ;  as  it  also  does,  that  all  the  governments  concerned  in  it,  should  push 
on  the  completing  of  the  levies,  and  making  the  necessary  preparations  and  disposi- 
tions for  it  within  their  respective  colonies  with  the  utmost  despatch  ;  and  in  doing 
which,  we  think  they  should  act  with  the  utmost  vigor,  not  regarding  what  they 
may  esteem  to  be  barely  their  just  quota  and  proportion  of  men  and  money  in  this 
expedition,  but  the  importance  of  the  enterprise  towards  cither  laying  a  most  sure 
foundation  for  the  general  welfare  and  prosperity  of  all  these  colonies,  or  leaving 
them  in  so  precarious  a  situation,  as  may  sometime  or  other  expose  them  to  be  re. 
duced  under  the  power  and  subjection  of  the  French  ;  upon  which  account,  they 
should  consider  themselves  as  one  body,  united  in  the  common  cause,  in  which,  if 
any  one  particular  colony  should  exert  itself  beyond  either  its  just  proportion  or 
abilities,  it  may  (we  doubt  not)  be  depended  upon  that  the  exceedings  of  such  colo- 
ny will  be  made  up  to  it,  either  by  an  average  to  be  afterwards  settled  among  all  the 
colonies  concerned,  or  by  a  reimbursement  from  His  Majesty,  or  the  Parliament  of 
Great  Britain. 

And  it  ought  to  be,  in  a  particular  manner  considered,  that  this  will,  in  all  proba- 
bility, be  the  only  favorable  opportunity  of  attempting  the  driving  of  the  French  ofi' 
from  the  northern  part  of  this  continent,  which  if  neglected,  may  never  be  re- 
deemed ;  but  followed  close  by  an  endless  train  of  disadvantages  and  difficulties  to  all 
His  Majesty's  northern  colonies,  too  many  to  be  enumerated  here,  and  too  obvious 
to  need  it. 

Wherefore,  we  trust  that  all  His  Majesty's  governments  upon  this  continent,  will 
leave  nothing  untried  for  raising  a  sufficient  force  for  securing  the  success  of  the 
present  enterpi-ise,  that  is,  all  the  force  they  can  raise. 

The  securing  of  the  assistance  of  the  Six  Nations,  we  esteem  a  pomt  most  essen- 
tial to  the  success  of  the  expedition,  and  necessary  to  be  gained  at  any  rate  ;  Mr. 
Gooch  writes  to  Mr.  Shirley,  that  he  will  come  with  presents  in  his  hands  for  this 
purpose. 

All  possible  despatch  Is  so  apparently  necessary  for  our  succeeding  in  this  expe- 
dition, or  even  proceeding  upon  it,  that  we  are  persuaded  Your  Honor  will  agree 
with  us  in  it. 

VOL.  V.  24 


186  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746, 

We  enclose  Your  Honor  a  memorandum  of  what  we  apprehend  necessary  to  be  ' 
provided  ;  and  doubt  not  but  you  will  be  pleased  to  provide  what  part  of  them  can 
be  had  in  your  government;  we  hope  in  particular,  that  two  armed  sloops,  brigan- 
tines  or  snows,  with  eighty  men  and  ten  carriage  guns  each,  may  be  procured  by 
Your  Honor  ;  and  we  think  that  as  it  will  be  absolutely  necessary  that  the  troops 
should  be  prepared  to  winter  in  the  enemy's  country,  ten  months'  provisions  should 
be  got  for  them,  and  some  salt  put  on  board  every  transport,  which  will  be  of  ser- 
vice to  cure  what  fresh  stock  may  be  had  in  Canada  ;  and  as  there  will  be  a  greater 
number  of  seamen  wanting,  for  not  only  the  transports  and  armed  vessels  from  the 
colonies,  but  His  Majesty's  ships  also,  at  Louisbourg,  the  A^'igilant  in  particular,  we 
hope  Your  Honor  will  assist  as  much  as  may  be,  by  an  impress,  or  otherwise,  as  you 
shall  think  proper. 

We  take  the  liberty  to  observe  to  you,  that  we  are  assured  it  will  bo  a  matter  of 
surprise  to  His  Majesty's  ministry  to  find  what  a  small  proportion  of  forces  the 
colony  under  your  government  has  contributed  towards  carrying  on  this  expedi- 
tion ;  and  we  flatter  ourselves  that  when  your  Assembly  shall  consider  how  much 
below  their  abilities  they  have  acted  upon  this  extraordinary  occasion,  and  compare 
themselves  and  what  they  have  done  for  the  common  cause,  with  the  other  colonies 
of  New  England,  and  in  particular  with  New  Hampshire,  and  the  part  they  have 
acted  at  this  important  juncture  ;  that  they  will  think  it  not  only  reasonable  and  fit, 
but  for  their  interest  to  augment  their  levies  to  a  just  number. 

We  beg  leave  farther  to  observe,  that  the  extraordinary  bounty  your  Assembly 
has  voted  for  encouraging  those  few  men  to  enlist,  which  are  to  be  raised  as  the  quota 
of  your  government,  has  not  had  the  best  effect  upon  His  Majesty's  service  in  the 
neighboring  colonies  ;  having,  as  we  are  informed,  not  only  drawn  several  of  their 
men  from  them,  but  damped  the  enlistments  within  those  colonies,  where  the 
bounty  given,  though  a  very  sufficient  one,  is  yet  much  below  that  given  by  your 
Assembly. 

Mr.  Shirley  is  in  hopes  that  troops  raised  in  this  Province,  may  sail  by  the  20th 
instant,  under  convoy  of  the  Massachusetts  frigate,  and  probably  of  His  Majesty's 
ship  Chester  ;  and  we  shall  be  glad,  if  you  think  proper,  that  your  troops  should 
rendezvous  here,  to  have  them  go  in  company  with  the  Massachusetts  and  Connec- 
ticut forces,  which  latter  propose  their  rendezvous  at  Boston. 

We  have,  in  a  joint  letter,  desired  Lieut.  Gen.  St.  Clair  to  come  to  Boston,  as  it 
will  save  much  time  in  forwarding  the  expedition,  for  doing  which,  nothing  shall  be 
wanting  on  our  parts,  nor  will,  we  are  persuaded,  on  Your  Honor's. 
We  are,  with  very  great  regard,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient,  humble  servants. 

W.  SHIRLEY, 
P.  WARREN. 

We  desire  the  favor  of  you  to  let  us  knew,  as  soon  as  possible,  the  number  of 
troops  you  shall  be  able  to  raise  in  j'our  government,  and  by  what  time  tliey  will 
get  to  the  place  of  rendezvous. 


1746.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  187 


Letter  from  Governor  Greene  to  Governor  Bhirley  and  Admiral 
JSir  Peter   Warren. 

Gentlemen: — Your  favors  of  the  4th  and  7th  of  July  Instant,  came  safe  by  the 
messenger,  on  Monday  last,  being  two  days  after  the  Assembly  rose  ;  which  now 
stands  adjourned  to  the  19th  of  next  month. 

As  to  what  you  write  about  procuring  two  armed  snows  or  brigantines,  &c.,  can- 
not determine  without  the  approbation  of  the  General  Assembly  ;  for  which  pur- 
pose, Intend  to  be  advised  by  the  council,  whether  they  think  proper  to  call  them 
together  before  the  day  they  stand  adjourned  to. 

Our  colony  sloop  will  sail  with  the  transports,  with  one  hundred  men  on  board, 
(officers  included,)  well  found  and  provided. 

As  for  the  provisions,  the  General  Assembly  had  devolved  a  power  on  the  com- 
mittee for  carrying  on  the  afitairs  of  the  expedition  ;  and  care  will  be  taken  to  put  a 
sufficient  quantity  on  board,  with  some  salt.  Our  colony  sloop  and  transports  are 
now  nearly  ready,  and  I  design  they  shall  sail  Immediately  to  Boston,  for  the  benefit 
of  a  convoy,  and  go  In  company  with  the  other  forces,  to  Louisbourg. 

As  to  what  you  write  about  the  coasters,  during  the  time  of  the  embai'go  here, 
not  one  was  stopped  a  moment  from  proceeding  on  his  voyage,  being  all  exempted 
in  the  warrant ;  and  at  all  other  times  never  met  with  any  hindrance  here. 

As  for  the  other  affairs,  of  raising  more  levies,  I  cannot  give  you  any  tolerable 
encouragement  to  expect ;  but  must  refer  you  to  the  letter  I  sent  the  Hon.  Admiral 
Warren,  of  the  11th  Instant,  wherein  the  sentiments  of  our  General  Assembly  on 
that  subject,  are  fully  expressed.  However,  what  I  can  do  la  the  affair,  for  His 
Majesty's  service,  shall  not  be  wanting. 

Being  with  due  respect,  gentlemen. 

Your  obedient  humble  servant, 

Newport,  18th  July,  1746.  WILLIAM  GKEENE. 

To  His  Excellency,  Wm.  Shirley,  Esq.,  and  the  Hon.  Peter  Warren,  Esq.,  Boston. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemUi/,  held  for  the  Colons/  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  third  Tues- 
day in  August,  1746. 

The  Hon.  Willioam  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  appointing  a  council  of  war,  to  hold  a  court  martial  on 
the  soldiers  raised  for  the  expedition  against  Canada,  till 
they  shall  join  His  Majesty's  forces. 


188  RECORDS   OP   THE   COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority of  the  same,  that  the  lieutenant  colonel  and  three  cap- 
tains, and  the  three  first  lieutenants  of  the  forces  bou.nd  for 
Canada,  or  a  major  part  of  them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  ap- 
pointed a  council  of  war,  for  the  punishing  any  of  the  oflicers 
and  men  that  belong  to  said  forces,  according  to  martial  law  ; 
and  that  said  power  be  continued  in  them  until  they  join  His 
Majesty's  forces  from  Europe. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  soldiers  raised  for  the  expe- 
dition against  Canada,  be  forthwith  put  on  board  the  trans- 
ports, there  to  continue ;  only  to  go  on  shore  upon  Goat  Island 
as  often  as  the  commanding  officers  shall  think  proper,  for  ex- 
ercising ;  and  that  the  transports  be  hauled  as  near  Goat  Is- 
land as  conveniently  as  may  be ;  and  that  said  soldiers  have 
their  full  allowance  of  provisions  on  board,  agreeably  to  act  of 
Assembly ;  and  that  Capt.  Jonathan  Nichols,  be,  and  he  is 
hereby  appointed  to  procure  said  provisions,  and  see  that  the 
soldiers  have  the  same  regularly,  and  in  good  order. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  tents,  both  of  the  officers 
and  men,  raised  to  go  in  tlie  expedition  against  Canada,  be 
lined  at  the  top,  and  painted;  and  that  the  commissary  procure 
the  same  to  be  done  as  soon  as  may  be. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  John  Cranston,  Esq.,  Messrs.  Sam'l 
Wickham  and  Thomas  Cranston,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  call  the  several  captains  or  other  offi- 
cers appointed  by  this  colony  for  the  expedition  against  Cape 
Breton,  or  their  representatives,  who  received  the  money  and 
clothing  for  the  use  of  the  soldiers  that  went  in  said  expedi. 
tion,  to  account  for  the  same ;  and  upon  their  refusing  or  neg- 
lecting to  account,  that  they  be  sued  by  the  general  treasurer 
forthwith. 

God  save  the  King. 


1746.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  189 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhif/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  the  29th  day 
of  September,  1746. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  making  additional  works  at  Fort  George,  and  sup- 
plying said  fort  with  warlike  stores. 

Whereas,  the  well  fortifying  the  town  of  Newport,  and  fur- 
nishing the  fortifications  there  with  warlike  stores,  are  neces- 
sary for  the  security  of  the  government  \ — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  the 
colony,  aforesaid,  and  by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted, 
that  the  sum  of  £2,120  in  money,  of  the  old  tenor,  be  allowed, 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  towards  the  completing  the  new 
works,  and  the  alteration  of  the  old  battery  adjoining  to 
Fort  George,  at  Goat  Island,  and  already  begun. 

And  that  Jahleel  Brenton  and  John  Gardner,  Esqs.,  Messrs. 
Godfrey  Malbone,  John  Brown,  Philip  Wilkinson,  Joseph  Har- 
rison, Peter  Harrison,  Walter  Chaloner,  James  Sheffield,  Wm. 
Read,  Capt.  Joshua  Sayer,  William  Bice  and  Edward  Cole,  or 
the  major^part  of  them,  be  established  and  appointed  a  commit- 
tee to.finish  the  said  new  battery,  or  work  begun,  and  make 
the  alterations  in  the  old  battery,  at  said  Goat  Island ;  and 
that  the  said  sum  of  £2,120,  be  paid  to  them,  or  the  major  part 
of  them,  out  of  the  general  treasury,  for  the  procuring  timber, 
plauk  and  materials  necessary  for  carrying  on  and  completing 
said  works,  and  paying  the  artificers  who  shall  work  on  the 
same. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
thejcommissary  forthwith  provide  for  said  Fort  George,  at  the 


190  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1746. 

expense  of  the  colony,  thirty  barrels  of  gunpowder,  and  as 
many  shot,  as  together  with  what  is  already  at  said  fort,  will 
make  up  the  complement  of  twenty  rounds  for  each  cannon  at 
said  fort ;  and  that  the  said  commissary  also  provide  all  small 
stores  that  are  necessary  for  the  service  of  said  fort,  the  charges 
whereof  shall  be  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Dissent. —  Vote  for  additional  worhs  at  Fort  George. 

1.  Foi-  that  if  the  circumstances  of  the  colony  be  duly  considered,  they  are  not 
in  a  condition  to  be  at  the  expense  of  any  additional  fortifications. 

2.  For  that  the  town  of  Newport  hath  already  had  built,  at  the  charge  of  the 
colony,  a  fort  sufficient  to  guard  it  against  the  attacks  of  any  private  men-of-war, 
fitted  out  by  private  persons ;  and  that  as  the  works  now  about  to  be  built,  will  not 
be  able  to  defend  them  against  the  fleets  of  any  sovereign  prince,  it  is  conceived 
they  will  be  entirely  useless. 

3.  For  that  we  apprehend  such  a  sum  of  money  as  must  necessarily  be  expend- 
ed in  the  works  proposed,  will  be  much  more  useful  for  the  defence  of  the  colony, 
if  it  be  kept  in  the  general  treasury  until  it  be  known  in  what  place  and  in  what 
manner  we  shall  be  attacked  by  the  enemy. 

STEP.  HOPKINS,  JOB  RANDALL, 

GEO.  13K0WN,  WALTER  PHETTIPLACE. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  colony  sloop  Tartar,  be  imme- 
diately sent  to  meet  Admiral  Lestock,  agreeably  to  the  request 
of  His  Excellency,  Governor  Shirley  and  Admiral  AVarren, 
with  the  packet  sent  by  those  gentlemen,  to  inform  Admiral 
Lestock  of  the  situation  of  the  French  naval  force  upon  the 
coast  of  North  America ;  and  that  Ilis  Honor,  the  Governor, 
give  orders  to  the  captain  of  the  colony  sloop  agreeably  to  the 
form  sent  by  Governor  Shirley  and  Admiral  Warren ;  and  that 
His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write' to  those  gentlemen  by  the  next 
post,  and  inform  them  that  this  colony  concurs  with  them 
in  the  necessity  of  Admiral  Lestock's  being  apprised  as  above ; 
and  that  for  said  purpose,  our  colony  sloop  was  ordered  imme- 
diately to  sail. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Col.  Daniel  Updike  and  Mr.  Josias 
Lyndon,  be  a  committee  to  draw  a  letter,  to  be  signed  by  His 
Honor,  the  Governor,  and  send  to  our  agent,  with  a  draft  of 
the  nev»f  wurks  at   Goat  Island,  directing  the  agent  to  use  his 


1746.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  191 


best  endeavors  to  procure  the  cannon  which  this  colony  has  pe- 
titioned His  Majesty  for  ;  and  that  he  send  them  over  by  the 
first  opportunity. 
God  save  the  King. 

Gov.  Shirley  and  Admiral  Warren  to  Gov.  Greene. 

Boston,  September  29th,  174G. 
Sir : — As  you  will  perceive  by  the  enlosed  letters  and  intelligence,*  which  we 
transmit  to  you,  open,  what  steps  we  have  taken  to  apprise  Admiral  Lestock  (who, 
with  a  strong  fleet,  may  be  daily  expected  upon  the  coast  of  Nova  Scotia,  or  Cape 
Breton,)  of  the  situation  and  strength  of  the  enemy's  naval  force,  seen  the  16th  in- 
stant off  the  harbor  of  Chebucto,  near  Cape  Samborough. 

We  have  despatched  as  many  vessels  as  we  could  possibly  get  here,  to  meet  the 
Admiral,  with  this  intelligence  ;  and  are  of  opinion  you  can't  do  your  King  and 
country  a  greater  piece  of  service,  than  by  despatching  your  colony  sloop  without  a 
moment's  loss  of  time,  to  cruise  for  Admiral  Lestock,  with  this  intelligence,  till  the 
25th  of  October,  unless  she  should  sooner  meet  with  him.  And  as  the  English  fleet 
•will  most  probably  make  the  Cape  Sable  shore,  to  the  westward  of  the  Isle  of  Sables, 
we  are  of  opinion  the  enclosed  will  be  a  proper  order,  and  the  station  mentioned 
therein,  most  likely  to  meet  the  fleet ;  and  therefore  flatter  ourselves  you  will  ap- 
prove of  it. 

We  have  letters  from  Mr.  Mascarene,  governor  of  Annapolis,  dated  the  21st  in- 
stant, by  which  we  find  the  Chester  and  Shirley  frigate  were  there,  and  that  he  had 
heard  of  no  French  ships  being  in  the  Bay  of  Fundy  ;  and  we  hope,  ere  this,  the 
reinforcement  of  troops  sent  by  Governor  Shirley,  are  safe  there. 
We  are,  with  great  regard,  sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servants, 
•  W.  SHIRLEY, 

P.  WARREN. 

P.  S.  We  esteem  it  of  the  last  consequence  to  the  colonies,  that  Admiral  Les- 
tock should  be  met  with  at  sea  ;  as  in  case  he  should  be  too  weak,  to  cone  with  the 
enemy,  wthout  the  assistance  of  Admiral  Townsend,  and  be  surprised,  and  over, 
powered  by  them,  the  storm  of  their  whole  force  would  be  immediately  directed 
towards  New  England  ;  wherefore,  we  hope  we  may  depend  absolutely  upon  your 
sending  out  your  colony  sloop,  with  the  enclosed  despatches,  forthwith. 


*  The  intelligence  alluded  to,  conveyed  in  a  number  of  letters  and  depositions  was,  tliat 
a  large  French  fleet,  consisting  of  twenty-six  ships  of  war  and  forty  transports,  had  been 
despatched  on  an  expedition  against  Newfoundland  and  Cape  Breton,  on  board  of  ^vhieh 
were  fifteen  thousand  troops,  with  all  sorts  of  implements  of  war,  for  a  siege;  and  that  a 
large  fleet  of  French  ships  had  been  seen  at  sea. 


192  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 


Gov.  Greene  to  Gov.  Shirlei/  and  Admiral  Warren. 

Newport,  3d  Oct.,  1746. 

Gentlemen  : — Your  favor  of  the  29th  of  September,  came  safe  ;  at  which  time, 
the  colony  sloop  Tartar  was  on  a  cruise,  and  did  not  return  till  yesterday  morning  • 
and  out  of  the  due  regard  I  have  for  His  Majesty's  service,  (and  our  common 
safety,)  on  this  emergent  occasion,  according  to  your  desire,  have  this  morning  di- 
rected Capt.  Fones  to  sail  immediately,  and  given  him  his  sailing  orders,  with  the 
packet  for  Admiral  Lestock,  whom  I  hope  he  may  readily  meet  with,  that  the  ad- 
miral may  have  proper  intelligence,  to  prevent  any  part  of  his  fleet  from  falling  into 
the  enemy's  hands,  and  thereby  being  prevented  from  doing  that  service  towards 
the  annoyance  of  the  French  fleet  now  on  our  eastern  coasts,  which  might  be  other- 
wise expected. 

I  hope  that  this  government  will  be  ready  on  all  occasions,  to  exert  themselves  as 
much  as  possibly  they  can,  for  His  Majesty's  service,  in  the  security  and  defence 
of  your  Province,  or  any  of  our  neighbors;  and  am,  with  due  i-egards,  gentlemen, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

WH.LIAM  GREENE. 
To   His   Excellency,   "William  Shirley,  Esq.,  and   the   Honorable   Peter  Warren, 

Esq.,  In  Boston. 

Letter  from   Governor  Shirle>/  and  Admiral  Warren,  to  Governor 

Greene. 

Boston,  October  14,  1746. 

Sir: — Having  received  advices  of  the  great  danger  that  the  fortress  of  Annapo- 
lis Royal,  and  the  whole  Province  of  Nova  Scotia  is  in  of  falling  into  the  enemy's 
hands,  imless  succors  be  immediately  sent  from  the  colonies  of  New  England,  Mr, 
Shirley  has  accordingly  sent  nearly  three  hundred  soldiers  of  His  Majesty's  troops, 
raised  here  for  the  expedition  against  Canada  ;  and  is  sending  more,  to  make  up 
his  quota  of  six  hundred  men ;  and  we  expect  that  three  hundred  more  will  be 
forthwith  sent  thither  by  Governor  Wentworth ;  and  as  the  preservation  of  this 
Province  is  of  the  utmost  consequence  for  His  Majesty's  interest,  and  the  security 
and  prosperity  of  the  colonies  of  New  England,  he  will  justly  expect  that  at  least 
the  troops  in  \m  own  pay,  be  employed  for  the  defence  of  that  country ;  and  there- 
fore we  must  earnestly  urge  Your  Honor,  without  loss  of  time,  to  send,  in  proper 
vessels,  the  three  hundred  men  raised  in  your  government,  for  the  expedition 
against  Canada,  for  the  defence  of  Annapolis  Royal  and  Nova  Scotia,  the  danger 
being  so  near,  and  the  season  of  the  year  so  far  advanced,  that  the  least  delay  may 
prove  fatal. 

We  have  enclosed  an  extract  of  a  letter  from  Lieut.  Gov.  Mascarene,  by  which 
you  will  understand  how  he  proposes  to  have  these  succors  employed  ;  and  if  you  can 
immediately  procure  a  number  of  whaleboats,  they  wdl  be  of  great  service. 
We  are,  sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servants, 

P.  WARREN, 
W.  SHHILEY. 

To  the  Hon.  William  Greene. 


1746.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  193 

P.  S.  The  loss  of  Annapolis  will  make  an  addition  of  five  or  six  thousand  fight- 
ing men  to  the  strength  of  the  enemy,  and  thereby  enable  them  to  make  further  at- 
tempts even  upon  Louisbourg,  or  prevent  the  success  of  His  Majesty's  arms  next 
year  against  Canada,  if  the  King  should  think  fit  to  extend  them,  to  make 
that  conquest. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Bhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Netvport,  the  21st  day 
of  October,  1746. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  forces  raised  in  this  colony, 
for  the  expedition  against  Canada,  that  are  able,  be  sent  to  An- 
napolis Royal,  under  the  command  of  their  respective  officers, 
for  the  succor  and  support  of  that  garrison,  against  His  Maj- 
esty's enemies;  and  that  an  express  be  forthwith  sent  to  Ad- 
miral Warren  and  Governor  Shirley,  informing  them  of  the 
resolution  of  this  Assembly,  and  desiring  them  to  inform 
this  government  what  convoy  they  will  have  for  said  forces ; 
and  that  the  committee  of  war  follow  the  instructions  and 
directions  of  Admiral  Warren  and  Governor  Sliirley,  in  re- 
gard to  sending  away  our  said  forces ;  and  that  the  colony 
sloop  Tartar  join  the  convoy  which  shall  be  ordered  by  Admiral 
Warren  and  Governor  Shirley  to  proceed  with  them  to  Annapo- 
lis Royal,  and  return  again  to  this  colony  as  soon  as  con- 
veniently may  be,  after  their  arrival  at  Annapolis  ;  and  that 
the  transports  which  shall  carry  our  forces,  also  return  with  the 
colony  sloop. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  commis- 
sionate  the  lieutenant  colonel,  and  other  commissioned  officers 
appointed  by  this  colony  for  the  expedition  against  Canada,  to 
continue  till  His  Majesty's   commissions  shall  arrive,  when  the 

VOL.  V.         25 


194  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 

same  be  filled  up  with  said  officers'  names,  and  delivered  or 
sent  to  them. 

And  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write  to  Lieutenant  Gov- 
ernor Mascarene,  at  Annapolis  Royal,  and  recommend  Lieut. 
Colonel  Kinnicut  to  him,  to  be  continued  as  a  field  officer,  in 
His  Majesty's  service  ;  and  that  he  also  inform  the  said  Lieu- 
tenant Governor  of  what  monies  this  colony  shall  advance  for 
His  Majesty  to  the  several  officers  and  soldiers  to'wards  their 
pay,  that  the  same  may  be  secured  to  the  government. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  Samuel  Wickham,  Esq.,  be,  and 
he  is  hereby  added  to  the  committee  of  war ;  and  that  they, 
or  the  major  part  of  them,  be  a  committee  to  take  up  of  some 
gentlemen  in  Newport,  upon  the  best  terms  they  can,  so 
much  money  as  shall  be  necessary  for  the  colony  to  pay  the  of- 
ficers and'soldiers  raised  for  the  Canada  expedition,  their£ad- 
vance  wages,  and  what  clothing  is  now  wanting ;  and  that 
bills  be  drawn  upon  the  paymaster  general  in  Great  Britain,  to 
be  signed  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  for  payment  of  the 
same. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  war,  or  the  major 
part  of  them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  fully  empowered  to  do, 
act  and  transact  all  and  every  thing  needful  and  necessary  to 
be  done,  in  respect  to  sending  the  forces  raised  in  this  colony 
to  Annapolis  Royal ;  and  also  in  sending  the  colony  sloop  with 
them;  and  to  displace  officers,  and  appoint  others  in  their 
room,  or  in  the  room  of  any  others  that  shall  be  prevented 
going,  by  any  way  or  means  whatsoever ;  and  in  general  to  do 
every  thing  necessary,  respecting  the  premises  that  shall  be 
left  undone  by  this  Assembly  at  their  rising,  as  fully  in  all  re- 
spects as  they  were  empowered  relating  to  the  Canada  expe- 
dition. 

God  save  the  King. 


1746.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  195 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Planiations,  at  Providence,  live 
last  Wednesday  in  October,  1746. 

The  lion.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

[There  was  no  business  of  a  public  nature,  transacted  at  this 
session  of  the  Assembly.] 

Gov.  Shirley  and  Admiral  Warren  to  Gov.  Greene. 

Boston,  October  23d,  1746. 

Sir  : — We  have  received  your  letter  by  Lieut.  Col.  Kinnicut,  and  are  glad  that 
your  government  has  shown  so  good  a  spii-it,  by  cheerfully  promoting  a  service  of 
such  importance,  as  the  relief  of  Annapolis  Royal,  and  the  saving  of  it  from  falling 
into  the  enemy's  hands. 

Last  night  we  received  from  the  master  of  a  vessel,  that  sailed  with  the  French 
fleet,  from  Chebucto,  (which  place  they  have  wholly  abandoned,)  such  an  account 
of  the  strength  and  good  condition  both  of  their  land  and  sea  forces,  and  of  their  in- 
tention to  sail  with  their  whole  body  to  Annapolis  Royal,  as  stopped  our  proceed- 
ings for  a  few  hours. 

But  this  afternoon,  upon  examining  the  captain  of  the  English  flag  of  truce,  and 
two  other  gentlemen,  of  good  reputation,  who  were  taken  prisoners  by  the  French, 
sixteen  days  before  their  arrival  at  Chebucto,  and  two  intelligent  masters  of  vessels 
that  were  likewise  prisoners,  all  of  whom  sailed  with  the  fleet  from  Chebucto,  and 
left  them  the  16  th  instant,  by  which  the  state  of  the  fleet  appears  to  us  in  a  very  differ- 
ent light  from  what  it  was  at  first  represented  to  us  ;  so  that  we  have  reason  to  judge 
that  they  are  in  a  very  weak  condition,  and  are  gone  (at  least  the  bulk  of  them,)  to 
France,  or  the  West  Indies ;  and  thereupon  Governor  Shirley  is  sending  the  re- 
mainder of  his  recruits,  with  all  despatch,  and  does  not  think  it  proper  to  stay  for 
convoy,  as  all  the  rest  of  his  troops  sailed  without,  and  are  safe  arrived  at 
Annapolis. 

However,  the  first  mentioned  account  has  put  us  upon  that  caution,  that  we  shall 
send  away  to-morrow,  a  small  well  sailing  vessel,  with  a  whaleboat  and  crew,  to  look 
into  Annapolis  basin  ;  and  if  they  find  none  of  the  enemy's  ships  there,  to  go  up  to 
the  fort,  and  get  what  intelligence  they  can  from  the  Governor  ;  but  if  the  enemy's 
ships  are  in  Annapolis  harbor,  to  come  back  immediately,  so  far  as  Passamaquoddy, 
to  inform  the  ofEcers  of  the  troops  and  masters  of  the  transports,  whom  Governor 
Shirley  will  order  to  stop  at  that  place  for  advice,  and  to  proceed  to  Annapolis,  or 


196  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 

return  back  to  Boston,  according  as  the  advice  shall  be  ;  and  we  judge  it  wiil  be 
best  for  Your  Honor  to  take  the  same  method,  by  ordering  your  vessels  to  stop  at 
Passamaquoddy  ;  and  we  sliall  desire  Lieut.  Governor  Mascarene  to  send  one  of 
the  ordinance  tenders  to  that  place,  to  meet  your  vessels,  and  wair  at  Passama- 
quoddy, till  their  arrival ;  and  you  may  depend  upon  it,  that  your  vessels  will  meet 
■with  advice  from  Mr.  Mascarene,  at  Passamaquoddy,  if  the  navigation  to  Annapolis 
be  safe. 

As  to  what  you  mention,  referring  to  Governor  Shirley's  giving  a  commission  to 
Mr.  Kinnicut ;  he  cannot  see  the  propriety  of  it  in  this  case  ;  it  being  left  to  every 
particular  governor  to  dispose  of  the  commissions  over  their  own  troops ;  however 
he  will  take  effectual  care  that  Col.  Kinnicut  shall  not  be  subjected  to  any  command 
below  his  own  rank  and  character. 

AVe  are,  with  great  regard,  sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servants, 

W.  SHIRLEY, 

To  the  Hon.  William  Greene,  Esq.  P.  WARREN. 

P.  S.  Governor  Wentworth  informs  Mr.  Shirley,  he  sent  two  hundred  soldiers 
Irom  his  government  to  Annapolis,  last  Sunday. 

Governor  Shirley  to  Governor  Greene. 

Boston,  October  27,  1746. 

Sir: — I  wrote  to  you  by  Lieut.  Col.  Kinnicut ;  since  when,  I  have  advices  ar- 
rived from  Annapolis  Royal,  dated  the  20th  instant,  informing  me  that  they  go  on 
there  very  well  against  the  enemy ;  and  want  only  more  strength  to  drive  the  Can- 
adians out  of  the  province,  forthwith  ;  whereupon,  Governor  Mascarene  presses  me 
for  such  an  addition  of  men,  as  will  make  up  what  is  sent  fifteen  hundred  or  two 
thousand.  Accordingly,  by  to-morrow,  near  four  hundred  men,  will,  I  hope,  be 
embarked,  and  sail  from  hence,  over  and  above  what  I  before  sent,  which  was  two 
hundred  and  sixty  ;  and  I  shall  to-morrow  give  orders  for  three  hundred  men  more 
to  prepare  for  embarkation  ;  and  hope  to  get  them  ready  for  sailing  by  Friday,  at 
farthest.  These,  with  the  two  hundred  men  from  Governor  Wentworth,  and  your 
three  hundred,  will  make  about  sixteen  hundred  ;  and  I  have  pressed  Governor 
Wentworth  to  send  a  further  reinforcement,  which  I  am  in  hopes  he  will  do  ;  and  I 
must  entreat  Your  Honor  to  hasten  your  three  companies,  if  they  shall  not  be 
sailed  before  this  comes  to  your  hands,  with  all  possible  speed. 

The  officer  who  brought  me  the  despatches  from  Annapolis,  saw  nothing  of  the 
French  fleet  in  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  in  his  passage  ;  and  I  have  just  now  heard  that 
they  have  been  seen  sixty  leagues  to  the  south-west  of  Cape  Sable  ;  at  all  events, 
every  one  here  is  persuaded,  with  myself,  that  they  are  in  a  miserable,  sickly,  weak 
condition,  and  are  making  the  best  of  their  way  to  the  West  Indies ;  and  we  have 
now  an  opportunity  of  giving  the  finishing  stroke  to  the  Canadians,  in  2\ova  Sco- 
tia, which  I  hope  we  shall  not  let  slip ;  as  it  might  prove  of  bad  consequence  to  us, 
in  every  respect,  the  next  spring.  I  am,  with  all  due  regard,  sir. 

Your  Honor's  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  SimiLEY. 

To  Governor  Greene. 

The  post  stays  for  this ;  excuse  haste. 


1746.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  197 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhl)/  held  for  the  Colomj  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  on 
11th  day  of  November,  1746. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  appointing  commissioners  to  mark  out  the  bounds  of 
the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,  eastward,  towards  the 
Province  of  the  Mas'^achusetts  Bay,  agreeably  to  His 
Majesty's  royal  determination  in  council,  the  28th  day  of 
May,  1746. 

Whereas,  this  colony  has  received  His  Majesty's  said  royal 
determination,  ascertaining  the  boundaries  between  the  said 
colony  and  said  Province,  and  hath  commanded  the  Governor 
and  Company  of  said  colony,  and  all  others  whom  it  may  con- 
cern, to  govern  themselves  accordingly,  which  renders  it  ab- 
solutely necessary  to  mark  out  the  several  boundaries  ordered 
in  His  Majesty's  said  determination,  that  this  colony  and  the 
inhabitants  who  dwell  near  said  lines,  may  be  the  better  ena- 
bled to  pay  due  obedience  to  His  Majesty's  commands ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this 
colony,  and  by  the  authority  of  the  same  it  is  enacted,  that 
James  Honeyman,  Jr.,  Gideon  Cornell  and  George  Brown,  Esq., 
Mr.  George  Wanton  and  Capt.  Walter  Chaloner,  be  appointed 
commissioners,  on  the  part  of  this  colony ;  and  they,  or  the 
major  part  of  them,  to  join  such  other  commissioners  as  are,  or 
shall  be  appointed  by  the  Province  of  the  IMassachusetts  Bay, 
with  full  power  and  authority  to  represent  this  colony  in  mark- 
ing out  the  several  boundaries,  and  running  the  several  lines, 
agreeably  to  His  Majesty's  said  determination ;  and  the  com- 


198  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 

missioners  so  appointed  and  authorized,  as  aforesaid,  shall  meet 
at  Pawtucket  Falls,  on  the  2d  day  of  December  next,  and  then 
begin  said  service. 

Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  in  case 
the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay  shall  not  appoint  any 
commissioners  on  their  part,  in  order  to  join  those  appointed  by 
this  colony,  that  then  the  commissioners  on  the  part  of  this 
colony,  proceed  on,  and  complete  said  lines  and  boundaries. 

Be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  the  du- 
plicate of  His  Majesty's  said  proclamation,  and  a  copy  of  this 
act  be  forthwith  transmitted  by  express  to  His  Excellency, 
William  Shirley,  Esq.,  Governor  of  the  Province  of  the  JNIassa- 
chusetts  Bay. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  the  commissioners  appointed  by 
this  Assembly,  for  marking  out  the  bounds  of  this  colony,  east- 
ward, towards  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby  empowered  and  directed  to  employ  one  or 
more  skillful  surveyor  or  surveyors,  (if  need  require,)  to  attend 
them,  in  performing  the  above  mentioned  service. 

Voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be  re- 
quested to  write  to  His  Excellency,  William  Shirle}',  Esq.^ 
Governor  of  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  desiring 
him  to  forbid  any  of  the  officers  of  said  Province,  exercising 
any  authority  or  jurisdiction  for  the  future  within  the  limits  of 
this  colony,  as  settled  by  His  Majesty's  determination,  on  the 
28th  day  of  May  last  past ;  and  also,  that  His  Honor,  the  Gov- 
ernor, send  with  his  letter,  by  express  to  Governor  Shirley,  the 
duplicate  of  His  Majesty's  said  determination,  and  the  act  of 
this  Assembly  for  appointing  commissioners  on  the  part  of  this 
colony,  for  running  and  marking  out  the  boundary  lines  be- 
tween said  colony  and  Province,  and  request  of  him  to  appoint 
commissioners  on  the  part  of  said  Province,  to  join  with  the 
commissioners  appointed  by  this  colony. 

Wliereas,  the  General  Assembly  has  received  information, 
that  Pawcatuck  bridge  is  out  of  repair ; — 

It  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  Capt.  William  Pen- 


1747.]  AND  PKOVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  199 

dleton,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  appointed   to   repair  this  govern- 
ment's part  of  said  bridge,  at  the  charge  of  the  colony. 
God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhl?/,  held  for  the  Colon?/  of  Bhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the  Qth  day 
of  January^  174  6-7. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Report  of  the  Commissioners  on  the  Eastern  Boundary  Line. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  James  Honeyman,  Jr.,  Gideon  Cornell, 
George  Brown,  George  Wanton  and  Walter  Chaloner,  were  by 
the  General  Assembly,  appointed  commissioners,  to  mark  out 
the  bounds  of  the  colony  towards  the  Province  of  the  Massa- 
chusetts Bay,  agreeably  to  the  late  determination  of  the  King, 
in  council,  who  have  perfected  the  same,  and  made  report  to 
this  Assembly,  of  their  proceedings  as  followeth  : 

We,  the  subscribers,  appointed  commissioners  by  the  General  Assembly  of  the 
colony,  aforesaid,  to  mark  out  the  bounds  of  the  said  colony  eastwards,  towards  the 
Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  agreeably  to  His  Majesty's  royal  determination 
in  council,  the  28th  day  of  May,  1746,  did,  in  pursuance  thereof,  on  the  2d  day  of 
December  last  past,  meet  at  Pawtucket  Falls,  in  expectation  of  meeting  with  com- 
missioners that  might  be  appointed  by  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  for 
the  purpose,  aforesaid ;  and  after  having  there  tarried  till  the  after  part  of  said  day, 
and  no  commissioners  in  behalf  of  the  said  Province  appearing,  we  proceeded  to  run 
a  due  north  line  from  Pawtucket  Falls  to  the  south  boundary  of  the  aforesaid  Prov- 
ince of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  in  manner  following,  viz. : 

From  a  certain  point  on  the  southern  side  of  Pawtucket  Falls,  where  we  erected 
a  monument  of  stones,  with  a  stake  thereon,  we  run  a  meridian  line,  which  directly 
passed  through  said  falls,  to  a  walnut  tree  on  the  northerly  side  of  said  falls  ;  then 
to  a  pitch  pine  tree ;  then  to  a  small  white  oak ;  then  to  a  grey  oak ;  then  to  a  small 
bush ;  then  to  another  small  bush,  with  stones  about  it ;  then  to  a  heap  of  stones, 
with  a  stake  thereon  ;  then  to  a  black  oak  tree  ;  then  to  another  black  oak  ;  then 
to  a  small  pitch  pine  ;  then  to  a  black  oak  ;  then  to  a  large  white  oak,  near  the 


200  KECORUS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1747- 

river,  called  Abbott's  Run  ;  then  to  a  poplar  tree  ;  then  to  a  heap  of  stones,  -with  a 
stake  thereon ;  then  to  a  large  rock,  with  stones  thereon ;  then  to  a  small  black  oak 
tree ;  then  to  a  walnut  tree  ;  then  to  a  black  oak ;  then  to  divers  other  marked  trees, 
in  the  said  course,  to  the  extremity  of  the  said  line ;  and  when  we  came  near  the 
termination  of  the  said  line,  made  a  monument  of  stones,  there  being  no  noted  south 
boundary  of  the  said  Province,  near  the  said  line  ;  and  therefore,  for  the  discovery 
of  the  south  boundary  of  the  said  Province,  upon  the  best  information  we  could  ob- 
tain, proceeded  to  Wrentham  Plain,  at  or  near  the  place  where  was  formerly  erect- 
ed a  stake,  called  Woodward's  and  Saffery's  Stake,  as  one  remarkable  south  boun- 
dary of  the  said  Province  ;  and  from  thence,  run  a  west  line,  making  an  allowance 
of  eight  degrees  and  an  half,  as  the  west  variation  of  the  magnetic  needle  from  the 
true  meridian  ;  it  being  the  course  of  the  south  line  of  the  said  Province,  according  to 
their  charter,  (as  we  apprehended  ;)  and  we  then  extended  the  said  north  line  from 
the  aforesaid  monument,  till  it  intersected  the  said  west  line  ;  and  upon  the  point  of 
its  intersection,  erected  a  monumentof  stones,  with  a  stake  thereon,  as  the  north-east 
boundary  of  that  tract  of  land,  commonly  called  the  Gore ;  after  which,  we  proceed- 
ed to  Bullock's  Neck,  and  on  the  south-west  corner  thereof,  erected  a  red  cedar 
post,  marked  with  the  letters  I  H  C  R,  with  the  figure  of  an  anchor  thereon;  and 
from  thence,  running  a  line  north-east,  making  the  same  allowance  for  the  varia- 
tion, aforesaid,  to  a  black  oak  tree,  marked  with  the  letters  G  C  C  R  ;  then  to  a  large 
white  oak,  marked  with  the  letters  G  B  C  R ;  then  to  a  white  oak  post,  set  in  the 
ground,  with  a  heap  of  stones  around  it,  marked  with  the  letters  G  W  C  R,  with 
the  figure  of  an  anchor  thereon ;  being  three  miles  distant  from  Bullock's  Neck, 
aforesaid  ;  after  which,  we  proceeded  to  the  north-easternmost  part  of  the  bay,  on 
the  west  side  of  Rumstick  Neck  ;  and  from  a  point  where  a  locust  post  was  erected, 
ran  a  line  three  miles  north-east,  with  the  same  allowance  for  the  variation  ;  and  at 
the  extremity  of  the  said  line,  erected  a  monument  of  stones  ;  from  which  we  run  a 
line  to  the  north-east  extremity  of  that  line,  drawn  from  the  south-west  corner  of 
Bullock's  Neck,  aforesaid ;  the  course  whereof,  being  west  thirty-eight  degrees 
north,  according  to  the  magnetic  needle,  the  distance  nine  hundred  and  fifty- 
five  rods,  (marking  trees  and  making  other  boundaries  in  the  course  of  said  line  ;) 
after  which  we  proceeded  to  the  north-east  corner  of  Bristol  harbor,  and  from  high 
water  mark,  which  was  some  rods  distant  north-east  from  the  bridge,  leading  to  Swan- 
scy  Ferry,  we  run  a  line  three  miles  north-east,  still  making  the  same  allowance  for 
the  variation  ;  and  at  the  extremity  of  which  line,  we  erected  a  monument  of 
stones ;  then  we  run  a  line  from  the  north-east  extremity  of  the  line  drawn  from 
Rumstick,  aforesaid,  the  course  whereof  being  south  twenty-five  degrees  east,  till  it 
met  with  the  termination  of  the  line  drawn  from  Bristol  harbor,  aforesaid  ;  the  dis- 
tance whereof,  being  nine  hundred  and  twenty-seven  rods ;  and  from  thence,  a 
straight  line  to  the  bay,  at  Sowoset  Neck,  (making  proper  boundaries  in  the  course 
of  said  line  ;)  after  which,  we  proceeded  to  the  eastern  side  of  the  Narragansett 
Bay ;  and  on  the  easternmost  part  of  a  cove  in  the  said  bay,  which  is  southward  of 
Nancquastkett,  run  a  line  three  miles  east,  (still  making  the  same  allowance  for  the 
variation)  ;  at  the  extremity  whereof,  we  marked  a  gray  oak  tree,  with  the  letters 
C  R,  with  the  figure  of  an  anchor  thereon  ;  after  which,  we  proceeded  to  the  mouth 
of  Fall  River,  and  from  thence,  measured  four  hundred  and  forty  rods  southerly,  on 
the  shore,  as  the  said  shore  extended  itself  from  the  mouth  of  said  Fall  River  ;  and 
from  the  point  where  the  said  four  hundred  and  forty  rods  reached,  (being  east 
thirty-five  degree?   south   of  the  southernmost  point  of  Shawomet  Neck,  we  run  a 


1746.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  201 

line,  three  miles  east,  with  the  same  allowance  for  the  variation ;  in  the  course) 
whereof  we  marked  divers  trees,  and  came  to  a  large  pond ;  on  the  west  of  which, 
was  a  small  oak,  between  two  large  rocks  ;  and  from  thence,  measured  over  the  said 
pond,  to  a  bunch  of  maples,  two,  whereof,  we  marked  with  letters  land  F,  standinfr  on 
a  place  called  Ralph's  Neck,  being  the  extremity  of  the  said  three  miles ;  from 
thence,  we  run  a  line  south  twenty  degrees  west,  two  thousand  one  hundred  and 
twenty-three  rods,  (making  proper  boundaries  in  said  line,  till  we  met  the  termina- 
tion of  the  three  mile  Ime  ran  from  the  cove,  southward  of  Nancquaskett,  aforesaid  • 
after  which,  we  proceeded  to  a  place  called  Church's  Cove,  in  said  bay,  and  ran  a 
line  three  miles  east,  making  the  same  allowance  for  the  variation,  aforesaid ;  and 
at  the  extremity  whereof,  and  near  to  the  sea,  we  erected  a  monument  of  stones  • 
and  from  thence  ran  a  line  north,  two  degrees  and  a  quarter  east,  one  thousand  and 
nine  hundred  and  forty-one  rods,  till  it  almost  met  the  termination  of  the  said  line 
drawn  from  the  first  mentioned  cove,  as  aforesaid,  making  proper  boundaries  in 
the  course  of  said  line. 

The  aforegoing  is  a  just  account  of  our  proceedings,  and  report  the  same, 
accordingly. 

J.  HONEYMAN,  JR.,  GIDEON  CORNELL, 

GEORGE  WANTON,  GEORGE  BROWN. 

And  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be,  and  it 
is  hereby  accepted  by  this  Assembly. 

Whereas,  the  committee  of  war,  in  pursuance  of  an  order 
of  the  General  Assembly,  made  a  report  to  this  Assembly,  of 
their  transactions  and  proceedings,  in  respect  to  sending  to  An- 
napolis Koyal,  the  troops  raised  in  this  colony,  for  the  intended 
enterprise  upon  Canada ;  and  also  an  acount  of  their  transac- 
tions and  proceedings  with  regard  to  the  colony's  sloop,  &c.j 
which  said  report  being  duly  considered ; — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved  by  this  Assembly,  that  the  same  be, 
and  it  is  hereby  accepted. 

Voted,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be,  and  he  is  hereby 
requested  to  procure  of  Sir  William  Pepperell,  a  certificate  of 
what  number  of  soldiers  was  received  from  this  colony,  into  the 
garrison  of  Louisbourg  ;  of  the  time  of  their  arrival  there,  and 
discharge  from  thence ;  as  also,  how  long  the  colony's  sloop  Tar- 
tar was  employed  in  the  expedition  against  Cape  Breton. 

And  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  is  hereby  also  requested  to 
procure  all  such  other  vouchers  and  certificates,  as  can  be  ob- 
tained in  this  colony,  and  arc  necessary  for  proving  the  account 
of  the  charges  the  colony  has  been  at  in  assisting  and  forward- 
ing the  reduction  of  Cape  Breton,  &c.,  and  to  transmit  the 

VOL.  V-  20 


202  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1746. 

whole  to  the  colony's  agent  in  Great  Britain,  as  soon  as 
possible. 

And  it  is  also  voted,  that  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  be,  and  he 
is  hereby  appointed  to  wait  on  Sir  William  Pepperell,  in  or- 
der to  get  the  certificates  by  the  government  desired  of  him. 

Voted,  that  the  captains  of  the  several  companies  raised  in 
this  colony,  for  the  intended  expedition  against  Canada,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby  empowered  to  give  furloughs  to  such  of  their 
soldiers  as  desire  the  same,  and  can  be  trusted  for  any  space  of 
time,  not  exceeding  a  fortnight,  at  one  time  ;  at  the  end  or  ex- 
piration of  such  furlough,  the  said  soldier  or  soldiers,  so  fa- 
vored, shall  be  obliged  to  appear  before  his  captain,  or  some 
other  officer  of  his  company,  at  such  place  as  his  said  captain 
shall  appoint. 

And  it  is  also  voted,  that  such  soldiers  as  the  captains,  afore- 
said, cannot  confide  in,  nor  think  them  fit  to  be  trusted  with 
furloughs,  or  so  many  of  them  as  the  committee  of  war  shall 
think  proper,  shall  be  kept  at  Fort  George,  with  one  of  the  of- 
ficers of  said  companies,  who  is  to  take  the  entire  care  of  them 
there  ;  where  they  shall  be  maintained  oat  of  the  colony's 
stores ;  and  when  any  of  the  said  soldiers  shall  return,  upon 
the  expiration  of  their  furloughs,  he  or  they,  shall  have  and  re- 
ceive what  the  government  allows  for  his  or  their  subsistence  ; 
and  the  lieutenant  colonel  is  hereby  empowered  to  appoint  an 
officer  to  take  care  of  such  soldiers  as  shall  be  kept  at  Fort 
George,  from  time  to  time  ;  and  that  the  captains  of  each  re- 
spective company  do  render  to  the  lieutenant  colonel  an  ac- 
count of  the  circumstances  his  company  is  in ;  and  the  lieu- 
tenant colonel  to  the  committee  of  war,  once  a  fortnight. 

God  save  the  Kintr. 


1746.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  203 


Gov.  SUrley  to  Gov.  Greene. 

Boston,  November  4th,  1746. 
Sir: — I  have  now  the  pleasure  of  informing  Your  Honor   of  the  French  fleet's 
quitting  the  coast  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  going  off'  to  the  West  Indies,  and  the  Cana- 
dians breaking  up  their  camp  before  the  garrison  at  Annapolis  Royal. 

But  notwithstanding  this,  as  service  of  the  greatest  importance  remains  yet  to  be 
done  in  Nova  Scotia,  viz. :  taking  or  destroying  all  the  enemy's  magazines  of  warhke 
stores  and  provisions,  at  Minas  and  Chicknecto ;  taking  all  the  grain  in  the  country,(ex- 
cept  what  is  wanted  by  the  inhabitants  for  their  present  use,)  for  His  iMajesty's  ser- 
vice, and  the  same  with  respect  to  their  cattle  ;  by  which  means,  all  the  inhabitants 
and  Indians  might  be  disarmed  ;  and  the  latter,  together  with  the  Canadians,  (in  case 
they  should  return  next  spring,)  be  without  subsistence,  from  the  country  ;  driving 
off  the  Canadians,  designed  to  winter  in  Minas  or  Chicknecto,  and  distressing  the 
Indians  there  ;  among  whom,  a  very  bad  sickness  prevails,  which  has  already  swept 
o(F  hundreds  of  them  ;  visiting  Chebucto,  and  seeing  what  footsteps  the  French  have 
left  there  ;  calling  the  malcontents,  who  are  the  most  obnoxious  among  the  French 
inhabitants,  to  an  account  for  their  joining  or  open  correspondence  with  the  enemy> 
and  destroying  the  settlements  of  such  of  them  as  shall  abscond ;  and  perhaps  re- 
covering some  of  the  prize  vessels  and  goods  taken  from  the  English. 

By  all  which  means,  the  Canadians  would  be  discouraged  from  renewing 
their  attempts  next  spring  ;  the  friends  to  His  Majesty's  government  in  that  Prov- 
ince confirmed  in  their  fidelity,  the  abettors  of  the  French  interest  diminished,  and 
deterred  from  open  or  even  secret  acts  of  hostility,  and  the  Indians  very  much  har- 
rassed  and  disabled  from  giving  the  enemy  the  usual  assistance  ;  so  that  if  the  Can- 
adians should  repeat  their  visit  in  the  spring,  they  would  not  be  able  to  make  any 
progress  in  the  country,  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  garrison. 

I  say  as  all  these  services,  which  have  so  plain  a  tendency  to  settle  the  lasting  se- 
curity of  the  Province,  remain  yet  to  be  done  ;  and  this  fall  is  the  only  opportunity 
for  doing  it ;  and  I  am  informed  by  persons  well  acquainted  with  the  seasons  in 
Nova  Scotia,  that  the  winter  is  not  yet  too  far  advanced,  for  doing  this  with  a  prob- 
able prospect  of  the  men's  returning  afterwards,  this  winter. 

I  have  determined  to  send  the  reinforcement  of  five  companies,  which  I  proposed 
before  my  receiving  the  last  advices  ;  some  of  which,  are  already  sailed,  and  others 
o-o  to-day,  and  the  rest  in  two  days,  at  farthest ;  and  I  hope  Your  Honor,  if  your 
three  companies  are  not  already  sailed,  will  order  them  to  proceed  forthwith. 

If  our  endeavors  are  attended  with  success  at  this  critical  conjuncture,  as  I  hope 
they  will,  it  will  be  a  most  beneficial  service  for  His  Majesty  and  the  colonics. 

1  am  iu  haste  ;  the  post  waiting. 

Your  Honor's  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  Governor  Greene. 


204  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1747- 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemUy,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the  21th  day 
of  January,  1746-7. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor, 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  incorporating  the  inhabitants  of  the  lands  lately 
taken  into  this  colony,  by  the  settlement  of  the  eastern  boun- 
daries, into  five  townships. 

Whereas,  His  Majesty  has  been  graciously  pleased  by  his 
royal  determination,  to  settle  the  eastern  boundaries  of  this 
colony,  whereby  several  large  tracts  of  land,  and  a  great 
number  of  inhabitants  are  taken  under  the  jurisdiction  of  this 
government ;  and  it  being  absolutely  necessary  for  the  well 
governing  the  said  people,  that  the  said  tracts  of  land,  with  the 
inhabitants  thereon,  be  set  off  and  incorporated  into  townships, 
and  the  same  being  conveniently  situated  for  the  making  of 
five  townships ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  of  the  same,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  aforesaid 
tracts  of  land,  with  the  inhabitants  thereon,  be  set  off  and  in- 
corporated into  five  towns  in  the  following  manner,  viz. : 

All  that  part,  which  heretofore  has  been  called  Bristol,  with 
the  inhabitants  thereon,  be  set  off  and  incorporated  into  a  town- 
ship, by  the  name  of  Bristol ;  and  that  that  part  which  was 
heretofore  [known]  as  part  of  Tiverton,  with  a  part  of  Dart- 
mouth and  Freetown,  adjoining  thereto,  be  incorporated  into  a 
township,  by  the  name  of  Tiverton  ;  and  that  part  which  has 
heretofore  been  a  -part  of  Little  Compton,  and  a  part  of  Dart- 
mouth, thereto  adjoining,  be  incorporated  into  a  township,  by 
the  name  ■.£  Little  Compton  j  and  that  the  line  wlii.li  formerly 


1747.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  205 

divided  Tiverton  from  Little  Compton,  be  extended  easterly, 
to  the  colony  line,  and  the  whole  to  be  dividing  lines  between 
said  towns ;  and  that  part  which  has  heretofore  been  a  part  of 
Swansey  and  Barrington,  with  a  small  part  of  Rehoboth  there- 
to adjoining,  with  the  inhabitants  thereon,  be  incorporated  into 
a  township,  by  the  name  of  Warren  ;  and  that  part  which  has 
been  commonly  called  and  known  by  the  name  of  the  Gore  of 
Land,  with  the  inhabitants  thereon,  be  into  a  township,  by  the 
name  of  Cumberland  ;  and  that  the  inhabitants  of  each  respec- 
tive town,  for  the  time  being,  shall  have  and  enjoy  equal  liber- 
ties and  privileges  with  the  other  towns  in  this  colony,  agreea. 
bly  to  our  charter. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  a 
special  justice  of  the  peace,  be  chosen  and  appointed  in  each  of 
the  above  mentioned  towns,  to  keep  Ilis  Majesty's  peace ;  and 
to  call  the  inhabitants  of  the  respective  towns  together,  by  a 
warrant,  to  meet  on  the  second  Tuesday  in  Februrary  next,  to 
choose  such  town  officers  as  are  directed  by  the  laws  of  this 
colony ;  and  also  deputies,  to  represent  said  towns  at  the  ad- 
journment of  this  Assembly. 

And  that  the  said  justices  bo  commissionated  by  His  Honor, 
the  Governor,  and  to  continue  till  the  next  session  of  the  As- 
sembly; and  that  the  general  treasurer  furnish  each  of  the 
above  mentioned  towns  with  a  colony  law  book ;  and  that  the 
secretary  send  to  each  of  the  said  towns  a  copy  of  the  late  act 
of  Assembly,  directing  the  manner  of  making  freemen,  and 
regulating  the  method  of  voting  ;  and  that  said  law  books  and 
copies  of  said  act,  be  delivered  to  the  above  mentioned  justices 
as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
every  man,  inhabiting  within  the  above  mentioned  towns  of 
Bristol,  Tiverton,  Little  Compton,  Warren  and  Cumberland, 
who  is  possessed  of  lands  or  real  estate,  sufficient  by  the  laws 
of  this  colony,  to  qualify  him  for  a  freeman,  and  the  eldest 
sons  of  all  such  freeholders,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  declared 
freemen  of  the  respective  towns,  and  also  of  this  colony ;  and 


20G  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISL.VND  [1747. 

to  govern  themselves  in  voting,  agreeably  to  the  laws  of  this 
colon3^ 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  following  persons  be,  and  they  are  hereby  chosen  and  ap- 
pointed special  justices  of  the  peace,  for  the  above  mentioned 
towns,  viz. : 

Jonathan  Peck,  Esq.,  for  the  town  of  Bristol ;  John  Man- 
chester, Esq.,  for  the  town  of  Tiverton ;  William  Richmond, 
Esq.,  for  the  town  of  Little  Compton  ;  Matthew  Allen,  Esq.,  for 
the  town  of  Warren  ;  and  Job  Bartlett,  Esq.,  for  the  town  of 
Cumberland. 

God  save  the  King. 

Governor  Slihicy  to  Governor  Greene. 

Boston  January,  5,  1746-7. 

Sir  : — This  will  be  delivered  you  by  Lieut.  Wilkinson,  from  whom,  as  well  as  by 
a  letter  from  Col.  Kinnicutt,  I  am  sorry  to  learn  that  the  levies  of  your  jjovernmcnt 
are  at  length,  by  a  train  of  cross  accidents  and  disasters,  prevented  from  going  upon 
His  Majesty's  service  to  Annapolis  Eoyal ;  for  which,  both  your  government  and 
the  troops  have  shown  so  ready  a  disposition  ;  I  can't  say  but  that  I  think  after 
having  been  so  greatly  weakened,  and  reduced  by  sickness  and  deaths,  as  I  under- 
stood the  three  companies  are,  that  your  officers  judged  right  in  not  venturing  them 
upon  a  passage  to  Annapolis  in  so  extreme  and  wintry  a  season  as  the  present  has 
proved ;  since,  in  all  probability,  it  would  have  destroyed  many  of  the  soldiers,  and 
the  few  that  had  survived  it,  might  have  been  rather  a  burthen  than  of  service,  to  the 
garrison ;  I  heartily  wish  those  of  them,  who  are  sailed  for  Newport,  a  safe  arrival 
there  ;  and  that  the  sick  among  them,  and  those  left  at  Martha's  Vineyard,  may 
recover. 

Mr.  Wilkinson  informs  me  that  some  deserters  from  your  levies  are  suspected  to 
be  concealed  in  this  government ;  if  there  is  any  possibility  of  getting  at  them,  I 
will  take  care  the}'  shall  be  secured  for  you,  upon  my  being  apprised  when  any  of 
them  may  be  apprehended. 

I  took  the  first  opportunity  of  laying  before  the  Assembly  of  this  Province,  the  copy 
of  His  Majesty's  order  in  council,  for  settling  the  boundary  line  between  the  Prov. 
incc  and  colony,  together  with  the  act  of  your  government,  appointing  commission- 
ers to  join  with  those  of  this  government,  in  running  and  marking  the  line  accord- 
ingly; and  of  recommending  to  them  forthwith  to  choose  commissioners  for  that 
purpose ;  which  1  hope  they  will  readily  do.  When  it  is  done,  I  shall  transmit  you 
the  first  notice  of  it,  that  I  can. 

I  .ini,  with  dill'  regani  sir, 

Your  Honor's  olxdi.  nl  hiimblc  servant, 

To  His  Excellency,  Gov.  Greene.  W.  SHIRLEY. 


1747.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  207 

P.  S.  I  hope  that  eight  hundred  of  the  Massachusetts  levies  arc  all,  long  before 
this,  safely  arrived  at  Annapolis,  with  a  great  quantity  of  snow  shoes ;  as  also  the 
two  New  Hampshire  companies ;  and  that  they  may  be  a  force  sufficient  for  the 
pui'poses  of  His  Majesty's  service  there. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhl//  held  for  the  Colon?/  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations^  at  Providence,  the  17 th 
day  of  February,  1746-47. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Thomas  Ward  was  chosen  secretary,  for  the  remaining  part 
of  the  current  year,  in  the  room  of  the  late  James  Martin, 
Esq.,  deceased,  and  engaged,  according  to  law. 

His  Honor,  the  Governor,  presented  two  letters  from  His 
Excellency,  William  Shirley,  Esq.,  Governor  of  the  Massachu- 
setts, for  the  consideration  of  this  Assembly  ;  who  having  duly 
weighed  the  same,  are  of  opinion,  that  (notwithstanding  they 
are  desirous  of  contributing  every  thing  in  their  power  for  His 
Majesty's  service,)  this  colony  cannot,  as  the  case  is  circum- 
stanced, comply  with  His  Excellency's  request,  for  sending  the 
troops  of  His  Majesty,  now  in  this  government,  to  Hudson's 
River,  to  join  the  other  troops  there  assembled,  in  order  to 
make  an  attempt  against  Crown  Point,  because  the  colony  has 
no  provision  or  stores  on  said  river,  and  the  navigation  thereof, 
is  impracticable  at  this  season  of  the  year ;  neither  can  the 
troops  be  sent  to  Annapolis  Royal,  as  desired  by  His  Excel- 
lency, ill  His  second  letter,  because  the  time  by  him  proposed 
for  their  arrival  there,  is  so  very  short,  that  it  is  impossible  to 
procure  transports,  provisions,  stores,  &c.,  timely  ;  and  also,  the 
colony's  sloop  is  much  out  of  repair,  and  no  hands  belong  to 
her,  the  late  crew  being  discharged  ;  so  that  the  troops,  if 
sent,  must  go  without  convoy  ;    moreover,  the   troops  them- 


208  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1747. 

selves,  are  in  uo  capacity  of  going,  being  greatly  enfeebled, 
and  lessened=-=  in  numbers  by  sickness  and  desertion,  in  the  late 
attempt  to  go  to  Annapolis. 

An  Act  incorporating  the  towns  of  Bristol  and  Warren  into  one 
distinct  county,  and  for  establishing  a  court  of  general  ses- 
sions of  the  peace,  and  inferior  court  of  common  pleas,  in 
said  county,  and  ascertaining  the  times  and  places  of  holding 
the  same. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 
by  the  authority  of.  the  same  it  is  enacted,  that  the  towns  of 
Bristol  and  Warren,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  incorporated  and 
made  a  county ;  and  shall  be  called  and  known  by  the  name 
of  the  county  of  Bristol;  and  Bristol  shall  be  the  county 
town. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
there  shall  be  held  and  kept  yearly  and  every  year,  for  said 
county,  in  the  town  of  Bristol,  on  the  first  Tuesday  in  July, 
and  first  Tuesday  in  January,  a  court  of  general  sessions 
of  the  peace,  by  the  justices  of  the  peace,  of  said  county,  any  five 
of  whom  shall  be  a  quorum ;  and  an  inferior  court  of  common 
pleas,  by  five  skillful  persons,  to  be  annually  appointed  by  the 
General  Assembly  ;  any  three  of  whom,  shall  be  a  quorum  ; 
said  courts  to  be  held  in  the  same  manner,  and  to  have  the 
same  power  in  all  respects,  as  the  other  courts  of  general  ses- 
sions of  the  peace,  and  inferior  courts  of  common  pleas  in  this 
colony  have. 

And  be  it  furtlier  enacted  by  the  authority,  aforesaid,  that 
the  town  of  Bristol  shall  send  to  the  said  court  of  general  ses- 
sions of  peace,  seven  grand  jurors ;  and  to  both  said  courts,  six 
petit  jurors;  and  tie  town  of  Warren  shall  send  six  grand  ju- 
rors to  the  said  court  of  general  sessions  of  the  peace,  and  six 
petit  jurors,  to  both  said  courts. 


*  On  the  10th  February,  Gov.  Shh-ley,  wrote   to  Gov.  Greene,  that  the  government  of 
New  York  liad  determined  not  to  send  an  expedition  against  Crown  Point  tliis  winter,  an 
tliat  lie  liad,  in  consequcnec,  eountcrmanded  his  orders  to  the  Massaehnsetts  troops.— J 

u.  i;. 


1747.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  209 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority,  aforesaid,  that 
there  be  annually  chosen  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  col- 
ony, one  clerk  for  said  court  of  general  sessions  of  the  peace, 
and  inferior  court  of  common  pleas,  and  one  sheriif  for  said 
county. 

An  Act  for  annexing  the  towns    of  Tiverton  and  Little  Comp- 

ton  to  the  county  of  Newport,  and  Cumberland  to  the  county 

of  Providence. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 
by  the  authority  of  the  same  it  is  enacted,  that  the  towns  of 
Tiverton  and  Little  Compton  be  annexed  to  the  county  of  New- 
port ;  and  that  the  town  of  Cumberland  be  annexed  to  the 
county  of  Providence. 

God  save  the  King. 

Governor  Shirley  to  Governor  Greene. 

Boston,  February  7,  1747. 

Sir: — By  my  last  advices  from  Albany,  I  find  the  condition  of  the  troops  of  the 
Southern  colonies,  now  on  Hudson's  River,  as  to  their  state  of  health  and  numbers, 
and  the  strong  disposition  of  the  Indians  of  the  Six  Nations  to  join  with  us  in  the 
attempt  against  Crown  Point,  and  the  danger  of  utterly  losing  these  Nations,  and 
their  falling  off  to  the  French,  (which  will  be  of  the  most  fatal  consequence  to  all 
the  Northern  English  colonies,)  to  be  such,  that  I  am  now  fixed  in  my  resolution  to 
push  forward  this  enterprise  with  all  imaginable  diligerce ;  and  as  the  government 
of  Connecticut  has  declined  to  join  their  forces  with  ours,  which  will  much  lessen  the 
numbers  we  expected,  I  must  earnestly  desire  Your  Honor  to  send  forward  to  our 
rendezvous  on  Hudson's  Eiver,  as  many  of  the  troops  of  your  government  in  His 
Majesty's  pay,  as  you  can  furnish  out  for  this  service. 

The  success  of  this  enterprise  being  of  the  utmost  importance,  I  trust  you  will  do 
every  thing  in  your  power  to  promote  it. 

You  have  herewith  enclosed,  a  copy  of  Mr.  Johnson's  letter  o  Mr.  Lydius,  and 
of  the  advice  of  our  Assembly  to  me,  in  this  affair. 

I  am,  sir.  Your  Honor's  very  humble  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  the  Hon.  William  Greene,  Esq. 

VOL.  V.         27 


210  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1747. 


Sir  WiUicim  Jolmsou.  to  Mr.  John  H.  Lydim. 

Mount  Johnson,  January  26,  1 746-7. 

Sir: — By  yours,  received  last  night,  by  Brant,  I  find  you  intend  shortly  to  leave 
for  Boston ;  and  as  I  cannot  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  before  you  set  off',  I 
wish  you  a  prosperous  journey,  and  safe  return. 

Two  days  a^o,  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Clinton,  telling  me  the  forwardness 
of  the  New  England  troops,  and  desiring  mc  to  prepare  as  many  Indian  warriors  as 
possible,  to  assist  our  forces  in  the  reduction  of  Crown  Point,  which  I  heartily  wish 
to  see  ;  and  should  not  make  the  least  doubt  of  it,  were  our  people  so  active  as  our 
neighbors,  the  New  Englanders,  who  daily  set  us  good  examples,  had  we  the  grace 
to  follow  it. 

I  have  now  sent  several  of  my  ofHcers  among  the  Upper  Nations,  to  prepare  them, 
but  have  fixed  on  no  certain  time,  fearing  a  disappointment ;  I  had  the  two  next 
castles  assembled  yesterday,  and  do  assure  you  that  nothing  could  give  me  more  plea- 
sure, than  to  see  the  willingness  they  showed,  of  joining  us,  whenever  required  ;  the 
sooner  they  say,  the  better ;  lor  they  are  almost  in  despair,  or  out  of  patience  so 
bng  waiting. 

I  make  not  the  least  doubt  of  bringing  as  many  in  the  field  as  will  be  sufficient 
for  that  enterprise  ;  I  only  wish  our  forces  were  all  so  ready  and  willing.  I  am 
much  hurried  ;  so  haveonly  time  to  assure  you  of  my  best  wishes  for  you,  Mrs. 
Lydius,  &c. ;  and  am,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant.  WM.  JOHNSON. 

To  Mr.  John  H.  Lydius,  at  Albany. 


Gov.  Shirley  to  Gov.  Greene. 

Boston,  February  9,  174G-7. 

Sir ; — I  have  this  morning  received  advices  from  Lieut.  Governor  Mascarene, 
that  Mons'r  Rawson,  who  was  posted  at  Manis,  with  above  six  hundred  Canadians, 
and  Indians,  was,  upon  the  arrival  of  the  reinforcement  sent  from  hence,  retired  to 
Sekenecta;  and  Col.  Noble,  with  a  body  of  about  five  hundred  men,  consisting 
principally  of  some  of  those  troops  I  sent  from  hence,  is  now  at  Manis  ;  but  the  re- 
[lorts  of  the  number  of  the  enemy  (being  j'cpresented  as  much  superior  to  Col.  No- 
ble,) makes  him  cautious  of  pushing  them  without  some  further  reinforcement. 

I  am  informed  that  the  enemy  will  not  be  able  to  get  oiT  before  April ;  and  1 
hope  our  troops  will  be  strong  enough  to  hinder  their  retreat  fill  the  English  can 
have  some  further  strength  from  these  colonies. 

It  appears  to  me,  bj-  what  advices  I  have  had,  that  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  mis- 
fortune that  happened  to  the  companies  from  your  colony,  and  my  last  company, 
bound  to  Annapolis  Royal.who  were  cast  away  at  Mont  Desert,  and  above  one  half  of 
them  drowned  and  frozen  ;  and  the  New  Hampshire  company,  under  Capt.  Mitch- 
ell, (instead  of  returning  to  Annapolis,  from  St.  Johns,  according  to  order,)  going 
back  to  New  Hampshire,  our  troops  would  have  either  entirely  drove  the  French 
forces  into  the  vroods,  where  they  must  perish  if  they  stay  lone,  or  have  made  them 
all  prisoners  of  war. 


1747.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  211 


And  as  Your  Honor  is  sensible  this  is  a  matter  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the 
safety  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  for  securing  our  conquest  of  Cape  Breton,  and  tlie  sea- 
son is  advancing  when  the  navigation  in  those  parts  will  be  much  safer  than  it  has 
been  in  the  months  past,  I  must  earnestly  desire  Your  Honor,  that  in  case  you  find 
any  difficulty  in  sending  your  troops  in  the  King's  pay  to  Crown  Point,  you  would 
not  fail  of  sending  them  as  soon  as  they  may  be  got  ready,  to  Annapolis  Koyal,  for 
this  necessary  service. 

And  I  must  urge  this  with  greater  importunity,  because  (having  already  upwards 
of  seven  hundred  men  in  Nova  Scotia.)  1  am  not  able  to  spare  a  man  more ;  the  re- 
mainder of  our  troops,  being  absolutely  necessary  to  be  employed  for  the  reduction  of 
Crown  Point,  to  which  place  I  have  given  orders  that  they  should  march  with  all 
possible  expedition.  I  shall  also  press  the  Governor  of  New  Hampshire  to  order  the 
companies  (raised  there  for  the  expedition,)  to  Annapolis  Koyal. 

If  we  can  make  ourselves  strong  enough,  I  hope  your  soldiers  will  be  detained 
but  a  short  time  upon  this  service.  However,  I  shall  continue  my  troops  here,  in 
hopes  of  a  reinforcement  from  you. 

The  ready  spirit  which  the  government  of  Rhode  Island  showed,  for  assisting  in 
this  important  service,  upon  my  first  application  to  Your  Honor  for  that  purpose, 
leaves  no  room  to  doubt,  but  that  they  will  exert  it  now  with  equal  vigor,  and  not 
let  slip  so  fair  an  opportunity  of  employing  the  same  companies,  or  what  maybe 
left  of  them,  so  beneficially  for  His  Majesty's  service,  and  the  general  good  of  the 
colonies ;  and  so  acceptably  to  His  Majesty,  as  the  sending  these  companies  to  An- 
napolis Royal,  would  be,  at  this  most  critical  juncture. 

If  the  troops  arrive  there  by  the  second  or  beginning  of  the  third  week  in 
March,  it  would  be  in  time,  though  the  sooner  the  better:  they  need  not  stay  at 
Annapolis  long. 

I  am  with  due  respect,  sir. 

Your  very  humble  servant,  W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  the  Hon.  William  Greene. 


Gov.  Greene  to  Gov.  Shirley. 

Providence,  20th  February,  1746-7. 

Sir : — Immediately  on  the  receipt  of  Your  Excellency's  letter  of  the  7th  current, 
pressing  that  His  Majesty's  troops,  in  this  colony,  might  be  sent  to  Hudson's  River, 
in  order  to  join  those  of  the  Southern  colonies,  &c.,  in  an  attempt  against  Crown 
Point,  I  issued  out  my  warrant,  to  summon  the  General  Assem'oly  to  meet  at  this  place 
on  the  17th  instant;  but  before  they  met,  I  had  the  honor  of  Your  Excellency's  let- 
ter, of  the  9th,  e.xpressing  your  desire,  that  the  troops  here,  may  be  sent  to  An- 
napolis Royal,  if  I  should  find  any  difficulty  in  sending  them  to  Crown  Point. 

The  Assembly  met  accordingly,  when  I  recommended  both  of  Your  Excellency's 
letters  to  their  consideration  ;  but  they  came  to  a  resolution,  that,  as  this  colony  has 
no  provisions  nor  stores  on  Hudson's  River,  and  the  navigation  of  that  river  is  im- 
practicable at  this  season  of  the  year,  it  is  not  possible  to  send  the  troops  thither,  as 
desired. 

As  for  sending  them  to  Annapolis,  the  Assembly  is  of  opinion,  that  the  time  pro- 
posed by  Your  Excellency  for  them  to  be  at  Annapolis,  is  so  short,  that  we  cannot 
procure  transports,  provisions,  &c.,  in  time. 


212  KECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1747. 

AVhat  increases  this  great  difficulty,  is,  that  the  troops  are  greatly  enfeebled  and 
lessen('d  in  numbers,  by  sickness  and  desertion,  in  the  late  attempt  to  go  to  Annap- 
olis. Moreover,  the  people  of  the  colony's  sloop  are  discharged,  and  the  vessel  it- 
self so  much  out  of  repair,  that  it  cannot  go  for  convoy  ;  for  which  reasons,  the 
troops  cannot  be  sent  to  Annapolis  at  this  juncture. 

This  is  the  determination  of  the  General  Assembly,  which  I  am  directed  to  In- 
form Your  E.Kcellency  of,  and  am,  with  due  respects, 

Your  Excellency's  very  humble  servant, 

WILLIAM  GREENE. 

To  Governor  Shirley. 

The  Secretary  of  Massaehuseits  Bay  to  Governor  Greene. 

Boston,  March  5,  1747. 

Sir  : — I  am  directed  by  the  General  Court  here,  to  apprjse  Your  Honor  of  the 
advice  we  have  from  our  agent,  by  the  ship  from  London,  yesterday,  that  a  grant 
was  made  in  Parliament,  on  Friday,  the  4th  of  December  last,  of  £10,200,000,  for 
the  current  year  ;  £800,000  of  which,  is  for  paying  the  charge  of  taking  and  keep- 
ing Cape  Breton,  by  the  people  of  New  England  ;  and  the  charge  of  raising  forces 
for  the  expedition  that  was  designed  against  Canada. 

There  have  been  some  proposals  and  endeavors,  that  the  payment  might  be  made 
by  debentures;  nothing  seems  so  likely  to  prevent  it,  as  applying  the  money  grant- 
ed to  redeem  and  finish  our  fatal  paper  currency,  so  absoluely  necessary  to  the  es- 
tablishment and  preservation  of  justice  in  our  commerce,  and  so  much  for  the  in- 
terest of  Great  Britain,  as  well  as  ourselves. 

This,  we  are  very  sensible  cannot  be  done  eiTectually,  without  the  meeting  of  the 
several  Assemblies,  interested  in  this  grant ;  it  is  therefore  hoped  that  Your  Honor 
will  call  your  General  Court  together  as  soon  as  may  be,  that  the  meeting  of  cemmis- 
sioners  may  not  be  put  ofT  beyond  the  time  proposed,  viz. :  the  12th  of  April  next, 
in  order  to  their  being  assured  at  home  very  soon,  that  this  money  will  be  so  wisely 
applied,  and  for  a  purpose  so  absolutely  inconsistent  with  debentures,  or  any  dila- 
tory methods  of  payment. 

I  am,  with  great  respect,  sir. 

Your  Honor's  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

JOSIAH  WILLARD. 

To  the  Hon.  Governor  Greene. 

P.  S.  The  agent's  letter  was  dated  the  10th  December,  and  sent  to  Ports- 
mouth a  few  days  before  the  ship  sailed. 


[The  following  Public  Laws,  passed  during  the  year  174C,  are  printed  at 
length  in  the  volume  of  public  laws,  published  in  1747,  unless  repealed  previous 
to  that  time.] 

An  Act  for  suspending  the  execution  of  Nathaniel  Alcock.     (May.) 
An  Act   in  addition  to   an   act,  entitled  "  An  act  for  regulating  appeals  to  His 
Majesty  in  council,  in  Great  Britain."     (July.) 


1747.]  AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  213 

An  Act  directing  the  manner  of  admitting  freemen,  and  for  preventing  bribery  and 
corruption  in  the  election  of  public  officers,  in  the  colony.     (August.) 

An  Act  in  amendment  of  an  act,  for  preventing  bribery  and  corruption.  (Sep- 
tember.) 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhlt/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Ixhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations^  at  Neivport,  the  6th  day 
of  May,  1747. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Abraham  Redwood,  Mr.  Philip  Greene, 

Mr,  Stephen  Brownell,  Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 

Mr.  Robert  Lawton,  Mr.  Jeoffrey  Watson. 
Mr.  James  Arnold, 

Mr.  Sam'l  Wickham,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon,  clerk. 

The  persons  whose  names  here  follow,  having  taken  the  oath, 
or  affirmation,  prescribed  by  the  law  of  this  colony  against 
bribery  and  corruption,  are  hereby  admitted  to  give  their  votes 
to  choose  officers  for  their  respective  towns  ;  and  also  to  give 
their  votes  for  the  choice  of  the  general  officers  in  the 
colony. 

[Here  follow  many  hundred  names,  which  are  omitted.] 

God  save  the  King. 


214 


RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND 


[1747. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhly,  held  for  ihe  Colour/  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  first  Wednes- 
day  of  Maij,  1747. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 


DEPUTLES. 


Neivport. 
Mr.  Samuel  Wickham, 
Capt.  Walter  Chaloner, 
Mr.  Thomas  Cranston, 
Mr.  John  Channing, 
Capt.  Jonathan  Nichols, 
Mr.  James  Sheffield. 

Providence. 
Mr.  George  Brown, 
Mr.  Elisha  Brown, 
Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Mr.  Ezekiel  Warner. 
Portsmouth. 
Mr.  Benjamin  Tucker, 
Mr.  Joseph  ]\Iartin, 
Mr.  Gideon  Freeborn,  Jr.. 
^Ir.  Benjamin  Hickes. 

WanvicJc. 
Mr.  John  Greene, 
Col.  Benoni  Waterman. 
Mr.  John  Iloldon, 
Mr.  Joseph  Lippitt. 

Wcstcrlf/. 
]\Ir.  Joshua  Babcock. 
Capt.  William  Pendleton. 


Neiv  Shoreham. 
Capt.  Robert  Hull, 
Mr.  John  Littlefield. 

North  Kingstoivn. 
Col.  Immanuel  Northup, 
Mr.  Edward  Dyre,  Jr. 

South  Kingstown. 
Capt.  Robert  Hassard, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Peckham,  Jr. 

East  Greemvich. 
Capt.  Joseph  Nichols, 
Mr.  John  Spenser, 
Jamestown. 
Mr.  Thomas  Carr, 
Mr.  John  Martin. 

Smithfield. 
Mr.  Thomas  Lapham. 
Mr.  Jonathan  Arnold. 

Scitiiate. 
Capt.  Job  Randall. 
Mr.  John  Fisk. 

Glocester. 
Mr.  Richard  Steere. 
]Mr.  Abraham  Tourtellott. 


1747.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


215 


Charlestotmi. 
Col.  Joseph  Stanton, 
Capt,  William  Clarke,  Jr. 

West  Greemvich. 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Ellis, 
Mr.  John  Spencer,  2d. 

Coventry. 
Capt.  Thomas  Stafford, 
Capt.  Abel  Potter. 

Exeter. 
Capt.  John  Weight, 
Mr.  Benoni  Gardner. 

Mlddletown. 
Mr.  Hobert  Nichols, 
Mr.  John  Taylor. 


DEPUTIES. 

Bristol. 
Mr.  Thomas  Greene. 

Tiverton. 
Capt.  John  Manchester. 
Mr.  John  Rowland. 
Little  Compton. 
Capt.  John  Hunt, 
Mr.  William  Wilbore. 

Warren. 
Mr.  Matthew  Allen, 
Mr.  Samuel  Miller. 
Cumberland. 
Mr.  Job  Bartlett, 
Mr.  Samuel  Bartlett. 


Mr.  Sam'l  Wickham,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon,  clerk 

The  following  officers  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hod.  William  Robinson,  Deputy  Governor. 


ASSISTANTS. 


Mr.  Benjamin  Haszard, 
Capt.  George  Wanton, 
Mr.  William  Rhodes, 
Mr.  Jonathan  Randall, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Tucker, 


Mr.  Gideon  Durfey, 
Mr.  Joseph  Edmonds, 
Mr.  Ephraim  Gardner, 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Niles. 
Mr.  William  Richmond. 


SECRETARY. 

Mr.  Thomas  Ward. 

ATTORNEY    GENERAL. 

Mr.  Daniel  Updike. 


GENERAL  TREASURER. 

Mr.  John  Gardner. 


216  RECORDS    Of   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1747. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  colony's  sloop  Tartar,  be 
immediately  put  in  commission,  and  manned  with  ninety  able 
bodied  men,  including  officers  ;  and  that  their  wages  be  as  fol- 
io we  th,  to  wit: 

Those  of  the  officers,  the  same  as  when  last  stated ;  those  of 
such  of  the  foremost  men,  as  are  seamen,  at  £14  per  month  ; 
and  such  others  of  them,  as  are  not  seamen,  at  £12  per 
month. 

And  that  the  said  sloop  shall  cruise  in  consort  with  the  Con- 
necticut  colony  sloop,  according  to  the  order  and  instructions 
which  shall  from  time  to  time  be  given  the  captain ;  and  His 
Honor,  the  Governor,  is  hereby  requested  to  give  His  Honor, 
the  Governor  of  Connecticut,  information  hereof,  forthwith. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  and  the  captain  of  Fort  George  is 
hereby  directed  to  enlist,  as  soon  as  may  be,  thirty  men,  to 
serve  as  soldiers,  at  said  fort,  upon  the  same  monthly  wages,  as 
were  allowed  the  soldiers  there  last  year,  with  an  allowance  of 
twenty  shillings  per  week,  board  wages,  for  each  of  them  ;  and 
in  case  a  sufficient  number  of  men  be  not  enlisted,  in  fifteen 
days,  from  the  rising  of  this  Assembly,  the  field  officers  of  the 
county  of  Newport  shall  have  granted  them  a  warrant  from 
His  Honor,  the  Governor,  and  thereby  cause  so  many  men  as 
will  make  up  and  complete  that  number,  to  be  impressed  in 
the  county  of  Newport,  for  that  purpose. 

God  save  the  King. 

Governor  Shirley  to  Governor  Jf anion. 

Boston,  May  18,  174  7. 

Sir : — This  goes  to  inform  Your  Honor,  that  by  despatches  I  have  received  from 
Albany  and  Northamjjton,  I  find  that  the  Indians  of  the  Six  Nations  are  gen 
erally  spirited  to  go  to  war  against  the  French  of  Canada  ;  that  divers  parties  are 
now  out,  and  others  daily  offering  themselves,  which  is  a  point  the  governments  of 
New  England  (especially  those  of  the  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut,)  have  been 
laboring  to  carry  ever  since  the  first  of  the  war  ;  and  if  this  spirit  be  duly  cherished 
and  properly  managed  and  directed,  it  may,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  prove  of  un- 
speakable benefit  for  the  safety  of  these  colonies. 

I  refer  Your  Honor  to  an  extract  from  Col.  Stoddard's  letter  to  mo,  for  a  more 
particular  account  of  this  affair ;  only  I  would  observe,  that  Col.  Johnson  and  Mr. 
Lydius,  whose  influence  on  the  Indians  has  brought  about  this  great  event,  are  un- 


1747.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  217 

der  such  engagements,  as  they  are  not  able  to  fulfill  ■without  proper  supplies  from 
these  governments  ;  and  if  for  want  of  that,  the  Indians  should  suffer  any  disap- 
pointment, it  is  more  than  probable  that  they  will  be  disgusted  at  their  being  left  in 
the  lurch  by  us,  and  will  fall  entirely  into  the  interests  of  the  French,  which  will  be 
more  fatal  to  these  colonies  than  any  thing  that  has  yet  befallen  us. 

Now,  as  there  is  no  General  Court  in  being  in  this  Province,  we  can  do  nothing, 
at  present,  for  the  furnishing  these  gentlemen  ;  though  our  General  Court  has  en- 
trusted Mr.  Lydius  with  this  affair,  and  have  undertaken  to  supply  him  with  a  con- 
siderable sum  for  this  service,  and  he  has  made  his  drafts  for  the  payment,  which 
will  be  done  ;  but  the  parties  of  Indians  come  so  fast  upon  him  and  Mr.  Johnson,  to 
be  fitted  out  for  this  service,  that  what  they  will  receive  at  present  from  this  gov- 
ernment, will  be  a  very  inconsiderable  part  of  what  they  are  under  engagements 
for ;  and  the  gentlemen  seem  to  apprehend  that  there  is  great  danger  of  their  being 
ruined,  and  the  common  cause  suffering  the  greatest  damage  that  we  can  conceive 
of,  unless  they  be  relieved  from  these  governments. 

I  doubt  not,  sir,  but  your  General  Court,  will,  in  this  critical  conjuncture,  I'eadily 
make  proper  supplies  for  the  encouragement  of  the  Indians  of  the  Six  Nations,  for 
prosecuting  this  war,  and  for  keeping  these  gentlemen  in  heart  till  an  agreement 
may  be  made  between  the  governments  to  apportion  the  charge  that  has  arisen  or 
may  arise  in  this  important  affair,  among  themselves ;  and  I  shall  lay  this  matter 
before  our  General  Court,  at  their  first  meeting,  and  am  fully  persuaded  they  will 
cheerfully  fall  into  all  the  measures  necessary  for  promoting  this  important 
interest. 

You  will  please  to  lay  these  matters  before  your  Assembly  as  soon  as  possible, 
and  let  me  know  their  resolutions  on  this  affair. 
I  am,  with  great  regard,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Esq. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly  ^  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  the  second  Tues- 
day in  June,  1747. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Robinson,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Jeremiah  Niles,  Esq.,  Samuel 
Wickham,  Esq.,  and  Mr.  John  Channing,  be,  and  they  are  here- 
by appointed  a  committee,  to  draw  up  the  draft  of  an  answer 

VOL.  V.         28 


218  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1747. 

to  the  letters  written  by  His  Excellency,  William  Shirley, 
Esq.,  Governor  of  the  iNIassachusetts,  to  this  government,  re- 
questing the  colony  to  bear  a  part  of  the  charge  and  expense 
of  encouraging  and  fitting  out  the  Six  Nations  of  Indians,  to 
prosecute  the  war  against  the  French  ;  and  therein  to  insert 
the  reasons  why  this  government  declines  entering  into  the 
same  ;  which  letter,  when  by  the  said  committee  so  drawn,  His 
Honor,  the  Governor,  is  requested  to  sign,  and  expedite  to  Mr. 
Shirley. 

His  Honor,  the  Governor,  is  desired  by  this  Assembly,  to 
write  and  send  to  Sir  William  Pepperell,  and  endeavor  to  pro- 
cure of  him  a  certificate  of  the  number  of  soldiers  which  were 
received  from  this  colony  into  the  garrison  of  Louisbourg ;  of 
the  time  of  their  arrival  there,  and  discharge  from  thence  ;  and 
also,  how  long  the  colony's  sloop  Tartar  was  employed  in  the 
expedition  against  Cape  Breton,  and  retained  in  the  service, 
after  its  reduction. 

His  Honor  is  also  requested  to  procure  all  such  other  certifi- 
cates and  vouchers  as  can  be  obtained  in  this  colony,  as  may 
be  necessary  for  rendering  the  accounts  of  charges  the  colony 
hath  been  at  (respecting  the  aforesaid  expedition,)  clear  and 
plain  ;  and  when  the  said  certificates,  vouchers,  &c.,  are  pro- 
cured, His  Honor  is  requested  to  transmit  the  same,  duly 
authenticated,  to  JNIr.  Partridge,  the  colony's  agent,  in  Great 
Britain,  as  soon  as  possible. 

And  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  is  hereby  appointed  and  desired 
to  wait  on  Sir  William  Pepperell,  with  His  Honor,  the  Gov- 
ernor's letter,  and  to  exert  himself  to  procure  the  aforemen- 
tioned certificates. 

The  commissioners  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly  of 
this  colony,  to  run  and  mark  out  the  bounds  of  the  colony,  east- 
ward, toward  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  having 
performed  that  service,  and  made  report  to  the  Assembly,  of 
their  doings  thereon,  at  a  former  session,  which  was  accepted 
now  presented  an  account  of  the  expense  they  were  at,  in  per- 
forming the  service,  and  prayed  that  they  and  the  persons  by 
them  employed  therein,  might  have  satisfaction  made  them,  out 


1747.]  AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  219 

of  the  general  treasury ;  which  account,  amounting  to  £500 
I85.  id.,  being  duly  examined,  is  allowed  by  this  Assembly. 

And  it  is  thereupon  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  sum 
shall  be  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  Mr.  James  Honey- 
man,  Jr.,  to,  and  for  the  use  of  himself  and  the  others  con- 
cerned ;  each  of  whom,  shall  have  out  of  the  same,  the  sum  set 
against  his  name. 

God  save  the  King. 

Governor  l^ldrleu  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Boston,  June  29tli,  1747. 

Sir  : — This  will  inform  Your  Honor  that  this  government,  taking  into  considera- 
tion the  great  danger  which  ail  His  Majesty's  colonies  in  North  America  are  in  (as 
well  as  their  own  particular  danger,)  of  being  in  time  destroyed  by  the  French,  and 
Indians,  under  their  influence,  without  a  firm  union,  between  themselves,  for  their 
mutual  defence,  and  for  weakening  and  destroying  the  power  of  the  enemy ;  and 
more  especially  for  driving  the  French  from  the  borders  of  the  Province  of  New 
York  ;  and  this  Province  has  appointed  commissioners  to  meet  in  a  congress,  to  be 
held  at  New  York,  on  the  2d  day  of  September  next,  with  such  commissioners  as 
may  be  appointed  by  all  His  Majesty's  governments,  from  New  Hampshire  to  Vir- 
ginia, inclusively  ;  then  and  there  to  treat  and  agree  upon  measures  for  encourag- 
ing the  Indians  of  the  Six  Nations  vigorously  to  prosecute  their  incursions  on  the 
enemy  ;  as  also  to  agree  upon  the  method  and  proportion  of  raising  men  and 
money,  for  carrying  on  the  war,  both  offensively  and  def<3nsively  ;  and  to  project 
and  settle  such  enterprises  and  plans  of  operation  as  the  common  interest  shall  re- 
quire. 

Your  Honor  will,  I  doubt  not,  duly  consider  the  great  importance  of  this  matter, 
and  represent  it  in  the  strongest  light  to  your  Assembly,  that  they  may  see  not  only 
how  deeply  His  Majesty's  interest  in  general  is  concerned,  but  that  their  own  par- 
ticular safety  will  be  soon  much  affected  by  the  growing  power  of  the  French  ;  and 
more  especially  the  hazard  there  is,  that  they  will  bring  the  Six  Nations  into  their 
interest,  in  case  they  are  not  forthwith  most  vigorously  supported  by  the  English, 
without  which,  it  will  be  a  very  little  while  before  the  Southern  as  well  as  the 
Northern  colonies  will  be  exposed  to  their  fury.  And  therefore  I  would  earnestly 
recommend  it  to  the  several  governments  separately  to  make  provision  without  de- 
lay, for  the  encouragement  of  the  Six  Nations,  till  the  congress  can  be  held  ;  this 
government  having  already  advanced  many  large  sums  of  money,  and  still  continu- 
ing to  do  more  for  this  service.  Your  Honor  will  be  pleased  to  give  me  seasonable 
advice  of  the  resolution  of  your  government  on  this  most  important  affair. 

I  am,  sir,  Your  Honor's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  the  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Esq. 

P.  S.  I  am  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the  favor  of  your  answer  to  my  last 
letter. 


220  RECORDS   OF  THE   COLONY   OP   RHODE  ISLAND  [1747. 


Gov.  Wanton  to  Gov.  Shirley. 

Newport,  July  3,  1747. 
Sir  : — I  received  your  favor  of  29th  June,  and  now  acquaint  Your  Excellency, 
that  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  do  any  thing  otherwise  than  to  represent  the  matters 
therein  contained,  in  as  strong  terms  as  I  can,  to  our  General  Assembly,  which 
will  meet  by  adjournment,  the  second  Tuesday  in  August ;  and  then  I  shall  be  ca- 
pable of  acquainting  Your  Excellency  of  their  resolutions  thereupon. 

I  am,  sir,  your  humble  servant, 

GIDEON  WANTON. 
To  Governor  Shirlev. 


Proceedings  of  iJie  General  Assemblt/,  held  for  the  Colon?/  of  Rhode 
Ishnd  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  JSfeivport,  the  third  Tues- 
day of  August,  1747. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon,  William  Robinson,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  for  incorporating  the  north  part  of  the  town  of  Charles- 
town,  in  King's  county,  into  a  township,  the  same  to  be  dis- 
tinguished and  known  by  the  name  of  Richmond. 
Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 
by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  town  of  Charles- 
town,  in  the  county  of  Kings  county,  &c.,  be  divided  into  two 
towns,  by  a  river  that  runs  across  said   town,  known  by  the 
name  of  Pawcatuck  River ;  all  the  lands  to  the  southward  of 
said  river,  shall  retain  the  name   of  Charlestown ;  and  that  all 
the  lands  to  the  northward  of  said  river,  be,  and  hereby  is  in- 
corporated into  a  township,  by  the  name  of  Richmond  ;  and  to 
have   and  enjoy  the   like  privileges,  as    other  towns   in  this 
colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  tiat 
each  of  said  towns  shall  have,  and  receive  a  proportion  of  the 
money  in,  and  belonging  to  the  treasury  of  said  Charlestown, 


1747.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  221 

according  to  the  money  for  which  the  lands  in  each  town  is 
mortgaged  to  the  colony ;  and  that  all  justices  of  the  peace 
and  military  officers,  living  within  the  bounds  of  said  new  town, 
called  Richmond,  retain  their  authority,  and  act  as  such  there- 
in, until  the  next  general  election ;  and  that  the  eldest  justice 
of  each  of  said  towns  is  hereby  empowered  to  grant  forth  their 
warrants  to  some  proper  officer,  whom  they  shall  appoint,  to 
warn  the  inhabitants  of  said  towns  to  assemble  and  meet  to- 
gether in  some  proper  place,  in  said  town,  on  Friday,  the  28th 
day  of  this  instant  August,  in  order  to  choose  deputies,  to  rep- 
resent them  at  the  October  session  of  this  Assembly ;  and  also, 
to  choose  town  officers  for  said  towns,  agreeably  to  the  laws  of 
this  colony ;  and  that  each  town  shall  send  one  grand  juror, 
and  one  petit  juror,  to  each  of  the  inferior  and  superior  courts, 
in  Kings  county. 

It  is  voted,  that  the  commissary  be,  and  he  is  hereby  ordered 
to  draw  up  an  account  of  all  the  charges  and  expenses  the 
colony  hath  been  at  in  raising  three  companies  for  the  expedi- 
tion intended  against  Canada,  (excepting  the  bounty  of  £50  to 
a  man,)  and  present  the  same  to  Edward  Scott,  Samuel  Wick- 
ham  and  Peter  Bours,  Esqs.,  who  are  hereby  appointed  a  com- 
mittee to  inspect  and  examine  the  same  :  and  that  the  commis- 
sary give  his  affidavit  or  engagement  to  said  account,  and  pro- 
cure all  such  vouchers  and  other  papers  and  evidences  as  shall 
be  necessary,  to  establish  the  credit  thereof;  and  that  when 
the  business  is  perfected,  the  whole  shall  be  sent  to  the  colo- 
ny's agent  in  Great  Britain. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby  empowered  to  draw  bills  of  exchange,  paya- 
ble to  the  agent,  for  the  amount  of  said  account,  on  the  lords 
commissioners  of  the  treasury,  or  others,  on  whom  the  pay- 
ment thereof  shall  be  incumbent ;  and  that  the  money  when 
received,  shall  remain  in  the  agent's  hands  until  the  General 
Assembly  shall  order  the  disposal  thereof 

And  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  is  also  hereby  empowered  to 
draw  bills  on  the  agent  for  so  much  money  as  the  colony  hath 
advanced  to  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  said  three  compa- 


222  RECORDS    OP    THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1747. 

nies,  towards  their  wages,  and  for  the  soldiers'  clothing  ;  and 
that  said  bills  be  made  payable  to  those  merchants  in  the  town 
of  Newport,  that  lent  the  colony  the  said  money. 

Whereas,  Sarah  Ninegret,  widow  of  George  Ninegret,  late 
sachem  of  the  Narragansett  tribe  of  Indians,  deceased,  and 
mother  and  natural  guardian  to  Thomas  Ninegret,  an  infant 
the  present  sachem  of  said  tribe  of  Indians,  with  Tobe}^  Co- 
heys,  Samuel  Niles,  John  Trask,  William  Sachem,  Ephraim 
Coheys,  ISIoses  Hammond,  James  Niles  and  Harry  Copper, 
Avho  were  appointed  by  the  said  tribe  of  Indians,  councillors 
for  the  present  sachem,  Thomas  Ninegret,  in  behalf  of  this  sa- 
chem, themselves  and  people  of  said  tribe  of  Indians,  represent- 
ed to  this  Assembly,  that  they,  at  the  last  sitting  of  this 
Assembly,  in  JMay  last,  did  prefer  a  petition  to  said  Assembly, 
setting  forth  the  deplorable  condition  they  are  brought  to,  by 
means  of  some  gentlemen,  namely :  Joseph  Whipple,  Daniel 
Coggeshall,  Samuel  Perry,  John  Spencer  and  David  Anthony, 
Esqs.,  who,  as  they  are  informed,  were  appointed  by  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly,  trustees,  at  its  session,  A.  D.  1746,  for  the  man- 
agement of  the  rents  and  profits  of  the  estate,  said  by  some  to 
be  submitted  to  this  government  by  the  late  Ninegret,  sachem, 
deceased,  in  the  year  1713  ;  but  without  the  desire,  consent, 
request  or  knowledge  of  the  said  Sarah,  and  the  said  council- 
lors or  sachem,  whicli  was  always  usual,  and  such  appointment 
was  always  at  the  request  of  the  sachem  and  his  council ;  and 
having  set  forth  in  said  petition,  that  the  said  trustees,  without 
the  knowledge  and  consent  of  the  sachem  or  any  of  the  coun- 
cillors, have  leased  out  the  land,  which  was  always  kept  and 
reserved  for  the  tribe  of  Indians,  for  planting  of  corn  and  rais- 
ing other  necessaries  for  their  support. 

iVnd  tlie  said  Sarah  and  councillors  further  declared,  that  it 
is  not  only  their  fields  and  improvements  that  they  have 
fenced,  and  liave  been  at  great  labor  and  charge  in  making 
said  fences  tliat  are  rented  out  from  them ;  but  also,  as  they 
are  credibly  informed,  the  wood  land,  which  was  alwaj^s  kept 
and  reserved  for  the  tribe  of  Indians  for  fire  wood  ;  and  also 
the  sachem's  cedar  swamp   is  rented  out,  which  was  always 


1747.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  223 

kept  and  reserved  for  the  tribe  of  Indians,  to  cut  stuff  and  sell 
the  same  ;  and  the  said  Sarah  and  councillors  apprehend  that 
when  the  General  Assembly  appointed  the  above  named  trus- 
tees, for  the  care  and  management  of  the  rents  and  profits  of 
the  estate  submitted  to  this  government,  in  the  year  1713,  by 
tne  late  Ninegret,  sachem,  deceased,  that  the  General  Assembly 
had  no  design  nor  intent  to  give  the  said  trustees  power  to 
lease  out  the  sachem's  land  without  his  knowledge  and  con- 
sent, and  the  knowledge  and  advice  of  his  council ;  and  they 
likewise  apprehended  that  the  submission  made  by  tlie  sachem 
in  the  year  1713,  (if  any  was  made  by  him  in  that  year,)  doth 
not  give  the  said  trustees  or  any  others,  power  to  lease  out  the 
sachem's  land  without  his  knowledge  and  consent ;  they  also 
informed  this  Assembly  -that  the  gentlemen  who  were  trustees 
to  the  late  sachems,  deceased,  never  leased  out  any  of  the  said 
sachems'  land  without  first  having  the  leave  and  consent  of 
the  sachem  and  his  council ;  and  as  this  Assembly  have  it  in 
their  power  to  relieve  them  in  this,  their  distressed  condition 
for  they  know  not,  as  the  case  is,  where  to  go,  nor  how  to  sub- 
sist themselves,  and  must  be  unavoidably  starved  without 
relief; — 

Therefore,  they  humbly  prayed  that  this  Assembly  would 
take  their  circumstances  into  consideration,  and  dismiss  the 
above  named  trustees  from  their  trusteeship,  and  make  void  all 
the  leases  given  by  said  trustees  of  the  sachem's  land ;  and 
that  the  Assembly  would  allow  and  accept  of  their  known  and 
trusty  friends,  Col.  Joseph  Stanton,  Capt.  George  Wanton  and 
Capt.  John  Frye,  to  be  trustees  for  tie  care  and  management 
of  the  sachem's  estate,  for  the  sachem's  interest;  the  last 
named  gentlemen  having  been  trustees  to  the  late  sachem ; 
and  the  said  Sarah  and  councillors  were  knowing  to  the  pro- 
ceedings and  management  in  that  affair,  and  that  their  pro- 
ceedings gave  good  satisfaction  to  the  sachem,  and  a  general 
satisfaction  to  the  tribe  of  Indians,  &c. 

Upon  consideration  whereof,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that 
tlie  prayer  of  the  said  Sarah  and  councillors,  be,  and  it  is  here- 
by granted  ;  and  that  the  said  Joseph  Whipple,  Daniel  Cog- 


224  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1747. 

geshall,  Samuel  Perry,  John  Spencer  and  David  Anthony,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby  removed  from  their 'aforesaid  ofiice  of  trus- 
tees ;  and  that  all  the  leases  by  them  made,  of  the  sachem's 
land,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  declared  and  made  null  and 
void ;  and  the  aforesaid  Col.  Joseph  Stanton,  Capt.  Geo,  Wan- 
ton and  Capt.  John  Frye,  are  appointed  trustees,  for  the  care 
and  management  of  the  sachem's  estate,  for  his  interest. 
God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhhj  held  for  the  Cohmj  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  on  the  last 
Monday  in  August,  1747. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  lion.  William  Robinson,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

[There  was  no  business  of  a  public  nature,  transacted  at  this 
session  of  the  Assembly.] 

Governor  Shirley  to  Governor  Jf  anion. 

Boston  August  20, 1747. 
Sir  : — I  send  now  to  inform  Your  Honor,  tbat  on  the  16th  inst.  arrived  here  a  flag 
of  truce  from  Quebec,  with  one  hundred  and  seventy-one  English  prisoners,  belong- 
ing to  this  Province,  and  divers  other  of  His  Majesty's  colonies  in  North  America, 
&c.,  by  which  ship  I  received  a  letter*  from  the  Marquis  Beauharnois,  Governor  of 


*  The  letter  from  the  Marquis  of  Beauharnois,  transmitted  by  Gov.  Shirley,  is  very  long, 
and  relates  to  the  exchange  of  prisoners.  It  is  exceedingly  courteous  in  its  tone,  and  ac- 
knowledges the  kind  attentions  paid  to  the  French  prisoners,  in  Boston,  by  the  autliori- 
ties  there.  It  appears  that  one  of  them,  Lieut.  La  Groix,  had  broken  his  parole.  Speak- 
ing of  him,  Gen.  Beauharnois  says,  this  gentleman,  "  by  his  services  and  good  qualities, 
had  merited  some  distinction  from  me;  but  I  cannot  but  disapprove  his  having  broken  his 
parole,  as  you  assure  me  he  liad  done.  He  can  blame  nobody  but  himself,  that  he  ^as 
put  under  a  more  close  confinement.  I  am  nevertheless  obliged  to  you  for  your  goodness 
to  him,  on  my  account.    This  particular  he  has  not  failed  to  inform  me  of." 


1747.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  '225 

Canada,  a  copy  whereof,  I  now  enclose ;  by  perusing  of  which,  you  will  understand 
that  I  wrote  to  him  a  letter,  dated  the  18th  of  March  last,  therein  proposlnir  a  gen- 
eral exchange  of  prisoners,  without  having  a  regard  to  the  inequality  of  numbers  on 
either  side  ;  and  that  each  Governor  should  bear  the  charge  of  the  transportation  of 
their  own  prisoners. 

This  I  undertook  (absolutely)  only  for  myself,  yet  presuming  It  would  be  accept- 
able to  all  the  rest  of  the  English  Governors ;  and  in  consequence  of  which,  the 
said  Governor  of  Canada  has  now  released  all  the  English  prisoners  with  him,  ex- 
cept a  few  that  were  not  In  such  health  as  to  allow  them  to  be  transported  without 
danger ;  and  that  the  said  Governor  does  fully  agree  to  my  proposal,  expecting  that 
the  other  Governors  will  also  come  Into  this  agreement,  desiring  that  I  should  let 
him  know  their  resolutions  by  the  return  of  this  flag  of  truce,  which  is  limited  to 
the  term  of  fifteen  days  for  his  stay  here,  which  will  expire  the  last  of  this  month. 

Therefore,  I  must  entreat  Your  Honor  to  send  me  your  answer  upon  these  points 
by  this  express,  that  1  may  forward  it  to  the  Governor  of  Canada,  agreeably  to  his 
desire  expressed  to  me  In  his  letter  ;  and  as  there  are  now,  and  may  be  hereafter, 
English  prisoners  belonging  to  Great  Britain  and  other  places,  at  a  distance  from 
these  provinces,  brought  in  by  the  flags  of  truce,  it  will  be  expected  that  your  gov- 
ernment will  bear  their  part  of  this  charge,  so  that  it  may  not  be  wholly  thrown  up- 
on this. 

And  I  must  further 'desire  that  you  would  appoint  some  agent  here,  who  may 
from  time  to  time  answer  for  the  charge  of  any  English  prisoners  of  your  province, 
that  may  be  released  from  captivity,  in  pursuance  of  this  agreement,  and  brought 
in  hither ;  and  as  there  are  now  brought  ifi  this  flag  of  truce  six  prisoners,*  that  you 
would  be  pleased  to  take  such  measures,  that  In  proportion  to  the  number  aforesaid, 
your  province  may  bear  their  part  of  the  charge  of  this  flag  of  truce ;  you  will  also 
send  me  your  answer  respecting  the  Governor  of  Canada's  proposal,  as  to  the  pur- 
chasing prisoners  out  of  the  Indians'  hands. 

I  have  likewise  enclosed  a  copy  of  the  agreement  made  for  the  hire  of  this  flag  of 
truce,  which  you  will  find  to  be  10,000  livres. 

I  am,  sir,  Your  Honor's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island'  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Soidh  Kings- 
toivn,  the  last  Wednesday  in  October,  1747. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Robinson,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 


*  These  prisoners  were  John  Pike,  Edward  Tew,  John  Years,  Gregory  Cousins,  Jacob 
Judah,  and  Samuel  Savers. 

VOL.  V.         29 


226  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1747. 

His  Honor,  the  Governor,  is  hereby  requested  to  write  to 
Richard  Partridge,  Esq.,  the  colony's  agent  in  Great  Britain, 
and  desire  that  gentleman  to  send  him  over  all  his  accounts 
with  the  colony,  and  the  particulars  of  them,  during  the  time 
he  has  been  in  the  colony's  service. 

This  Assembly  having  taken  into  consideration  the  extracts 
of  His  Grace,  the  Dake  of  Newcastle's  letter,  to  Governor  Shir- 
ley, respecting  the  dismission  of  the  troops,  raised  in  America, 
for  the  expedition  intended  against  Canada,  together  with  the 
letter  from  Governor  Shirley  and  Governor  Knowles  to  our 
Governor,  thereupon  are  of  opinion  as  follows  : 

1st.  That  it  will  be  proper,  and  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  is  here- 
by requested  to  send,  forthwith,  unto  their  Excellencies,  the  en- 
listment and  muster  rolls  of  all  the  soldiers  raised  in  this  colo- 
ny, for  the  expedition ;  and  all  other  papers  His  Honor  may 
think  necessary ;  and  that  the  whole  bo  duly  authenticated. 

2d.  That  these  troops  being  raised  in  consequence  of  a 
proclamation  issued  by  the  Governor,  with  the  advice  of  the 
Assembly,  they  ought  to  be  discharged,  according  to  the  tenor 
of  that  proclamation,  and  the  true  intent  and  meaning 
thereof 

3d.  That,  as  it  appears  by  the  several  extracts  from  the 
Duke  of  Newcastle's  letter,  the  disbanding  the  troops  raised 
for  the  aforesaid  service,  is  wholly  vested  in  their  Excellencies  ; 
the  way  and  manner  of  doing  it,  and  paying  off  the  officers  and 
soldiers,  must  be  their  proper  province  ;  and  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  is  desired  to  inform  their  Excellencies  of  the  senti- 
ments of  this  Assembly. 

God  save  the  Kino-. 

[The  fbllowin<T  Publio  Laws,  passed  during  the  year  1747,  are  printed  at 
length  in  the  volume  ot  public  laws,  published  in  that  year,  unless  repealed  previous 
to  that  time.] 

An  Act  for  quieting  possessions,  and  establishing  titles  of  land  within  the  towns  of 

Bristol,  Tiverton,  Little  Compton,  Warren  and  Cumberland.     (January.) 

An  Act  for  supplying  the  general  treasury  with    the    sum    of  £15,000,  in  bills  of 

credit,  of  the  new  tenor.     (February.) 
An  Act  for  the  more  regular  establishing  a  superior  court   of  judicature,  court  of 

assize  and  general  jail  delivery,  throughout  the  colony.     (February.) 


1747.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  227 


An  Act  for  regulating  appeals  to  His  Majesty,  in  council,  in  Great  Britain,  and  for 

repealing  the  former  act  made  for  that  purpose.     (Februaiy.) 
An  Act  for  settling  the  militia  of  the  towns  of    Bristol,  Tiverton,  Little  Compton, 

Warren  and  Cumberland.     (February.) 
An  Act  in  emendation  of  part  of  an  act,  passed  in  1744,  entitled  "  An  act  ascertain- 
ing what  estate  is  ratable,  and  for  proportioning  the  same  in  value."     (June.) 
An  Act  directing  how  the  value  of  ratable  estates  in  this  colony,  shall  be  known, 

and  each  town's  proportion  thereof.     (June.) 
An  Act  for  the  incorporation  of  Redwood  Library,  in  Newport.     (August.) 
An  Act  for  appointing  committees  in  each  town  in  this  colony,  for  the  management 

of  the  colony's  money,  let,  or  to  be  let,  on  loan,  in  the  several  towns.     (August.) 
An  Act  for  the  ease  of  prisoners  for  debt.     (August.) 
An  Act  for  increasing  the  fines  and  fees  of  petit  jurors,  and  for  punishing  the  towns 

which  do  not  return  their  quota  of  jurors.     (August.) 
An  additional  Act  to  prevent  the  spreading  of  the  small  pox,  and<)ther  contagious 

diseases.     (August.) 
An  Act  appointing  coroners  in  each  town  in  this  colony.     (August.) 
An  Act  apportioning  the  number  of  jurors  in  each  town.     (August.) 
An    Act  to   empower   the   clerk   of  the   superior  courts   to   appoint  a  deputy. 

(August.) 
An  Act  for  the  better  regulating  the  several  ferries  in  the  colony.     (August.) 
An  additional  Act  for  the  regulating  and  mending  of  highways.     (October.) 
An  Act  for  printing  all  the  public  laws,  and  acts  that  shall  hereafter  be  made  and 

passed  by  the  General  Assembly.     (October.) 
An  Act  directing  all  the  public  laws  now  in  force,  in  the  colony,  to  be  put  in  print. 

(October.) 

Governor  Shirley  and  Admiral  Knowles  to  Governor  Wanton. 

•  Boston,  October  10th,  1747. 

Sir  : — The  enclosed  is  an  extract  from  a  letter  of  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  to  Gov- 
ernor Shirley,  signifying  His  Majesty's  commands  to  us,  upon  the  several  matters 
contained  in  it. 

In  obedience  to  which,  we  must  desire  you  will  be  pleased  to  tratismit  to  us,  by 
return  of  this  express,  or  as  soon  aftejkas  you  can,  muster  roll?,  or  lists  of  the  several 
officers  and  soldiers  raised  within  your  government  for  His  Majesty's  service,  in  the 
late  intended  expedition  against  Canada,  (which  His  Majesty  has  laid  aside  for  the 
present,)  distinguishing  the  companies  into  whii;h  they  were  formed,  with  the  re- 
spective times  of  every  officer's  engaging  in  His  Majesty's  service,  and  days  on 
which  the  soldiers  were  enlisted  into  it,  (which  last  may  be  best  done  by  attested 
copies  of  the  enlistments  themselves ;)  also  an  account  of  the  deaths  of  such  of  the 
officers  and  men  which  have  happened  since  they  entered  into  the  service,  with  the 
respective  times  when  they  happened ;  as  also  of  the  dismissions  and  desertions  of 
any  of  the  soldiers,  and  times  of  their  being  discharged  or  deserting ;  together 
with  an  account  of  the  furloughs  which  have  been  granted  from  time  to  time  to  the 
soldiers,  and  for  what  time  ;  as  also  upon  what  command  or  duty,  the  officers  and 
men  have  been  respectively  employed  since  the  time  of  their  entering  into  the  ser- 
vice ;  together  with  a  muster  roll  or  list  of  the  officers  and  effective  private  soldiers 


228  UECUKDS    OF    THE    COLONY    Of    RHODE    ISLAND  [1747. 

now  remaining  in  the  service ;  all  which  rolls,  lists  and  accounts,  we  desire  may 
be  flulv  certified  by  the  proper  officers,  under  their  hands,  upon  oath,  taken  be- 
fore yourself,  and  attested  by  you  ;  also,  that  you  would  transmit  to  us  an  account 
of  the  charges  of  the  clothing,  arms  and  accoutrements  of  the  soldiers,  and  of  all 
other  expenses  which  have  been  incurred  on  account  of  the  expedition,  and  are 
not  to  be  defrayed  by  the  colony  under  your  government,  from  the  time  of  their 
bein"  levied,  to  the  time  of  your  attesting  the  said  accounts ;  together  with  the 
vouchers  thereof,  all  duly  certified,  upon  oath,  by  the  proper  parties  before  you  ; 
and  a  copy  of  the  proclamation,  issued  by  you  for  the  encouragement  of  troops  to 
enlist  into  the  aforesaid  service,  with  copies  of  the  votes  of  your  Assembly,  touch- 
ing the  bounty  and  subsistence  or  allowance  of  provisions  granted  by  them  for  the 
troops. 

And  we  must  further  desire  that  you  would,  in  pursuance  of  His  Majesty's  or- 
ders, communicate  to  us,  your  sentiments  and  opinion  as  to  the  manner  of  dis- 
charging these  officers  and  soldiers,  and  ujjon  what  foot  it  may  be  best  done,  hav- 
ing due  regard  to  His  Majesty's  command  to  us,  for  doing  it  in  the  most  frugal  man- 
ner, and  his  expectation  in  this  affair ;  and  this  we  desire  you  will  forthwith  do,  as 
a  great  charge  is  running  on,  till  the  soldiers  shall  be  dismissed  by  us  from  this 
service. 

We  must  also  desire  you,  in  obedience  to  His  Majesty's  commands,  to  recommend 
it  to  your  Assembly  to  furnish  such  sums  of  money  or  credit  as  may  be  wanted,  to 
pay  off  the  soldiers ;  which  you  will  perceive,  by  the  extracts  of  the  Duke  of  New- 
castle's letter,  is  to  be  provided  for  by  Parliament,  as  soon  as  the  accounts  of  the 
whole  charge  Incurred  by  raising  the  levies,  shall  be  transmitted  to  His  Grace,  by 
us  ;  and  forthwith  let  us  know  your  opinion  of  the  success  of  such  an  application  ; 
as  also  to  let  us  know  whether  you  have  advanced  any,  and  what  sums  of  money 
to  the  officers  and  soldiers,  or  any  of  them,  on  account  of  their  pay,  and  after  what 
rate,  and  to  what  time  they  are  paid  in  full. 

And  as  you  perceive,  we  are  commanded  by  His  Majesty  to  retain  such  a  number 
of  the  American  levies  In  his  pay  as  we  shall  judge  sufficient  for  the  securing  of 
Nova  Scotia,  against  the  enemy's  attempts,  until  a  reinforcement  can  be  sent  thither 
from  Great  Britain  ;  the  preservation  of  which  colony,  is  of  the  greatest  importance 
to  the  safety  and  welfai-e  of  all  His  Majesty's  northern  colonies;  and  also,  that  Mr. 
Shirley  is  ordered  by  His  Majesty  to  complete  his  owh,  as  well  as  Sir  William 
Pepperell's,  as  likewise  Lieut.  Gen.  Phillips's  regiment  out  of  those  troops,  we  hope 
you  will  assist  the  oflicers  who  should  be  seft  to  raise  recruits  for  those  purposes, 
into  your  government,  with  your  Influence  and  authority,  and  contribute  every- 
thing in  your  power  to  their  success,  and  the  promoting  of  His  Majesty's  service. 

We  think  it  clear,  that  the  arms  and  accoutrements  of  the  soldiers  are  to  be  re- 
turned ;  and  where  the  men  have  lost  them,  their  value  must  bo  stopped  out  of 
their  pay,  or  rather  the  several  captains  are  to  be  called  upon  lor  the  arms  of  their 
respective  companies,  and  are  chargeable  therewith,  which  you  will  be  pleased  to 
consider. 

And  we  must  desire  you  will  forthwith  let  us  know  your  opinion  of  what  pay  it 
will  be  reasonable  to  allow  the  officers,  as  well  as  men,  for  their  service. 

We  are,  sir.  Your  Honor's  most  obedient  humble  servants 

W.  SHIRLEY, 

To  the  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton.  CHAPvLES  KNOWLES. 


*1747.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  229 


Gov.  Sliirlci)  and  Admiral  Knowlcs  to  Gov.  Wanton. 

Extracts  of  a  letter  from  His  Grace,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  to  Governor  Shirley, 
dated  Whitehall,  May  30th,  1747. 

"  His  Majesty  has  been  pleased  to  direct  me  to  signify  to  you  his  pleasure  that  you 
should  immediately  appoint  a  meeting  with  Commodore  Knowles,  at  such  place  as 
shall  be  agreed  upon,  and  consider  with  him  the  present  state  of  Nova  Scotia  and 
Louisbourg,  and  take  the  proper  measures  for  the  defence  of  those  places. 

"  It  is  His  Majesty's  pleasure  you  should  endeavor  to  complete  from  out  of  the 
Americans,  who  are  now  raised  for  His  Majesty's  service.  Sir  William  Pepperell's 
regiment  and  your  own. 

"  Lieut.  Gen.  Phillips's  regiment,  is,  I  am  afraid,  very  weak.  I  will,  however, 
send  His  Majesty's  orders  to  send  what  recruits  can  be  got  from  hence  ;  and  you 
will  also  endeavor  to  have  his  regiment  completed  out  of  the  Americans. 

"  As  it  is  His  Majesty's  intention  that  the  Americans  should  be  immediately  dis- 
charged, except  only  such  few  as  are  mentioned  above,  the  manner  of  discharging 
them,  the  satisfaction  of  their  time,  &c.,  must  be  left  to  Commodore  Knowles  and 
yourself ;  the  King,  however,  is  persuaded  you  will  do  it  as  cheap  as  possible. 

"  And  as  these  American  troops  have  done  little  or  no  service  hitherto,  it  is 
to  be  hoped  they  will  not  expect  to  be  paid  in  the  manner  they  would  have  been, 
had  they  actually  been  employed  on  service ;  and  as  it  seems  highly  reasonable 
that  such  of  those  troops  as  have  remained  in  the  Provinces,  where  they  were  en- 
listed, should  be  contented  with  less  pay  than  such  of  them  as  may  have  marched 
into  other  Provinces. 

"  When  you  and  Mr.  Knowles  shall  have  met  and  fully  considered  the  service  to 
be  undertaken,  in  the  manner  above  directed,  and  shall  have  agreed  what  number 
of  Americans  it  will  be  necessary  to  keep  in  pay  for  that  purpose,  it  is  His  Majes- 
ty's pleasure  that  you  should  procure  an  account  of  the  whole  expense  incurred  on 
account  of  the  American  troops  from  the  time  of  their  being  levied,  to  the  time  of 
their  discharge ;  and  when  the  same  shall  be  fully  adjusted  and  liquidated,  you 
will  transmit  it  to  me,  with  the  proper  vouchers,  from  the  several  Governors,  that 
it  may  be  laid  before  Parliament,  to  the  end  that  provision  may  be  made  for  the 
payment ;  and  in  the  mean  time,  in  order  to  prevent  any  comjilaint  amongst  the 
men  that  have  been  enlisted,  (as  well  those  that  shall  be  discharged,  as  those  that 
shall  continue  in  service,)  for  want  of  immediate  pay,  you  will  recommend  it  to  the 
Governors  of  the  provinces,  where  these  levies  have  been  made,  to  procure  credit 
from  their  respective  Assemblies  for  that  purpose,  which  His  Majesty  hopes  may 
be  done  without  difficulty. 

"  It  is  also  His  Majesty's  pleasure,  that  Mr.  Knowles  and  you  should  consider  what 
number  of  Americans  will  be  really  wanted  for  the  service  above  mentioned  ; 
and  the  King  would  have  you  retain  as  many  as  may  be  absolutely  necessary  for 
that  service,  and  no  more  ;  and  the  King  hopes  that  a  small  number  of  Americans, 
with  His  Majesty's  forces,  which  you  have,  may  be  sufficient  for  that  purpose,  as 
the  expense  of  these  Americans  is  very  great ;  and  as  to  the  Americans  in  general, 
except  only  such  as  may  be  wanted  for  the  service  above  mentioned,  it  is  His  Maj- 
esty's pleasure,  that  you,  in  conjunction  with  Commodore  Knowles,  should  thank 
them  in  such  manner   as  you  think  proper,  and  immediately  discharge  them  upon 


230  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1747.' 

the  best  and  the  cheapest  foot  you  can ;  and  in  order  thereto,  you  .will  consult  with 
the  respective  governors,  upon  the  manner  of  closing  it ;  and  you  will  transmit  to 
His  ALijesly  an  immediate  account  of  what  you  shall  do  therein." 

N.  13.     This  paragraph  should   have  been  inserted  between  the  fourth  and  fifth 
paragraphs.  W.  SHIRLEY, 

CHARLES  KNOWLES. 

To  the  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton. 


Governor  Wanton  to  Governor  Shirlefj  and  Admiral  Rnowles. 

Newport,  on  Rhode  Island,  23d  October,  174  7. 

Gentlemen : — When  I  wrote  you,  the  14th  current,  I  was  in  hopes  that  I  should 
have  transmitted  to  you  this  week,  the  papers,  accounts,  &c.,  relating  to  the  expedi- 
tion against  Canada,  so  far  as  this  government  hath  been  concerned  therein,  but 
have  been  since  informed,  that  they  cannot  be  completed  till  some  time  the  next 
week. 

I  will  take  due  care  to  communicate  to  the  General  Assemblv  of  this  colonj',  who 
are  to  sit  on  Wednesday  ne.\t,  at  South  Kingstown,  your  letter,  together  with  the 
copy  of  the  extracts  that  accompanied  it;  but  having  been  confined  at  home  for 
several  weeks  past,  with  the  gout,  I  fear  I  shall  not  be  able  to  meet  them  there. 

At  our  last  choice,  in  August  past,  several  towns  thought  fit  to  change  their  depu- 
ties, so  that  the  lower  house  will  consist  of  a  majority  of  new  members,  with  whose 
sentiments  concerning  the  pay  of  the  soldiers,  being  wholly  unac({uainted,  I  cannot 
possibly  tell  what  they  will  resolve  upon. 

In  October  past,  the  committee  of  war  took  up  about  £11,000,  in  pursuance  of  an 
act  of  Assembly,  authorizing  them  so  to  do,  of  some  merchants  of  this  town  ;  which 
sum  being  reduced  into  sterling  money,  at  the  rate  of  £750  this  currency  for  £lOO 
sterling,  was  paid  to  the  officers  and  soldiers  in  part  of  their  pay,  and  for  their 
clothing,  a  few  days  before  their  embarkation  for  Annapolis. 

The  committee  of  war  contracted  with  the  said  merchants  to  give  them  bills  of 
e.xchange  for  sterling  money,  at  the  rate  above  mentioned,  for  the  sum  they  ad- 
vanced. This,  in  expectation  of  directions  from  Great  Britain,  was  for  some  time 
delayed,  and  hath  not  yet  been  complied  with. 

But  in  August  past,  the  General  Assembly  resolved  that  the  accounts  of  the 
charges  expended  by  this  colony  in  raising  three  companies  for  the  expedition 
against  Canada,  should  be  drawn  out  by  the  commissary,  and  sent  with  proper 
vouchers,  to  our  agent ;  and  that  the  Governor  should  draw  bills  for  the  amount  of 
said  accounts,  on  the  lords  commissioners  of  the  treasury,  or  on  whom  the  payment 
of  such  bills  m  ly  concern,  pa)-able  to  our  agent ;  and  likewise  bills  on  the  agent 
for  such  money  as  hath  been  paid  to  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  said  companies,  to- 
wards their  wages,  and  for  clotiiing,  payable  to  the  merchants  who  advanced  it. 

This  money  being  paid  to  the  officers  and  soldiers  to  induce  them  willingly  to  go 
to  succor  and  relieve  Annapolis,  whither  this  government  was  strongly  urged  to 
send  them  by  His  Excellency,  Governor  Shirley,  and  the  Honorable  Admiral 
Warren,  and  the  merchants  who  advanced  it,  being  highly  dissatisfied  and  uneasy 
at  so  long  a  delay,  I  beg  you  to  recommend  it  in  the  strongest  terms  to  His  Grace, 
the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  that  the  bills  now  to  be  drawn  in  their  favor,  be  punctually 
paid.     There  was  another  payment  made  to  the  ofllcers  and  soldiers  in  September 


1747.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  231 


past,  by  order  of  the  General  Assembly,  for  which,  not  knowing  the  sum,  I  must 
refer  to  the  accounts. 

The  extreme  hardships  the  officers  and  soldiers  underwent  in  their  voyage  to- 
wards Annapolis,  by  the  shipwreck  of  the  transport  vessels,  the  severity  of  the  sea- 
son, and  the  sickness  with  which  they  were  visited,  of  which  many  of  them  died,  do 
in  my  opinion,  entitle  the  survivors  and  the  heirs  of  the  deceased,  to  full  pay ;  and 
I  hope  Your  Excellencies  will  concur  with  me  herein,  and  likewise  that  you  will 
do  this  colony,  which  hath  remarkably  distinguished  itself  by  its  readiness  and  zeal  to 
serve  His  Majesty,  in  the  intended  expedition  against  Canada,  in  giving  a  higher 
bounty  to  soldiers  than  any  other  government  did,  all  the  good  offices  in  your  pow- 
er towards  getting  their  charges  reimbursed ;  and  I  promise  myself  you  will  the 
more  readily  do  this,  as  great  part  of  the  charge  was  incurred  by  that  fatal  expedi- 
tion intended  for  the  relief  of  Annapolis,  and  undertaken  at  the  instance  of,  and  in 
deference  to  the  directions  of  the  gentlemen  above  mentioned. 

I  request  the  favor  of  you  to  let  me  know  at  what  rate  you  fix  the  exchange  be- 
tween sterling  money  and  New  England  currency. 

As  soon  as  the  accounts,  &c.,  are  finished,  I  intend  to  send  them  per  Col.  Kinni- 
cutt ;  and  in  the  mean  time,  am,  gentlemen,  &c.,  G.  WANTON. 

Wm.  Shirley  and  Charles  Knowles,  Esqs. 

Governor  Shirk//  to  Governor  If  anion. 

Boston  October  2G,  1747. 
Sir: — We  are  favored  with  your  letter  by  the  last  post,  and  are  glad  to  find  there 
is  a  probability  of  our  receiving  a  full  answer  to  every  particular  part  of  ours  of  the 
10th  instant,  because  the  expense  to  the  crown  now  running  on,  is  large,  and  liis 
Majesty's  service  in  the  West  Indies  requires  Mr.  Knowles's  presence  there  as  soon 
as  possible,  to  take  upon  him  the  command  of  His  Majesty's  ships  at  Jamaica,  &c. 

We  must  desire  you  would  be  pleased,  in  your  next,  to  inform  us  when  the 
levies,  raised  within  your  government,  embarked  for  Annapolis  Royal,  and  when 
they  returned  to  Newport ;  and  are,  sir, 

Your  obedient,  humble  servants, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 
To  Governor  Wanton. 

P.  S.  Mr.  Knowles  being  gone  to  Nantasket  before  this  was  copied,  I  am  obliged 
to  sign  this,  in  behalf  of  us  both. 


Governor  SUrhy  to  Governor  Wanton. 

Boston,  October  29th,  174  7. 
Sir: — Mr.  Knowles  and  I  have  received  your  letter,  dated  the  23d  instant,  and 
as  very  great  expense  to  the  crown  is  running  on,  whilst  the  accounts  of  the  forces 
raised  within  your  government  for  the  expedition  against  Canada,  are  preparing 
and  adjusting,  we  think  it  our  indispensable  duty  to  send  you  the  enclosed  dis- 
charge of  them,  which  we  desire  you  would  have  published  among  the  levies  in  such 
manner  as  you  shall  think  proper. 


232  RECORDS   OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1747. 

You  will  perceive  by  the  extract  from  the  Duke  of  Newcastle's  letter,  which  we 
enclosed  in  our  last,  that  it  is  His  Majesty's  pleasure  that  the  levies  should  be  dis- 
charged in  the  most  frugal  manner  ;  so  that  it  is  doubtless  his  expectation  that  all 
such  of  them  as  have  not  marched  out  of  the  province  or  colony  where  they  were 
raised,  should  be  paid  off  at  the  rate  of  the  ordinary  establishment  for  all  His  Maj- 
esty's regiments  of  foot,  viz. : 

The  private  men,  at  the  rate  of  Cd.  sterling  per  day  ;  out  of  which,  a  stoppage  must 
be  made  of  -id.,  for  their  provisions  ;  so  that  there  will  remain  to  be  paid  in  money,  to 
them,  onlv  2d.  per  day.  The  corporals,  after  the  rate  of  Sd.  per  day  ;  out  of  which, 
a  stoppaae  of  4d.,  for  their  provisions ;  so  that  id.  per  day  will  remain  to  be  paid  in 
money,  to  them.  The  sergeants,  after  the  rate  of  Is.  per  day  ;  out  of  which,  a  stop- 
pai^e  must  be  made  of  4d.,  for  their  provisions  ;  so  that  there  will  remain  8d.  per 
day,  to  be  paid  to  them  ;  and  this  is  agreeably  to  the  laws  of  their  enlistment,  in 
which  no  more  is  promised  than  the  usual  pay  of  His  Majesty's  troops,  viz. : 

Sixpence  sterling  per  day,  for  a  private  man  ;  Sd.  for  a  corporal,  and  12d.  for  a 
sergeant ;  out  of  which,  they  find  themselves  with  provisions  ;  and  where  provisions 
are  found  for  them,  as  in  the  case  of  Lieut.  Gen.  Phillips's  regiment,  posted  in 
Nova  Scotia  and  Newfoundland,  a  stoppage  o{4d.  per  day,  is  made  out  of  their  pay 
for  it ;  and  in  this  case,  it  makes  no  difference  with  respect  to  the  soldiers,  that  pro. 
visions  have  been  generally  found  for  them,  at  the  .charge  of  the  colonies,  where 
they  were  raised,  and  not  the  crown's ;  for  that  was  not  given  them  as  the  bounty 
of  the  several  colonies,  but  was  required  by  His  Majesty  from  those  colonies,  to  be 
done  in  ease  of  the  national  expense  ;  and  as  what  was  their  reasonable  part  of  the 
clKir^es  to  be  incurred  by  the  late  intended  expedition,  set  on  foot  chlelly  for  the 
immediate  benefit  of  the  several  colonies  concerned  in  it ;  and  considering  these 
troops  have  not  marched  out  of  their  respective  colonies,  they  have  no  pretence  to 
expect  more  than  what  was  promised  them  by  the  terms  of  their  enlistment,  and 
ought  to  be  satisfied  with  that. 

As  to  all  those  levies,  which  have  marched  out  of  the  several  provinces,  where  they 
were  rai'sed,  except  those  sent  to  Nova  Scotia,  an  allowance  of  2d.  per  day  extraor- 
dlnai'y,  to  them,  upon  that  consideration,  will  be  sufficient ;  but  as  to  those  troops 
which  were  sent  to  Nova  Scotia,  or  embarked  for  that  province,  though  they  had 
the  misfortune,  through  shipwreck  and  sickness,  not  to  arrive  there,  Mr.  Knowles 
and  I  think  they  ought  to  have,  on  account  of  their .  service  and  hard  duty,  which 
occasioned  them  a  greater  expense  of  clothes  and  other  things,  than  the  rest  of  the 
troops  iiad,  Gd.  over  and  above  their  provisions,  from  the  time  of  their  embarka- 
tion for  Nova  Scotia,  till  their  return  to  their  respective  colonies ;  before  and  after 
which  times  a  stoppage  must  be  made  out  of  their  pay,  for  their  provisions ;  and 
they  receive  no  more  in  money,  than  2d.  per  day  ;  and  the  several  levies  are  to  be 
paid  oil"  accordingly,  after  those  rates. 

As  to  the  method  of  paying  oS'  the  men,  when  they  are  discharged  ;  it  appears  to 
Mr.  Knowles  and  me,  that  there  are  but  two  ways  of  doing  it,  viz. : 

Either  by  procuring  money,  or  credit  from  your  Assembly,  which  we  are  com- 
manded by  His  j\lajef;ty  to  recommend  to  you ;  or  else,  by  borrowing  money  of  the 
merchants,  upon  public  bills,  payable  when  the  Parliament  shall  make  provision  for 
defraying  the  charges  incurred  on  account  of  these  levies ;  which  bills,  Mr.  Knowles 
and  I  think  should  be  sold  for  the  highest  txchange  that  can  be  got,  for  the  bene- 
fit of  the  men  ;  but  not  at  a  lower  rate  than  £700  per  cent,  advance,  in  bills 
i)f  till'    old    tiMior ;    or    *;«oo    n(    that    currency,   for    £100   sterling;  and  if  both 


1747.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  233 


these  methods  should  fail,  then  we  can't  see  what  more  can  possibly  be  done,  than  to 
give  the  men  certificates  of  what  is  due  to  them,  at  the  time  of  their  being  dis- 
charged, with  a  promise  of  paying  them  as  soon  as  possible  ;  but  we  hope  there  will 
be  no  necessity  of  having  recourse  to  this  method. 

Mr.  Knowles  being  very  much  engaged  in  the  business  of  his  squadron,  which 
detains  him  great  part  of  his  time  at  Nantasket,  has  desired  me  to  take  upon  myself 
the  settling  of  the  terms  for  paying  the  men  off;  and  as  he  is  under  orders  from  the 
lords  of  admiralty,  to  repair  to  Jamaica,  to  take  upon  him  the  command  of  His 
Majesty's  ships  there,  and  designs  to  sail  in  about  a  fortnight,  we  shall  be  glad  to 
proceed  as  far  as  possible  in  the  execution  of  His  Majesty's  orders  committed  to  our 
care,  before  he  goes;  and  besides,  if  the  accounts  are  not  transmitted  home  in  time 
to  be  laid  before  Parliament  this  session,  it  may  occasion  a  delay  in  raisins  the 
money  for  defraying  the  charges. 

Since  Mr.  Knowles'  and  my  joint  letter  to  you,  I  am  informed  by  Mr.  Secretary 
Willard,  that  upon  the  first  raising  of  troops  in  this  Province,  for  the  expedition 
against  Canada,  in  Queen  Anne's  time.  Her  Majesty  expressly  promised,  (among 
other  things,)  as  an  encouragement  for  volunteers  to  enlist,  that  they  should  retain 
their  arms,  which  had  been  provided  for  them  by  the  crown  ;  but  as  the  expedition 
did  not  proceed  that  year,  and  the  Queen  sent  orders  to  disband  those  levies, 
which  was  done.  This  government  then  thought  proper,  notwithstanding  the 
Queen's  express  promise,  and  those  troops  had  marched  out  of  the  Province,  to  be 
ready  to  proceed  by  land  to  Canada,  to  make  the  soldiers  deliver  up  their  arms,  as 
they  had  not  actually  proceeded  to  Canada,  in  order  to  be  kept  for  the  service  of  the 
expedition,  when  it  should  be  prosecuted  ;  which  seems  to  be  a  case,  where  the 
men  had  far  greater  reason  to  expect  to  retain  their  arms,  than  they  have  in  this  ; 
especially  as  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  in  his  letter  to  me,  of  the  30th  of  May,  only 
says  that  His  Majesty  had  laid  aside  the  design  of  tlie  expedition  for  the  present. 

It  was  necessary  to  transmit  to  you  the  terms  for  the  payment  of  the  men  and 
non-commissioned  offii.'ers,  together  with  the  enclosed  discharge  of  them. 

As  to  the  ofEcers,  it  may  be  time  enough  to  send  you  Mr.  Knowles'  and  my 
opinion  of  the  terms  on  which  they  should  be  paid  off,  by  the  post  following,  he 
being  now  at  Nantasket.  With  regard  to  myself,  I  must  in  the  mean  time,  say,  that 
I  think  they  ought  to  have  the  full  sterling  pay,  which  the  oflicers  of  His  Majesty's 
otiier  troops  in  their  ranks  receive. 

I  am,  sir.  Your  Honor's  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  the  Hon.  Governor  Wanton. 

Governor  Wanton  to  Governor  Shlrleij  and  Admiral  Knotvles. 

Newport,  on  Rhode  Island,  October  31st,  1747. 
Gentlemen  : — I  have  received  your  favor  of  the  26th  current.     The  forces  raised 
within  this  government,  embarked  for  Annapolis  Royal,  on  the  31st  day  of  October, 
1746,  and  returned  to  this  place  on  the   2d  of  January,  following,  excepting  some, 
who  were  left  sick,  at  Martha's  Vineyard. 

I  herewith  send  you,  by  Col.  Kinnicutt,  the  muster  rolls,  accounts,  acts  of  Assem. 
Illy  and  other  papers,  wrote  for  in  your  letter  of  the  10th  current,  all  duly  attested. 
VOL.  V.  30 


234  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1747. 

I  hope  they  will  be  to  your  satisfaction  ;  but  if  you  think  any  one  or  more  articles 
of  the  expense  not  sufficiently  proved  by  proper  vouchers,  please  to  let  me  know 
it,  and  I  will  endeavor  to  get  the  defect  supplied. 

The  soldiers  were  enlisted  into  His  Majesty's  service,  according  to  the  method 
ordered  by  an  act  of  the  General  Assembly,  made  for  that  purpose;  and  no  one  of 
them  received  the  government's  bounty  of  £50,  till  he  had  taken  the  oath  in  that  act 
prescribed,  and  had  obtained  a  certificate  thereof  from  a  justice  of  the  peace. 

Of  this  lar^e  bounty,  please  to  observe,  the  government  hath  made  no  charge  to 
His  Majesty  ;  and  after  their  enlistment,  were  disciplined  by  their  ofiicers,  and  kept 
on  duty,  waiting  His  Majesty's  commands,  till  they  were  ordered  to  embark  for 
Annapolis  Royal,  in  compliance  with  the  pressing  instance  and  direction  of  His 
Excellency,  Governor  Shirley,  and  the  Hon.  Admiral  Warren,  to  whom  His  Maj- 
esty had  given  power  to  regulate  or  order  the  plan  of  operations,  and  the  disposi- 
tion of  the  forces. 

A  committee  of  war  was  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 
fully  empowered  to  act  in  all  things  relating  to  the  expedition  ;  they  inspected  into 
and  audited  all  the  accounts,  and  gave  orders  to  the  general  treasurer  for  the  pay- 
ment thereof;  and  there  has  no  money  been  paid  by  him  on  account  of  this  expedi- 
tion, without  an  order  from  said  committee,  or  from  the  General  Assembly,  or  from 
some  person  by  them  duly  authorized. 

The  hire  of  transports  and  the  misfortune  of  losing  two  of  them  at  Martha's  Vine- 
yard, for  which  the  government  was  by  contract  obliged  to  pay,  hath  much  aug- 
mented the  expense.  What  could  be  saved  of  said  transports,  and  the  provisions, 
stores,  &c.,  that  were  not  expended,  have  been  sold  at  public  auction,  and  the 
amount  of  the  sale  deducted. 

^Vhen  the  forces  landed  here,  on  January  3d,  in  a  weak  and  distressed  condition, 
and  many  of  them  sick,  the  severity  of  the  weather  made  it  very  difHcult  to  induce 
persons  to  receive  them  into  their  houses,  to  nurse  and  take  care  of  them  ;  and  that 
time  of  the  year  being  wholly  unfit  for  action,  they  were  furloughed  till  the  1st  of 
i\Iarch,  excepting  the  sick,  and  a  few  whom  the  ofiicers  could  not  trust;  and  since 
that  time,  they  have  been  billeted  out  till  the  22d  of  August  past,  except  some  who 
choose  rather  to  forego  it,  than  to  appear  every  day  before  their  officers  as 
required. 

I  fear  you  will  think  the  account  of  billeting  to  be  irregular ;  but  the  soldiers  be- 
ing sometimes  allowed  billeting  and  sometimes  not,  I  could  not  get  it  put  into  a 
better  form ;  and  when  they  were  sick,  (which  many  of  them  were,)  it  was  impos- 
sible to  billet  them  at  the  price  the  government  had  stated  ;  and  be  pleased  to  ob- 
serve, that  no  accounts  of  billeting  were  paid,  before  they  had  been  strictly  exam- 
ined, and  allowed. 

Due  care  shall  be  taken  of  the  arms  of  the  soldiers ;  and  if  any  of  them  are  lost, 
the  value  shall  be  discounted  out  of  their  pay. 

By  the  accounts,  it  appears  that  the  three  companies  raised  within  this  govern- 
ment, have  been  paid  £  1,455  14s.,  for  which  they  have  given  their  receipts.  My 
opinion  about  their  pay,  I  have  already  signified  to  you ;  but  it  appears  to  me,  by 
the  copy  of  the  extracts  of  the  letter  from  His  Grace,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  that 
Your  Excellencies  are  to  determine  that  point ;  when,  therefore,  you  have  liqui- 
dated the  sum  this  colony's  companies  are  to  receive,  I  presume  you  will  let  me 
know  ;  and  likewise  at  what  rate  you  fix  the  exchange  between  sterling  money  and 


1747.] 


AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


New  England  cun-ency  ;  for  I  believe  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony  will 
abide  by  your  determination  in  both  these  points ;  and  till  they  are  known  I 
think  it  altogether  impracticable  to  pay  off  the  forces. 

All  possible  frugality  having  been  used,  and  the  government  having  been  obliired 
to  advance  part  of  their  pay  to  the  soldiers,  and  some  additional  clothino',  to  induce 
them  cheerfully  to  go  on  the  expedition  to  Annapolis,  many  of  them  havino-  fami- 
lies to  support,  and  the  winter  then  approaching,  I  beg  leave  to  renew  my  request 
of  your  good  offices  as  well  in  behalf  of  the  merchants  who  advanced  the  money  for 
that  payment  made  a  twelve-month  ago,  as  of  the  colony  getting  their  expense  in- 
curred by  this  expedition,  reimbursed ;  which  favor  shall  ever  be  gratefully  ac- 
knowledged by  Your  most  humble  servant, 

GIDEON  WANTON. 

To  Governor  Shirley,  and  Admiral  KnoAvles. 

P.  y.  I  am  apprehensive  there  are  demands  for  services  done,  relating  to  this 
expedition,  that  are  not  yet  brought  in. 

Governor  Shirk?/  to  Governor  Ifanion. 

Boston,  IJeeembei  28,  1747. 

Sir: — I  sometime  ago  informed  Your  Honor  of  a  meeting  of  commissioners,  to 
be  appointed  from  the  governments  from  Virginia  as  far  as  New  Hampshire,  being 
proposed  to  be  at  New  Yjrk  ;  and  am  now  to  apprise  you,  that  in  consequence  of 
that  proposal,  there  has  been  a  meeting  of  commissioners  from  this  government, 
New  York  and  Connecticut,  at  New  York ;  and  that  they  agreed  on  another 
meetmg,  now  fixed  to  be  at  Middletown,  in  Connecticut,  the  20th  of  next  month. 

Those  commissioners  have  reported,  that  there  be  a  representation  made  to  His 
Majesty,  as  to  those  governments  which  refuse  to  assist  in  this  common  cause ; 
thinking,  I  suppose,  that  there  is  a  necessity  for  it,  when  there  is  such  danger 
of  losing  the  Six  Nations,  and  the  other  numerous  tribes  of  Indians,  their  allies,  to 
the  westward ;  for  the  preservation  of  whose  friendship,  the  King  has  always  been 
very  solicitous;  as  also  for  the  safety  of  his  province  of  New  York. 

And  in  his  instructions  to  the  present  Governor,  has,  as  I  am  informed,  directed 
that  the  other  governments  should  give  their  assistance  in  it. 

I  hope  your  government  will  look  on  my  apprising  Your  Honor  of  this,  to  pro- 
ceed, as  it  really  does,  from  a  most  friendly  disposition  to  them,  and  my  hearty 
zeal  to  promote  the  interest  of  the  common  cause  ;  and  that  they  will  send  one  or 
more  commissioners  to  meet  and  act  with  the  others,  upon  this  important  affair. 

I  hear  all  the  people  at  Pennsylvania,  are  willing  to  assist  in  preventing  the 
western  Indians  going  over  to  the  French. 

I  am,  sir.  Your  Honor's  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  the  Hon.  Governor  Wanton. 


236  '  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    Of    RHODE    ISLAND  [1748. 


Governor  Wanton  io  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Treasur//. 

Newport,  on  Khode  Island,  January  9,  174  7-8. 

IMv  Lords : — Tlie  Governor  and  Company  of  tliis,  His  Majesty's  colony  of  Khode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  in  New  England,  having,  in  obedience  to  His 
Majesty's  commands,  transmitted  to  them  by  His  Grace,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle, 
bearing  date  the  9th  of  April,  1 746,  raised  three  companies  of  soldiers  within  this  col- 
ony, for  His  Majesty's  service,  in  the  intended  expedition  against  Canada  ;  and  hav- 
ing, besides  a  bounty  of  £50  to  each  soldier,  expended  £76,083  Us.  4d.,  New  Eng- 
land currency,  in  levying  said  soldiers,  in  purchasing  arms,  ammunition,  tents  and 
provisions  for  them,  in  billeting  them,  and  in  advancing  to  them  part  of  their  pay,  in 
hirin'T  transports,  and  in  equipping  and  manning  a  convoy,  and  in  other  necessary 
charges  on  account  of  said  three  companies,  all  which  will  appear  by  proper  vouch- 
ers, sent  to  His  Excelloncy,  Governor  Shirley,  and  the  Honorable  Admiral 
Knowles;  and  also  to  Mr.  Richard  Partridge,  agent  for  this  colony;  and  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  having  enjoined  and  authorised  me,  the  subscriber.  Governor  of  the 
colony,  abovcsaid,  to  draw  bills  for  the  expense  incurred  by  this  colony  on  the  oc- 
casion above  mentioned  ;  I  have,  pursuant  thereto,  drawn  upon  Your  Lordships  for 
the  said  sum  of  £76^83  lis.  4rf.,  reduced  to  sterling  money,  at  the  rate  of  £750 
currency,  for  £lOO  sterling,  two  sets  of  bills  of  this  date  ;  one,  for  £3,662  13s.  bd- 
sterling;  and  the  other  for  £6,481  16s.  l^Z.  sterling,  payable  to  the  said  Richard 
Partridge. 

I  beg  leave  to  observe  to  Your  Lordships,  that  the  Governor  and  Company  of 
this  colony,  have  remarkably  distinguished  themselves  by  their  zeal  to  serve  His 
Majesty  on  this  occassion,in  giving  a  greater  bounty  to  the  soldiers  than  any  of  the 
other  governments  did  ;  and  readily  sending  them  at  the  instance  and  bj'  the  direc- 
tion of  Governor  Shirley  and  the  Honorable  Admiral  Warren,  to  attempt  the  relief 
of  His  Majesty's  garrison  at  Annapolis  Royal,  at  an  advanced  season  of  the  year  ; 
and  that  they  have  thereby  contracted  a  heavy  load  of  debt,  beyond  their  ability  to 
pay,  if  their  expense  should  not  be  reimbursed. 

I  am,  &c.,  GIDEON  WANTON. 

To  the  Right  Honorable  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Treasury. 

Governor  Wanton  to  Richard  Partridye,  Agent  for  Rhode  Island, 

in  London. 

Newport,  Rhode  Island,  January  11th,  174  7-8. 
Sir  ; — In  pursuance  of  a  vote  of  the  General  Assembly,  I  herewith  transmit  you 
the  accounts  of  the  whole  expense  arising  upon  the  three  companies  of  soldiers 
raised  in  this  colony  for  the  intended  expedition  against  Canada  ;  as  also  an  account 
of  the  charge  of  equipping,  manning  and  victualling  the  colony's  sloop  for  the  same 
service,  all  which  arc  attested  and  authenticated  in  the  best  manner  we  are  capable 
of  doing  it ;  and  as  the  whole  of  said  service  was  undertaken  in  obedience  to  His 
Majesty's  royal  instructions,  signified  to  the  Governor  and  Company  of  this  colony, 
by  His  Grace,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  an  attested  copy  whereof,  you  will  receive 
herewith  ;  wherein  we  v.ere  rlirected    and    ordered    to    raise    as   nian\  men  as  tlio 


1748.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  237 


shortness  of  the  time  would  permit,  -who  were  to  enter  immediately  into  his  service 
and  pay,  and  to  provide  proper  transports  for  the  cari-ying  the  said  forces  to  the 
place  of  rendezvous,  and  provisions  for  their  subsistence  ;  as  also  to  furnish  them 
with  arms,  clothing  and  other  necessaries  for  the  said  expedition  ;  and  to  provide 
as  many  armed  vessels  as  could  be  got,  to  be  employed  in  the  said  service,  we  can- 
not doubt  but  the  whole  of  the  expense  will  be  paid  by  His  Majesty. 

And  in  order  that  you  may  be  the  better  prepared  to  set  the  conduct  of  the 
colony  in  a  true  light,  and  to  solicit  the  reimbursement  of  the  expense  we  have 
been  at,  in  complying  with  the  King's  instructions,  I  thought  it  would  be  proper  to 
give  you  a  short  abstract  of  our  proceedings  in  this  atfair. 

As  this  colony  has  always  distinguished  itself  by  its  loyalty  to  the  crown,  and 
zeal  for  its  service,  so  in  this  afi'aii-,  as  they  had  received  His  Majesty's  said  instruc- 
tions, the  General  Assembly  immediately  passed  an  act  for  the  raising  three  compa- 
nies of  soldiers,  consisting  of  one  hundred  men  each,  officers  included  ;  and  also  for 
equipping,  manning  and  victualling  the  colony's  sloop  for  the  same  service,  though 
she  was  the  only  armed  vessel  we  had  to  guard  our  coast  and  protect  our  trade. 

And  in  order  the  more  efi'ectually  to  answer  His  Majesty's  intentions  in  raisino- 
these  forces,  they  granted  a  very  large  bounty  to  such  as  should  enlist  in  said  service ; 
by  which  means,  they  completed  the  levying  the  men  ;  and  provided  transports, 
provisions,  arms,  tents,  clothing  and  other  necessaries  seasonably,  so  that  the  men 
were  ready  to  embark  at  a  very  short  warning,  with  provisions  for  their  subsistence 
for  nearly  twelve  months;  and  in  this  state  they  continued,  (with  the  colony's 
sloop  manned,  and  ready  to  proceeil  with  them,)  until  the  month  of  October' 
when,  at  the  pressing  instance  of  Governor  Shirley  and  Admiral  Warren,  (who 
Avere  two  of  the  gentlemen  appointed  by  Plis  Majesty  to  direct  the  plan  of  opera- 
tion in  said  expedition,)  they  were  embarked  to  go  to  the  relief  of  Annapolis  Royal, 
which  was  then  in  the  utmost  danger  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  they 
departed  from  hence  the  beginning  of  November,  under  convoy  of  the  colony's- 
sloop,  with  all  the  provisions,  &c.,  provided  for  the  Canada  expedition  ;  but  had 
the  misfortune,  in  the  pursuance  of  their  voyage,  to  meet  with  contrary  winds,  and 
exceeding  bad  weather,  whereby  two  of  the  transports  were  stranded  and  lost ;  and 
finally,  after  sending  them  another  transport,  and  several  fruitless  attempts  to  pro- 
ceed on  their  voyage,  and  after  suffering  very  greatly  by  sickness  and  the  severity 
of  the  weather,  they  were  obliged  to  return  in  a  very  sickly  condition,  without  be- 
ing able  to  get  to  Annapolis  after  their  return,  as  the  government  had  no  orders 
from  the  King  to  disband  them  ;  they  were  some  furloughed,  and  some  billeted  out, 
until  the  King's  pleasure  should  be  known ;  and  thus  they  continued  until  Gov- 
ernor Shirley  and  Commodore  Knowles  had  orders  to  discharge  them. 

When  the  orders  came  for  the  raising  these  troops,  the  warning  was  so  very 
short,  that  there  was  no  possible  means  to  comply  with  His  Majesty's  intentions, 
but  by  giving  a  large  bounty  ;  which  you  will  see  by  the  act,  was  £50,  of  the  old 
tenor,  (which  is  not  charged  in  the  accounts,)  and  the  treasury  being  empty,  the 
government  was  obliged  to  supply  it  by  striking  off  a  number  of  bills  of  credit,  as 
well  for  the  payment  of  this  large  bounty,  (which  they  did  not  expect  would=t5C're- 
funded,)  as  also  to  defray  the  charge  of  levying,  arming,  victualling,  clothing,  trans- 
porting, and  other  necessary  expenses  of  the  forces. 

And  notwitstanding  that  they  expected  that  these  last  would  be  reimbursed  by 
His  Majesty,  yet  they  were  obliged  to  make  provision  for  sinking  the  said  bills  by 


238  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1748. 

a  tax  ;  otherwise,  tbey  never  could  have  obtained  a  currency,  by  which  means, 
the  colony  is  involved  in  a  vast  debt,  which  they  are  utterly  unable  to  discharge  at 
the  periods  prefixed  in  said  act ;  and  in  the  mean  time  defray  all  the  necessary  ex- 
pense of  the  defence  and  support  of  the  government ;  and  if  they  had  not  had  as- 
surance of  the  charge  being  repaid,  it  is  not  probable  they  would  have  ventured  on 
so  large  an  expense. 

The  accounts,  perhaps,  may  not  appear  so  regular  as  might  be  expected;  this 
arises,  in  a  great  measure,  from  our  not  being  acquainted  with  the  methods  of 
levying  soldiers,  and  stating  military  accounts  at  home  ;  and  so  were  forced  to  take 
methods  of  our  own  prescribing. 

Uut  we  hope  our  zeal  lor  the  King's  service  in  this  affiiir,  will  atone  for  some 
little  irregularities  in  the  method  of  proceeding  and  stating  our  accounts  ;  especially 
when  it  is  found,  as  we  are  persuaded  it  will,  that  the  charge  upon  our  soldiers  will 
turn  out  full  as  low  as  the  same  number  in  any  of  the  neigboring  governments. 

It  is  true  there  is  no  express  promise  in  His  Majesty's  instructions  for  the  reim- 
Inirsing  any  part  of  the  expense  the  colony  should  be  at,  in  raising  these  foi-ces,  ex- 
cept the  arms  and  clothing,  which  were  immediately  to  be  paid  lor,  by  Lieut.  Gen. 
St.  Clair.  But,  as  the  forces  were  by  His  Majesty's  express  orders  and  directions, 
to  enter  immediately  into  his  service  and  pay,  it  seems  to  be  naturally  and  neces- 
sarily implied,  that  he  would  pay  all  the  charges  arising  upon  the  subsisting  and 
transporting  his  own  troops. 

I  must  further  inform  you,  that  when  the  forces  were  ordered  to  embark  for  An- 
napolis Royal,  as  they  had  been  several  months  in  the  service  without  any  pay,  and 
their  clothing  being  not  sufficient  for  them  to  go  into  garrison  in  the  winter  season, 
the  government  thought  it  absolutely  necessary  (though  they  had  no  orders  from 
the  King,)  to  advance  them  some  part  of  their  pay,  and  to  furnish  them  with  some 
more  clothes  on  His  Majesty's  account ;  and  as  the  bills  first  struck  off  for  the  charge 
of  this  expedition  were  exhausted,  they  were  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the  mer- 
chants to  borrow  a  sum  for  this  exigency,  which  was  accordingly  efTected,  for  which 
sum  they  were  to  receive  sterling  money,  as  you  will  see  by  the  enclosed  certifi- 
cate ;  and  as  this  money  was  borrowed,  and  Interest  to  be  allowed  for  any  delay  of 
l)ayment,  it  is  the  government's  intentions  that  this  should  be  paid  out  of  the  first 
money  that  you  shall  receive;  and  they  have  given  me  directions  to  draw  bills  upon 
you  for  the  same,  which  I  have  accordingly  done. 

You  will  see,  also,  by  the  accounts,  that  the  colony  hath  since  made  another  pay- 
ment to  the  officers  and  soldiers,  for  both  of  which  payments,  they  have  given  re- 
ceipts, reduced  into  sterling  money  in  part  of  their  pay ;  which  sums  must  be 
deducted  when  they  are  paid  off. 

A\  hen  Governor  Shirley  and  Commodore  Kuowles  received  directions  to  dis- 
charge the  soldiers,  they  also  had  instructions  to  procure  the  accounts  from  the 
several  governments,  of  the  whole  expense  incurred  on  account  of  the  American 
troops,  from  the  time  of  their  being  levied,  to  the  time  of  their  discharge ;  and  they 
were  likewise  empowered  to  adjust  and  liquidate  all  the  said  accounts,  and  transmit 
them  to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  with  the  proper  vouchers  from  the  several  Gov- 
ernors, that  they  might  be  laid  before  the  Parliament,  in  order  that  provision  might 
be  nndc  fiir  tin;  payment,  which  seems  to  be  a  demonstration  that  it  is  the  King's 
intention  that  the  whole  expense  should  be  paid;  an  extract  of  which  Instructimis 
was  sent  by  those  gentlemen  to  me,  requesting  me  to  send  the  accounts  of  the 


1748.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  239 


whole  expense  this  colony  had  been  at,  on  account  of  said  forces ;  which  accord- 
ingly has  been  done  exactly  in  the  same  form  and  with  the  same  attestations  as 
those  now  sent  you. 

In  what  manner  those  gentlemen  have  adjusted  and  liquidated  them,  or  in  what 
light  they  have  represented  them  to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  I  cannot  tell ;  but  by 
some  expressions  in  a  letter  from  them,  it  does  not  seem  as  though  they  had  done  it 
very  favorably  to  the  colony. 

A  copy  of  the  extract  of  the  Duke  of  Newcastle's  instructions  to  those  gentlemen, 
you  have  here  enclosed,  in  which  you  will  see  that  they  were  directed  to  recom- 
mend it  to  the  Governors  of  the  provinces  wherein  the  levies  were  made,  to  procure 
credit  from  their  respective  Assemblies  for  the  paying  the  forces  when  discharged, 
which  I  have  laid  before  the  General  Assembly ;  but  they  have  not  yet  made  any 
provision  for  the  payment  of  the  arrears  due  to  those  raised  in  this  colony,  which  is 
very  considerable,  as  you  may  see,  by  considering  what  they  have  already  re- 
ceived. 

You  will  perceive  by  the  accounts,  that  the  expenses  for  doctors  and  medicines 
amount  pretty  high  ;  there  was  all  possible  care  taken  in  this  article  ;  but  this  ex- 
pense was  unavoidable,  as  these  forces  were  not  regimented,  and  so  no  chirurgeons 
upon  the  King's  establishment ;  and  sickness  raging  very  much  amongst  them,  Ave 
at  first  made  use  of  doctors  occasionally  ;  but  finding  that  very  chargeable,  we  were 
obliged  to  contract  with  one  by  the  month,  who  continued  a  whole  year  in  the  ser- 
vice of  the  government,  finding  all  medicines,  which  are  excessively  dear  in  this 
country. 

The  General  Assembly  having  empowered  and  directed  me  to  draw  bills  of  ex- 
change for  the  whole  amount  of  this  expense,  upon  the  lords  commissioners  of  the 
treasury,  or  upon  whom  the  payment  thereof  shall  concern,  payable  to  you,  I  have 
in  pursuance  thereof,  drawn  two  sets  of  bills  ;  one  set,  including  the  amount  of  the 
arms,  clothing,  and  the  pay  advanced  to  the  officers  and  soldiers,  which  being  re- 
duced  to  sterling  money,  at  the  rate  of  £750  this  currency,  for  £100  sterling,  is 
£3,662  13s.  Sd. ;  the  other  set,  includes  all  the  remaining  part  of  the  expense, 
which  amounts  at  the  same  exchange,  to  £6,481  16s.  Id. ;  which  I  make  no  doubt 
you  will  use  your  best  endeavors  to  procure  the  payment  of,  by  the  best  means  you 
are  capable  of  making  use  of 

I  have  given  you  as  full  an  information  of  this  affair  as  I  can  think  of  at  this 
time;  if  any  further  account  should  be  thought  necessary,  I  shall  endeavor  to  trans- 
mit it  to  you  ;  and  in  the  mean  time  remain,  Your  assured  friend, 

GIDEON  WANTON. 

P.  S.  On  comparison,  you  will  find  that  there  is  a  difference  in  some  instances 
between  the  muster  rolls  and  the  abstracts  of  enlistment,  as  to  the  days  of  enlisting. 
The  occasion  of  it  seems  to  be,  the  commissary  took  his  dates  from  the  certificates ; 
whereas,  the  captains  took  theirs  from  the  days  on  which  the  soldiers  agreed  to 
enter  into  His  Majesty's  service,  which  was  oftentimes  several  days  before  they 
were  sworn.  This  error  cannot  be  of  any  great  consequence  ;  yet,  it  will  not  be 
amiss  (if  any  objections  should  be  made  on  that  account,)  for  you  to  take  notice  of 
what  is  said  above.  G.  W. 


240  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1748. 


Gov.  Wanto7i  io  Gov.  Shirk?/. 

Newport,  on  Rhode  Island,  January  14,  1747-8. 

Sir  : — I  herewith  send  you  two  sets  more  of  the  accounts  of  this  colony's  expen; 
in  the  intended  expedition  against  Canada,  and  two  abstracts  of  the  enlistments 
but  not  made  exactly  in  the  manner  Your  Excellency  hath  directed.  This  is  ow- 
innf  to  our  not  having  been  acquainted  with  the  regular  manner  of  enlisting  ;  the 
enlisting  officers  pursued  the  method  prescribed  by  the  General  Assembly  of  the 
colony,  and  accepted  of  such  as  appeared  to  them  to  be  able  bodied  men,  without 
inquiring  about  their  place  of  abode,  or  their  age  ;  but  this  defect  hath  been  in  some 
measure  supplied  from  muster  rolls  lodged  by  the  captains  in  the  commissary's  of- 
fice ;  due  care  was  taken  not  to  accept  of  any  one  as  a  soldier,  who  was  not  above 
sixteen  years  of  age ;  and  all  the  soldiers  took  the  oath  prescribed  in  the  act  of  As- 
sembly, and  had  a  certificate,  that  they  had  so  done,  and  in  what  company  they 
were  enlisted,  from  some  justice  of  the  peace  in  commission,  or  assistant  of  the  colo- 
ny, before  they  received  the  government's  bounty  ;  all  which  certificates  are  on  file 
in  the  treasurer  and  commissary's  office  ;  but  few  of  them  making  mention  of  the 
soldier's  place  of  abode  or  age  ;  the  columns  made  to  express  those  two  things, 
could  not  be  filled  up  in  the  manner  you  have  directed  ;  I  hope  this  want  of  regu- 
larity is  not  very  material,  and  that  it  will  be  excused  for  the  reason  above  men- 
tioned. 

I  have  been  informed  that  some  of  the  arms  are  not  in  very  good  order,  and  per- 
haps some  of  them  may  be  missing  ;  if  therefore,  the  officers  of  the  three  companies 
raised  within  this  government,  should  apply  to  Your  Excellency  for  certificates ; 
and  you  should  think  proper  to  grant  them  (the  General  Assembly  having  not 
m^de  any  provision  for  paying  said  officers  their  arrears,)  I  desire  you  will  be 
pleased  to  transmit  said  certificates  to  me,  that  I  may  stop  them,  till  I  shall  be  bet- 
ter satisfied  about  the  arms  than  I  am  at  present. 

I  beg  leave  to  acquaint  Your  Excellency,  that  I  have,  in  pursuance  of  a  vote  of 
the  General  Assembly  in  August  last,  the  substance  of  which  I  wrote  you  in  my 
letter,  of  the  23d  of  October  past,  drawn  bills  as  directed  in  said  vote,  and  to  en- 
treat Your  Excellency's  good  offices  and  recommendation  to  His  Grace,  the  Duke 
of  Newcastle,  and  others,  in  whom  you  may  have  an  interest  at  the  court  of  Great 
Britain,  in  behalf  of  the  merchants  here,  who  supplied  this  government  with  the 
money  paid  to  the  soldiers  just  before  their  embarkation  for  Annapolis  Royal ;  and 
also  of  tiie  colony  in  general,  which  by  its  zeal  to  serve  His  Majesty,  in  the  intend- 
ed expeditions,  hath  contracted  a  heavy  load  of  debt,  beyond  the  ability  of  the  in- 
habitants to  discharge,  in  case  their  expense  should  not  be  reimbursed. 

I  am,  with  very  great  respect,  &c., 

'  GIDEON  WANTON. 

To  Governor  Shirley. 


1748.]  AND   PEOVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  241 


"Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemlly, held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kingstown,  the  last 
Monday  in  February,  174  7-8. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Robinson,  Depnty  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Whereas,  there  is  no  regular  cartel  settled  between  His 
Most  Gracious  Majesty,  King  George  the  Second,  King  of 
Great  Britain  and  the  French  King,  and  His  Most  Catholic 
Majesty,  the  King  of  Spain,  &c.,  for  the  exchanging  of  prison- 
ers of  war ;  his  subjects  that  belong  to  this.  His  Majesty's 
colony,  when  taken  by  either  of  the  powers  of  the  aforesaid 
princes,  now  our  most  gracious  Majesty's  open  and  declared 
enemies,  and  at  war,  to  the  great  annoyance  and  peace  of  this, 
his  most  loyal  and  dutiful  colony  ;  which  renders  the  redeem- 
ing of  His  Majesty's  subjects,  belonging  to  the  same,  imprac- 
ticable by  any  other  method  or  means,  but  by  way  of  flag  of 
truce,  either  from  this  colony  to  either  of  the  aforesaid  princes, 
enemies  of  our  sovereign,  or  from  thence  to  this  colony  ;  which, 
if  prevented  or  discouraged,  under  proper  regulations,  would 
be  greatly  against  His  Majesty's  interest,  and  unspeakable 
hardship  of  his  subjects  belonging  to  this  colony  ; — 

For  regulating  whereof,  for  the  future,  be  it  enacted  by  this 
Assembly,  and  by  the  authority  of  the  same  it  is  enacted,  that 
when  any  persons,  prisoners  of  war,  be  brought  into  this  colo- 
ny, belonging  to  either  of  the  said  princes.  His  said  Majesty's 
enemies,  as  aforesaid,  when  there  be  to  the  number  of  fifteen  or 
more,  of  such  prisoners,  their  names,  and  by  whom,  and  when 
taken,  being  first  certified  by  the  secretary  of  this  colony,  who 
is  hereby  required  to  keep  an  exact  register  of  all  such  prison- 
ers, to  be  taken  from  the  oath  of  the  captors,  the  confession  of 

VOL.  V.  31 


242  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1748. 

such  prisoners,  or  decree,  or  certificate  from  the  admiralty  of- 
fice, that  then,  and  in  such  case  His  Honor,  the  Governor  of 
this  colony,  for  the  time  being,  may  commissionate  a  proper 
person  and  vessel,  at  the  charge  of  this  colony,  unless  some 
private  merchant  will  offer  to  do  the  same,  at  his  own  ex- 
pense. 

Provided  always,  that  such  person  so  commissionated,  shall, 
before  such  vessel  sails  out  of  any  harbor  in  this  colony,  pro- 
duce a  certificate  from  the  admiralty,  or  custom  house  office, 
that  such  vessel  has  not  on  board  any  more  provisions  than 
are,  by  them,  thought  to  be  sufficient  for  victualling  such  ves- 
sel's crew,  and  such  prisoners  and  as  many  English  prisoners, 
as  such  vessel  is  capable  of  bringing  back  from  the  dominions 
of  either  of  the  aforesaid  princes,  with  conveniency  ;  and  that 
such  persons,  so  commissionated,  give  bond  to  His  Majesty,  in 
the  sum  of  £1,000  ;  to  produce  a  certificate  from  the  Governor, 
or  other  commanding  officer  of  the  place,  where  such  prisoners 
are  to  be  delivered,  of  such  delivery,  and  that  he  will  bring 
back  as  many  English  prisoners  as  such  vessel  will  carry  with 
conveniency,  if  they  are  to  be  had  at  such  place. 

Whereas,  John  Gardner,  of  South  Kingstown,  hath  repre- 
sented unto  this  Assembly,  that  the  inhabitants,  trade  and 
commerce  of  this  colony,  have  so  far  increased  of  late  that  the 
ferries  established  on  the  Narraganset  shore,  and  the  boats 
employed  in  that  service  are  not  sufficient  to  transport  with 
convenience,  the  numerous  passengers,  their  large  droves,  vari- 
ous effects  and  merchandise  ;  the  boats  being  often  crowded 
with  men,  women,  children,  horses,  hogs,  sheep  and  cattle,  to 
the  intolerable  inconvenience,  annoyance,  and  delay  of  men 
and  business ;  that  he,  the  said  John  Gardner,  is  provided 
with  a  good  wharf,  and  pier,  situate  in  a  convenient,  and 
commodious  place,  for  keeping  a  ferry  between  South  Kings- 
town, and  thereupon  prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  him  the 
liberty  of  keeping  a  ferry  between  the  aforesaid  towns  of  South 
Kingstown  and  Jamestown; — 

On  consideration  whereof,  this  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve, 
and  it  is  hereby  vuled  and   resolved,  that   flie   petitioner  liave 


1748.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  243 

the  liberty  of  keeping  a  ferry,  agreeably  to  his  petition,  he 
complying  with  the  laws  regulating  ferries. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  Hon.  William  Robinson, 
Esq.,  George  Wanton,  Esq.,  Jeremiah  Niles,  Esq.,  Capt.  Robert 
Ilaszard  and  Col.  Benoni  Waterman,  be  a  committee,  to  con- 
sider of  the  best  method  that  may  be,  for  the  payment  of  the 
officers  and  soldiers  raised  by  this  colony,  for  the  intended  ex- 
pedition against  Canada,  and  make  report  as  soon  as  may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  rate  of  £5,000,  new  tenor, 
to  be  levied  on  this  colony,  for  the  year  year  1747,  be  propor- 
tioned to  each  town  as  followeth,  and  that  the  same  be  levied 
as  soon  as  may  be,  viz. : 

£     s.  £    s. 

Newport 825  00  Glocester 117  15 

Providence 550  00  Charlestown 75  00 

Portsmouth 275  15  West  Greenwich 79  05 

Warwick 239  10  Coventry    59  10 

Westerly 270  00  Exeter    125  00 

New  Shoreham 83  00  Middletown 149  00 

North  Kingstown 325  00  Bristol 1 74  10 

South  Kingstown 450  00  Tiverton 140  00 

East  Greenwich 125  00  Little  Compton 167  10 

Jamestown 100  05  Warren 115  00 

Smithfield    274  00  Cumberland 83  10 

Scituate 132  00  Richmond 64  10 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  George  Wanton,  Esq.,  Mr.  Jas. 
Sheffield,  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.  and  Capt.  Robert  Haszard,  or 
the  major  part  of  them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a 
committee  to  pay  off  the  officers  and  soldiers,  raised  in  this 
colony,  for  the  intended  expedition  against  Canada,  upon  the 
credit  of  His  Majesty,  what  yet  remains  unpaid  of  their  wages; 
and  for  that  purpose,  that  the  sum  of  £7,500,  in  bills  of  credit, 
of  the  new  tenor,  be  forthwith  struck  off,  and  signed  by  the 
grand  committee,  and  delivered  to  the   said  committee ;  or  a 


244  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1748. 

less  sum,  if  the  whole  shall  not  be  wanted ;  and  that  the  same 
be  sunk  when  it  is  repaid  by  His  Majesty. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  secretary  be  cited  to  ap- 
pear at  the  next  session  of  this  Assembly,  to  answer  for  his 
conduct,  in  respect  to  the  act  passed  at  the  last  session  of  this 
Assembly,  on  consideration  of  the  extracts  of  the  Duke  of 
Newcastle's  letter  to  Governor  Shirley,  respecting  the  dismis- 
sion of  the  troops  raised  in  America,  for  the  expedition  against 
Canada,  &c. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhl//,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  od  day 
of  May,  1748. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Robinson,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Benjamin  Haszard,  Mr.  Joseph  Edmonds, 

Capt.  George  Wanton,  Mr.  Jeremiah  Niles. 

Mr.  Benjamin  Tucker,  Mr.  William  Richmond. 
Mr.  Gideon  Durfey, 

The  Hon.  Daniel  Jenckes,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 

God  save  the  Kino;. 


1748.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


245 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  the  first  Wednes- 
daij  of  May,  1748. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Robinson,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 


DEPUTIES. 


Neiuport. 
Capt.  Thomas  Wickham, 
Capt.  Walter  Chaloner, 
Mr.  Thomas  Cranston, 
Mr.  John  Channing, 
Capt.  Jonathan  Nichols, 
Mr.  James  Sheffield. 

Providence. 
The  Hon.  Daniel  Jenckes, 
Mr.- John  Angel, 
Mr.  Henry  Harris, 
Mr.  John  Potter,  Jr. 

Portsmouth. 
Mr.  Daniel  Howland, 
Mr.  Oliver  Earl, 
Mr.  David  Anthony, 
Mr.  Jonathan  Freeborn. 

Warioich. 
Col.  Benoni  Waterman, 
Mr.  Samuel  Greene, 
Mr.  Joseph  Lippitt, 
Mr.  Samuel  Barton. 


Westerly. 
Mr.  Joshua  Babcock, 
Major  William  Pendleton. 

New  Shoreham. 
Mr.  Nathaniel  Littlefield, 
Mr.  John  Littlefield. 

North  Kingstoimi. 
Col.  Immanuel  Northup, 
Mr.  Edward  Dyre. 

South  Kingstoum. 
Col.  Thomas  Haszard, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Haszard. 

East  Greemvich. 
Mr.  Giles  Pearce, 
Capt.  Thomas  Spencer. 

Jamestoivn. 
Mr.  John  Eldred, 
Mr.  George  Franklin. 

Smithfield. 
Mr.  Jonathan  Arnold, 
Mr.  Israel  Wilkinson. 

Scituate. 
Capt.  Job  Randall, 
Capt.  Charles  Harris. 


246 


RECORDS    OP   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1748. 


Gloccsier. 
Mr.  Pvichard  Steere, 
Capt.  Richard  Smith. 

Charlestoivn. 
Col.  Joseph  Stanton, 
Mr.  James  Congdon. 
West  Greenwich. 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Ellis, 
Mr,  George  Gardner. 

Coventry. 
Mr.  Aaron  Bowen, 
Mr.  Elisha  Johnson. 

Exeter. 
Capt.  Job  Tripp, 
Mr.  Simon  Smith. 

Middletoivn. 
]\Ir.  John  Rogers, 
Mr.  John  Taylor. 


DEPUTIES. 

Bristol. 
]Mr.  Jonathan  Peek, 
Major  Thomas  Greene. 

Tiverton. 
Capt.  John  Manchester, 
Mr.  John  Rowland. 
Little  Compton. 
\lx.  William  Hall, 
Mr.  Joseph  Wood. 
Warren. 
Mr.  Matthew  Allen, 
Capt.  Benjamin  Barton. 

Ciiniherland. 
Mr.  Israel  Whipple, 
Mr.  Job  Bartlett. 

Richmond. 
Capt.  Richard  Bayley, 
Mr.  John  Webster. 


The  Hon.  Daniel  Jenekes,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 

The  following  officers,  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged  : 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Ellery,  Deputy  Governor. 


ASSISTANTS. 


Mr.  Peter  Bours, 
Mr.  John  Gardner, 
Mr.  Robert  Gibbs, 
Mr.  William  Burton, 
Mr.  Stephen  Brownell, 


jMr.  Robert  Lawton, 
Mr.  James  Arnold, 
Mr.  William  Richmond, 
INIr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 
Mr.  Jeoffrey  Watson. 


1748.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  247 


SECRETARY.  GENERAL  TREASURER. 

Mr.  Thomas  Ward.  Mr.  Thomas  Richardson. 

ATTORNEY    GENERAL. 

Mr.  Daniel  Updike. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  troops  raised  in  this  colo- 
ny, for  the  expedition  intended  against  Canada,  and  lately  dis- 
banded, shall  be  paid  their  arrears  in  bills  of  public  credit,  at 
nine  hundred  per  cent,  advance  upon  the  sterling  wages. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  colony's  sloop  Tartar,  shall 
be  forthwith  put  in  commission,  and  manned  with  ninety  effec- 
tive men,  including  officers,  Avho  shall  be  allowed  and  have  the 
same  wages  as  were  paid  the  last  year ;  and  that  the  commissa- 
ry purchase  six  months'  provisions  for  the  sloop,  and  put  on  board 
her  not  less  thereof  than  will  be  sufficient  for  six  weeks  at  one 
time ;  and  that  the  sloop  cruise  according  to  the  orders  and 
directions  of  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  until  the  1st  day  of  Oc- 
tober next,  or  longer,  if  His  Honor  shall  think  proper. 

And  the  general  treasurer  is  hereby  directed  and  ordered,  to 
supply  the  commissary  with  such  sums  of  money  as  shall  be 
necessary  to  equip  said  sloop,  and  purchase  the  provisions, 
aforesaid  ;  as  also  necessaries  for  Fort  George. 

God  save  the  King. 

TJie  Duke  of  Bedford  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  of  Island. 

Whitehall,  7th  May,  1748. 

Sir : — The  King's  plenipotentiary,  and  those  of  His  Most  Christian  Majesty  and 
the  States  General  of  the  United  Provinces,  having  signed,  at  Aix  la  Chappelle,  on 
the  19th  of  April  last,  O.  S.,  preliminary  articles  for  restoring  a  general  peace,  and 
in  consequence  whereof.  His  Majesty  has  been  pleased  to  order  a  proclamation  to 
be  published,  declaring  a  cessation  of  arms,  as  well  by  sea  as  land,  which  I  send 
you  herewith  enclosed. 

I  am  commanded  by  His  Majesty  to  signify  to  you  his  pleasure,  that  you  cause 
the  same  to  be  published  in  all  the  proper  places  of  your  government,  to  the  end 
that  all  His  Majesty's  subjects  there,  may  pay  due  obedience  to,  and  a  strict  observ- 
ance of  the  same.  I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

BEDFORD. 

To  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 


248  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1748, 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhhj,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  second  Mon- 
day in  June,  1748. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Ellery,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  William  Barton,  William  Rich- 
mond, Joshua  Babcock  and  Immanuel  Northup,  Esqs.,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  take  into  considera- 
tion the  subject  matter  of  His  Excellency,  Governor  Shirley's 
letter  to  the  government,  and  make  report  thereof,  to  this 
Assembly. 

Whereas,  it  hath  been  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that 
James  Holmes,  captain  of  the  colony's  sloop  Tartar,  notwith- 
standing the  vessel  was  not  to  go  on  a  cruise  till  manned  with 
ninety  effective  men,  including  officers,  on  or  about  the  21st  day 
of  May  last,  wentto  sea  with  the  sloop,  having  but  about  sixty- 
five  hands  on  board;  and  that  of  his  own  accord,  having  no  orders 
nor  instructions  from  His  Honor, the  Governor;  that  in  this  cruise 
on,  or  about  the  22d  of  May,  he  gave  chase  to  a  schooner,  not 
far  from  Block  Island,  and  came  up  with  her  near  Point  Judith. 
After  a  couple  of  shot  were  fired,  the  schooner  struck ;  Capt. 
Holmes  took  possession  of  her,  and  put  his  lieutenant  on  board, 
Avith  orders  to  bring  her  in ;  that  thereupon,  the  schooner, 
which  was  pretended  to  be  a  flag  of  truce,  almost  loaded  from 
Leoganon  Hispaniola,  to  some  of  the  northern  colonies,  sailed 
on  the  west  side  of  Conanicut,  came  round  and  anchored  at  a 
place  called  Coddington's  Cove,  where  she  was  unladen  of  a 
cargo  of  sugar,  &c. ;  and  afterwards  brought  publicly  into  this 
[tort ;  which  conduct  of  the  captain  and  lieutenant  of  the  colo- 
ny's sluu[i  demand  the  notice  of  this  Assembly  ; — 


17-48.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  249 

Who  thereupon  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  hereby  voted  and 
resolved,  that  Peter  Bours,  Stephen  Brownell,  Daniel  Cogges- 
hall  and  William  Hall,  Esqs.,  together  with  Messrs.  Walter 
Chaloner,  James  Sheffield,  Benoui  Waterman  and  John  El- 
dred,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  examine  into  the  conduct  of  the  said 
Capt.  Holmes,  respecting  the  premises  ;  and  if  it  shall  appear  to 
them,  that  he  merits  to  be  suspended  the  colony's  service,  that 
they  suspend  him  until  the  next  session  of  this  Assembly,  and 
appoint  another  in  his  room,  to  command  the  said  sloop  in  the 
mean  time;  and  to  examine  and  deal  with  Daniel  Vaughan, 
the  lieutenant  of  the  Tartar,  in  the  same  manner ;  and  that 
the  said  committee  have  full  power  to  summon  persons  before 
them,  to  give  evidence  concerning  the  premises  ;  and  if  the 
said  officers  shall  be  found  to  have  been  gudty  of  mal-conduct, 
that  the  committee  have,  and  power  is  hereby  given  them,  to 
commit  the  offender  or  offenders  to  jail,  or  admit  him  or  them 
to  bail,  for  his  or  their  appearance  before  this  Assembly,  at  its 
next  session ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  commission- 
ate  such  captain  and  lieutenant  as  shall  be  appointed  by  the 
committee,  if  they  shall  appoint  any. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Robert  Gibbs,  Stephen  Hop- 
kins and  George  Brown,  Esqs.,  be  sued  by  Benjamin  Nichols, 
of  Newport,  one  of  the  grand  committee,  or  colony's  trustees, 
in  behalf  of  the  colony,  in  an  action  of  £100,000  damage,  fur 
breach  of  trust,  in  receiving  of  the  General  Assembly  sundry 
pap'irs  of  great  consequence,  and  neglecting  to  return  the 
same  ;  and  that  he  employ  one  or  more  attornies  in  said  case ; 
and  that  the  action  be  brought  to  the  next  inferior  court  of 
common  pleas,  to  be  held  in  the  county  of  King's  county ;  and 
that  the  said  Benjamin  Nichols  draw  money  out  of  the  general 
treasury,  to  defray  the  charge  of  said  suit. 

God  save  the  King. 

VOL.  V.         32 


250  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE    ISLAND  [1748. 


The  Duke  of  Bedford  to  the  Governor  and  Company  of  B.  Island. 

Whitehall,  June  28,  1748. 

Gentlemen  : — The  act  of  accession  of  the  King  of  Spain,  as  likewise  that  of  the 
republic  of  Genoa,  to  the  preliminaries  signed  at  Aix  La  Chappelle,  the  19th  of 
April,  O.  S.  1748,  having  been  signed  there  by  their  respective  plenipotentiaries, 
on  the  28th  instant,  N.  S.,  in  consequence  of  which,  hostilities  are  to  cease,  as  well 
liy  sea  as  land,  according  to  the  terms  and  periods  agreed  upon  for  a  suspension  of 
arms,  in  the  treaty  signed  at  Paris,  the  19th  day  of  August,  N.  S.,  1712, 1  herewith 
enclose  to  you  a  literal  translation  of  the  clauses  of  the  said  treaty  of  the  19th  of 
August,  N.  S.,  1712,  which  relate  to  this  matter ;  and  which,  together  with  my  let- 
ter to  you  of  7th  of  May  last,  and  the  copy  of  His  Majesty's  proclamation,  which  was 
therein  enclosed,  will  serve  for  your  information,  and  tor  the  rule  of  your  conduct 
on  this  occasion ;  and  you  are  to  give  proper  directions  to  the  end  that  all  His 
IMnjesty's  subjects  in  your  government,  may  pay  due  obedience  thereto,  and  strict- 
ly observe  the  same.  1  am,  gentlemen, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

BEDFORD. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 


Procccd'nKjs  of  the  General  Assemhl//,  held  for  the  Colony  of  BJtode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Ncuport,  the  ith  3Ion- 
day  of  Any  list,  1748. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  EUeiy,  Deputy  Governor. 

AVith  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  the  officers  and  men,  be- 
longing to  the  colony's  sloop  Tartar,  be  discharged ;  and  that 
the  commissary  take  the  vessel  into  his  care,  unbend  her  sails, 
and  put  all  her  small  stores  on  shore,  taking  an  inventory  of 
them  ;  that  the  sloo).  sliall  lie  id  anch(n-  in  the  road,  and  a  num- 
ber of  propci-  persons,  not  oxceeding  four,  be  kept  on  board,  for 
her  bf'ttor  security;  and  in  case  it  shall  be  found  necessary  to 
send  her  (.n(  upon  a  cruise,  then  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  or 
in  his  ab.-entr.  lh<-    Drpniy  Governor,  with  llio  advice  of  such 


IT-^l^S.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  251 

of  his  council  as  slicall  then  he  within  the  county  of  Newport, 
appoint  proper  officers  to  command  said  sloop  ;  furnish  a  cap- 
tain and  lieutenant  with  proper  commissions,  issue  a  warrant 
for  impressing  a  sufficient  number  of  seamen,  and  send  them 
forth  against  the  enemy  with  all  necessary  despatch. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Capt.  Chaloner  discharge  all 
the  soldiers  belonging  to  Fort  George,  eight  excepted  ;  that 
nevertheless,  if  there  be  any  appearance  of  danger,  whereby  it 
may  seem  that  the  defence  of  the  fort  will  require  a  larger 
number  of  soldiers,  the  captain  is  hereby  empowered  to  issue 
a  warrant  to  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Newport,  for  the  im- 
pressing as  many  as  he  shall  think  necessary  for  that 
purpose. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  tliat  Josiah  Arnold,  Esq.,  and  Mr- 
John  Hull,  both  of  Jamestown,  and  Mr.  John  Gardner,  of  South 
Kingstown,  be  a  committee,  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  to 
purchase,  for  the  colony's  use,  the  two  ferry  places  on  the  west 
side  of  Jamestown,  with  the  two  ferry  boats,  and  all  other  ap- 
purtenances, if  the  same  may  be  had  at  a  reasonable  rate,  and 
cheaper  than  to  build  new  ;  and  take  a  good  deed  of  the  same, 
and  draw  money  out  of  the  general  treasury  to  pay  therefor. 
But  if  said  ferry  places,  boats,  &c.,  cannot  be  purchased  upon 
better  terms  than  to  build,  then  the  said  committee,  or  the  ma- 
jor part  of  them,  are  hereby  empowered  and  directed  to  build 
a  good  and  suitable  pier  or  wharf,  for  a  ferry  place,  at  the  west 
end  of  the  highway,  which  runs  across  said  Jamestown,  from 
ferry  to  ferry,  and  erect  a  suitable  house  on  said  highway,  and 
purchase  two  suitable  ferry  boats  as  soon  as  conveniently  may 
be,  for  the  use  of  the  colony  ;  and.  draw  money  out  of  the  gen- 
eral treasury  to  defray  the  same ;  and  immediately  to  hire  one 
or  two  suitable  boats  for  transporting  over  the  ferry ;  and  ap- 
point proper  persons  to  tend  the  same,  until  good  boats  may 
be  purchased ;  and  that  no  other  persons  be  licensed  to  keep  a 
ferry  on  the  west  side  of  Jamestown. 

Whereas,  Edward  Scott,  Esq.  and  the  secretfiry  were  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  procure  the  printing  of  all  the  public 
laws,  now  in  force  in  this  colony,  that  have  been  made  since 


252  RECORDS   OF  THE   COLONY   OF  RHODE   ISLAND  [\748. 

the  last  revisal  and  i.rintiiig  the  laws,  but  have  hitherto  omit- 
ted doing  the  same,  and  the  secretary  altogether  declines  en- 
cao-ins  in  that  business,  being  in  a  bad  state  of  health  ; — 

Wherefore  this  Assembly  do  constitute  and  apppoint  Mr. 
James  Gould,  of  Newport,  to  join  Mr.  Scott,  in  the  secretary's 
room. 

Whereas,  Col.  Benoni  Waterman  and  Mr.  Joseph  Lippitt, 
represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  the  bridge  over  Pawtuxet 
river,  commonly  called  Capt.  Benjamin  Greene's  Bridge,  is 
very  much  out  of  repair ;  and  as  the  same  is  in  the  country 
road,  and  of  great  service  to  the  public,  they  prayed  a  grant  of 
about  £70,  out  of  the  general  treasury,  for  repairing  said 
bridge ;  on  consideration  whereof, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved  by  the  Assembly,  that  the  said  Be- 
noni Waterman  and  Mr.  Samuel  Greene,  be,  and  they  are 
npiHjinted  a  committee,  to  repair  the  bridge  aforesaid  ;  and 
when  it  is  completed,  that  they  draw  out  of  the  general  treasu- 
ry the  sum  of  £70,  towards  paying  the  charge  thereof 

Whereas,  the  commissioners,  that  were  appointed  to  run  the 
line  between  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  and  this 
colony,  did  not  go  through  that  Avork  in  every  part  there- 
of;—' 

Whereupon,  it  is  voted  and  enacted  by  the  Assembly,  that 
Daniel  Jenckcs,  Henry  Harris  and  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esqs., 
be.  and  they,  or  ihc  major  part  of  tlioni,  are  hereby  appointed 
conunissioners  to  linish  the  running  said  line  in  manner  follow- 
ing, viz. : 

Beginning  ;it  the  monument,  in  the  north-east  corner  of  the 
colony,  set  u[t  by  tlie  former  commissioners,  where  they  left 
off,  and  from  thence  to  run  westerly  to  Connecticut  line,  agree- 
:ibly  to  the  charter  of  this  colony;  and  that  they  meet  the 
third  Tuesday  of  October  next,  at  12  o'clock,  at  Maxe's,  in  At- 
tloborough,  ill  order  t(»  begin  said  work. 

And  it  is  i'mihov  voted  und  enacted,  that  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  write  to  Ills  ivxcellency,  the  Governor  of  the  Mas- 
.sachusetts,  informing  him  of  this  resolution ;  and  to  request 
that  commissioners  may  be  appointed  on  the  part  of  that  Prov- 


1748.]  AND   PEOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  253 

ince,  to  join  with  the  commissioners  of  the  colony,  in  order  to 
perform  the  business  aforesaid. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  last  session,  in 
Newport,  appointed  Peter  Bours,  Stephen  Brownell,  Daniel 
Coggeshall  and  William  Hall,  Esqs.,  together  with  Messrs. 
Walter  Chaloner,  James  Sheffield,  Benoni  Waterman  and  John 
Eldred,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  a  committee,  to  inquire  into 
the  conduct  of  the  captain  and  lieutenant  of  the  colony's  sloop, 
&c. ;  and  the  major  part  of  the  said  committee  having  assumed 
and  gone  through  the  burthen  of  that  province,  made  report  as 
foUoweth,  to  wit : 

Report  of  the  Committee  in  the  case  of  Captain  and  Lieutenant 
of  the  jSioop  Tartar. 

To  the  Honorable  General  Assembly  : 

"  We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  a  committee  to  inquire  into  the  conduct 
of  Capt.  James  Holmes,  commander  of  the  colony  sloop  Tartar,  char"-ed  with  mis- 
demeanors in  his  said  office;  and  also  into  the  conduct  of  Mr.  Daniel  Vauohan, 
lieutenant  of  said  sloop,  with  full  powers  to  continue  or  suspend  said  officers,  as 
should  be  found  agreeably  to  justice  ;  in  pursuance  of  which,  we  have  met,  and  had 
before  us  the  said  Capt.  Holmes  and  Mr.  Daniel  Vaughan,  and  on  examining  them 
and  several  evidences,  summoned  before  us,  came  to  the  following  resolutions 
which  we  now  report : 

1.  That  as  to  Capt.  Holmes'  going  out  without  orders,  or  instructions  from  the 
Governor,  it  was  resolved  by  the  committee,  that  his  going  out  without  orders,  or 
instructions  from  the  Governor,  or  the  Deputj^  Governor,  was  a  great  misdemeanor ; 
but  it  appeared  to  the  committee,  that  it  was  without  any  bad  design,  and  princi- 
pally to  keep  his  men  on  board  from  deserting  their  service. 

2.  As  to  his  conduct,  in  bringing  to  the  schooner  referred  to  by  act  of  Assem- 
bly, and  what  was  consequent  thereupon,  the  committee  resolved,  that  it  did  not 
appear  by  the  evidences,  that  Capt.  Holmes  knew  the  said  schooner  was  a  tla"  of 
truce  at  that  time ;  but  as  she  had  been  at  Jamaica,  and  was  furnished  with  a  clear- 
ance from  the  custom  house  of  that  island  (which  was  produced  to  the  committee), 
there  is  room  to  allow  that  Capt.  Holmes  might  suppose  her  to  come  directly  from 
thence  ;  but  the  committee  was  of  opinion,  that  he  greatly  erred  in  putting  his  lieu- 
tenant, Mr.  Daniel  Vaughan,  on  board  said  schooner,  as  a  pilot,  to  bring  her  in,  as 
said  Vaughan  had  the  second  command  on  board  the  colony  sloop. 

3.  As  to  the  said  Capt.  Plolmes'  not  waiting  upon  the  Governor,  or  in  his  ab- 
sence, the  Deputy  Governor,  on  his  return  from  his  cruise,  the  committee  resolved, 
that  it  was  a  breach  of  duty  ;  and  that  he  ought,  on  his  return,  to  have  waited  on 
the  Governor,  or  in  his  absence,  the  Deputy  Governor,  to  have  informed  him  of 
what  had  occurred  in  said  cruise. 

Upon  the  whole,  though  it  appeared  to  the  committee  that  Capt.  Holmes  had 
been  guilty  of  several  misdemeanors  in  his  conduct,  as  captain  of  said  sloop,  yet  it 


254  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1748. 

was  resolved  by  them,  that  they  did  not  amount  to  sufficient  cause  for  a  suspension 
from  his  aforesaid  post  of  captain  of  said  sloop. 

With  respect  to  Mr.  Daniel  Yaughan,  the  lieutenant  of  the  sloop,  it  appeared  to 
the  committee,  that  he  was  put  on  board  said  schooner,  by  order  of  Capt.  Holmes, 
his  superior  officei';  and  although  he  declared  to  the  committee,  that  one  Mr. 
lli'Tht,  on  board  her  (who  had  with  him  a  copy  of  one  Capt.  Haydon's  commission, 
to  command  a  privateer  vessel,  which  was  produced  to  the  committee,)  ordered 
him  to  carry  the  schooner  to  Coddington's  Cove ;  yet  the  committee  were  of 
opinion,  that  he  erred  in  complying  with  said  Right's  orders,  and  in  not  bringing 
her  into  the  harbor  of  Newport.  But  on  considering  the  whole  of  his  conduct, 
and  the  circumstances  attending  it,  on  board  said  schooner,  the  committee  resolved, 
that  there  was  not  sufficient  cause  for  to  suspend  him  from  his  aforesaid  office  ot 
lieutenant  of  said  sloop. 

PETER  BOURS,  WALTER  CHALONER, 

STEPHEN  BROWNELL,  BENONI  WATERMAN. 

WILLIAM  HALL, 
Newport,  August  23,  1748." 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  appointed  to 
build  a  pier  and  feny  house  on  the  west  side  of  Jamestown, 
and  procure  boats,  &c.,  or  the  major  part  of  the  said  committee, 
to  treat  with  John  Martin,  of  Jamestown,  or  whoever  owns  the 
piers  or  wharfs  and  ferry  houses,  on  the  west  side  of  James- 
town, and  purchase,  or  hire  of  him,  said  piers  or  wharfs 
and  ferry  houses,  and  boats,  for  the  use  of  the  colony, 
until  those  they  appointed  to  build  are  fit  for  use  ;  and,  if  he 
refuse  to  let  the  colony  have  them  upon  reasonable  terms,  that 
said  committee  take  possession  of  the  southernmost  of  said 
piers  or  wharfs  on  the  west  side  of  Jamestown,  and  improve 
them  fur  the  use  of  the  colony,  and  for  accommodating  the  in- 
liabitauts  thereof;  am], that  reasonable  damages  be  allowed  by 
tlie  culuny  to  the  owners  thereof,  for  the  same,  during  the  time 
they  shall  be  improved  for  the  use  of  the  colony. 

God  save  the  Kinji. 


The  Duke  of  BcilJ'onl  to  the   Governor  and  Compmvj  of  Rhode 

Island. 


Whitehall,  August  9,  1748. 
Gentlemen  : — In  my  letter  of  the  28th  June  last,  I  acquainted  you  with  the  King 
of  Spain  and  the  rc'pulilic    of  (umio.i's  accession  to   the  preliminary  articles  signed 
at  Ai.\  la  Cuappellc,  the  llMli  of  April,  O.  S.,  1748,  for  restoring  a  general  peace. 


1748.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLAJ^TATIONS.  255 

I  am  now  to  inform  you,  that  their  Excellencies,  the  Lords  Justices,  have  since  or- 
dered a  proclamation  to  be  published,  a  copy  of  which  is  enclosed,  declaring  a  ces- 
sation of  hostilities  against  His  Catholic  Majesty,  and  the  republic  of  Genoa,  and 
their  subjects,  as  well  by  sea  as  land  ;  which  proclamation  you  are  to  cause  to  be 
published  in  all  the  proper  places  under  your  government,  to  the  end  that  His  Maj- 
esty's subjects  there,  may  pay  due  obedience,  and  strictly  conform  themselves 
thereto.  I  am,  gentlemen. 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

BEDFORD. 
To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembli/  held  for  the  Cohmj  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the 
last  Wednesda?/  in  October,  1748. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  EUery,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Daniel  Jenckes,  Henry  Harris 
and  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part  of 
them,  are  hereby  appointed  commissioners  to  run  the  northern 
boundary  line  of  the  colony,  from  the  stake  set  up  by  Nathan'l 
AV^oodward  and  Solomon  Saffery,  in  the  year  1649,  upon 
Wrentham  Plain,  westerly,  so  as  it  may  (at  Connecticut  river,) 
be  two  miles  and  a  half  to  the  southward  of  a  west  line ;  and 
that  said  line  be  run  clear  through,  to  said  Connecticut  river, 
according  to  an  agreement  made  between  the  commissioners 
of  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay  and  this  colony, 
October  the  22d,  1718  ;  and  that  they  meet  the  first  Monday 
in  April  next,  at  Pelatiah  jMan's,  at  Wrentham,  in  order  to  be- 
gin said  work ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write  to 
His  Excellency,  the  Governor  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  in- 
forming him  of  this  resolution ;  and  to  request  that  commis- 
sioners may  be  appointed  on  the  part  of  that  government,  to 
join  wit!i  onr  commissioners,  to  pcrfoi-m  tlic  business  afore- 
said. 


256  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1748. 

It  is  Yotcd  and  resolved,  that  the  colony's  sloop  Tartar,  to- 
gether with  all  her  appurtenances,  stores  and  provisions,  (ex- 
cepting the  warlike  stores,)  be  sold  by  the  commissarj^,  at  a 
public  vendue,  to  the  highest  bidder,  within  ten  days  after 
the  rising  of  this  Assembly ;  and  that  the  commissary  give 
public  notice  of  the  sale,  with  a  list  of  the  stores,  appurtenances 
and  provisions ;  the  price  to  be  paid  down  into  the  general 
treasury. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  send 
home,  to  Mr.  Partridge,  the  colony's  agent  in  Great  Britain, 
copies  of  the  muster-rolls  of  the  officers  and  soldiers,  enlisted 
for  the  expedition  against  Canada;  together  with  a  well  attest- 
ed copy  of  Governor  Shirley  and  Governor  Knowles'  order  for 
the  settlement  of  the  pay ;  and  direct  the  agent  to  make  ap- 
plication for  the  re-payment  thereof,  by  the  crown ;  and  that 
the  former  committee,  viz. :  George  Wanton,  Esq.,  Mr.  James 
Sheffield,  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.  and  Capt.  Hobert  Haszard, 
prepare  said  copies,  and  deliver  them  to  His  Honor ;  and  that 
said  committee  render  an  account  of  all  their  proceedings  to 
the  General  Assembly,  at  their  next  session ;  and  that  His 
Honor,  the  Governor,  draw  bills  for  payment  of  the  above 
mentioned  pa}"  to  the  agent. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Robert  Gibbs,  William  Hop- 
kins, Daniel  Jenckes,  Stephen  Hopkins  and  George  Brown, 
Esqs.,  be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  hereby  ap- 
pointed a  committee  to  take  into  consideration  the  queries 
sent  from  the  board  of  trade,  to  this  colony,  and  prepare  an 
answer  thereto,  and  lay  the  same  before  this  Assembly,  at  their 
next  session ;  that,  in  the  mean  time,  the  town  council  of  each 
respective  town  in  tliis  colony,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  direct- 
ed to  appoint  a  pro})cr  person  to  take  an  account  of  the  inhab- 
itants »'f  each  town,  whites,  Indians  and  blacks ;  and  deliver 
said  :;cc<.nnt  to  the  said  committee;  and  that  the  same  com. 
niittee  take  into  consideration  the  letter  from  Chambers  Rus- 
sell, Esq.,  judge  of  the  vice  admiralty,  and  report  thereupon  to 
this  Asscmldy,  at  tlioir  next  session  ;  and  that  the  secretary 
Iraiisiiiil  a  Cdpy  n|"  this  voto  to  each  town  dcrk  in  this  colony. 


1748.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  257 


Proclamaiion  of  Governor  Shirley  and  Admiral  Knoiulcs. 

His  Grace,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  having,  in  his  letter  to  Governor  Shirley,  sig- 
nified that  His  Majesty,  finding  it  necessary  to  employ  the  greatest  part  of  his 
forces  to  assist  his  allies,  and  defend  the  liberties  of  Europe,  had  thought  proper  for 
the  present,  to  lay  aside  the  prosecution  of  the  intended  expedition  against  Cana- 
da, and  commanded  him  and  Governor  Knowles  to  discharge  all  the  forces  raised 
for  that  service  (excepting  such  as  they  should  judge  necessary  to  be  kept  in  pay  for 
securing  the  Province  of  Nova  Scotia,)  and  to  thank  the  officers  and  men,  in  His 
Majesty's  name  for  their  readiness  and  zeal  to  enter  into  his  service. 

In  consequence  thereof,  we  do  hereby  discharge  all  the  said  officers  and  men  (ex- 
cept four  hundred,)  out  oT  His  Majesty's  service,  from  the  31sfc  of  October,  1747, 
and  they  are  hereby  discharged,  accordingly. 

And  we  do  also  thank  them  in  His  Majesty's  royal  name,  for  their  readiness  to 
engage  in  their  country's  cause  against  the  common  enemy  ;  and  though  they  are 
prevented  at  present,  of  revenging  themselves  on  a  cruel,  perfidious  enemy,  it  cannot 
be  doubted  but  the  same  zeal  and  spirit  will  always  animate  them  to  serve  again 
whenever  they  are  called  upon. 

Given  under  our  hands,  this  •28th  day  of  October,  1 747. 

W.  SHIRLEY, 
CHARLES  KNOWLES. 

Thomas  Hill  to  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

Whitehall,  June  8,  1748. 
Gentlemen  : — I  am  directed  by  my  lords  commissioners  for  trade  and  plantations, 
to  send  you  the  enclosed  heads  of  inquiry,  and  to  desire  your  particular  answer 
thereto,  as  soon  as  may  be,  together  with  your  observations  upon  such  points  as  you 
shall  think  necessary  ;  and  you  are  desired  to  make  a  return  thereto  every  six 
months,  that  their  lordships  may  be  apprized  of  any  alterations  which  may  happen 
in  the  circumstances  of  your  government. 

I  am,  gentlemen. 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  HILL. 
To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  the  Colony  of  Rhode  Island. 

Queries  from  the  Board  of  Trade^  to  the  Governor  and  Company 
of  RJiode  Island. 

What  is  the  situation  of  the  colony  under  your  government ;  the  nature  of  the 
country,  soil  and  climate ;  the  latitudes  and  longitudes  of  the  most  considerable 
places  in  it,  or  the  neighboring  French  or  Spanish  settlements  ?  Have  those  lati- 
tudes and  longitudes  been  settled  by  good  observations,  or  only  by  common  compu- 
tations, and  from  whence  are  the  longitudes  computed  ? 

What  are  the  reputed  boundaries  ;  and  are  any  parts  thereof  disputed,  what 
parts,  and  by  whom  ? 

VOL.  V.         .83 


258  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1748. 

What  is  the  constitution  of  the  government  ? 

What  is  the  trade  of  the  colony,  the  number  of  shipping,  their  tonnage,  and  the 
number  of  sea-faring  men,  with  the  respective  increase  or  diminution,  within  ten 
years  past  V 

Wliat  quantity  and  sorts  of  British  manufactures  do  the  inhabitants  annually 
take  from  hence  ? 

What  trade  has  the  colony  under  your  government,  with  any  foreign  plantations, 
or  any  part  of  Europe  besides  Great  Britain  ?  How  is  that  trade  carried  on '? 
What  commodities  do  the  people  under  your  government  send  to,  or  receive  from 
foreign  ])!antations  V 

What  methods  are  there  used  to  prevent  illegal  trade,  and  arc  the  same 
eflectual  V 

What  is  the  natural  produce  of  the  country,  staple  commodities  and  manufac- 
tures, and  what  value  thereof  in  sterling  money,  may  you  annually  export  ? 

What  mines  are  there  V 

What  is  the  number  of  inhabitants,  whites  and  blacks  ? 

Are  the  inhabitants  increased  or  decreased  within  the  last  ten  years,  how  much 
an!  for  what  reasons  V 

AVhat  is  the  number  of  the  militia  ? 

What  forts  and  places  of  defence  are  there  within  your  government,  and  in  what 
condition  V 

What  number  of  Indians  have  you,  and  how  are  they  inclined  ? 

What  is  the  strength  of  the  neighboring  Indians  ? 

What  is  the  strength  of  your  neighboring  Europeans,  French  or  Spaniards  ? 

What  elfect  have  the  French  or  Spanish  settlements  on  the  continent  of  Ameri- 
ca, upon  His  ]\lajesty's  plantations,  especially  on  your  colony  ? 

What  is  the  revenue  arising  within  your  government,  and  how  is  it  ap- 
propriated V 

What  are  the  ordinary  and  extraordinary  expenses  of  your  government  ? 

What  are  the  establishments,  civil  and  military,  within  your  government,  and  by 
what  authority  do  the  olHcers  hold  their  places'? 

Chambers  Russell  io  Gov.  Greene. 


Charlestown,  July  8th,  1  748. 
Sir  :— The  lords  commissioners  of  the  admiralty,  having  been  informed  that  there 
was  an  iniquitous  trade  subsisting  between  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  the 
King's  enemies,  under  color  of  Hags  of  truce,  have  directed  me  to  make  the  most 
strict  inquiry  into  the  truth  of  it,  and  if  I  find  the  same  to  be  fact,  to  make  proper 
remonstrances  to  the  government  of  Ithode  Island  against  such  illegal  pro- 
ceedings. 

I  have,  in  compliance  with  their  iord.ships'  commands,  made  inquiry  into  the 
same,  and  find  that  there  were  the  last  year,  abov.;  twenty  sail  of  vessels  commis- 
sioned as  (lags  of  truce,  by  the  government  of  Khode  Island,  to  carry  prisoners  to 
the  French  West  Indies;  which  vessels  have  carried  but  few  prisoners;  but  under 
color  of  said  commissions,  have  carried  cargoes  of  fish  and  other  provisions  to  the 
King's  enemies,  and  in  return  have  brought  back  the  produce  of  the  French  sugar 
plantations. 


1748.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  259 

And  also,  that  several  French  flags  of  truce  came  to  Rhode  Island,  with  cargoes 
of  molasses,  sugar  and  indigo ;  for  which,  they  have  carried  back  in  return- 
provisions. 

And  as  said  trade  is  strictly  prohibited  by  His  Majesty's  proclamation,  and  is  a 
base  prostitution  of  the  King's  commission,  and  has  a  tendency  to  distress  His  Maj- 
esty's subjects  and  succor  the  enemy,  I  doubt  not  but  that  you'll  take  the  utmost 
care  to  prevent  it ;  and  will  see  that  those  who  presume  to  carry  on  such  illicit 
trade,  for  the  future,  are  duly  punished. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

CHAMBERS  RUSSELL. 
To  the  Hon.  William  Greene,  Esq., 

to  be  communicated  to  the  General  Court. 

Whereas,  Josiah  Aniold,  Esq.,  and  Mr.  John  Hull,  both  of 
Jamestown,  and  Mr.  John  Gardner,  of  South  Kingstown,  were 
by  the  General  Assembly,  appointed  a  committee,  they,  or  the 
major  part  of  them,  to  purchase  for  the  colony's  use,  the  two 
ferry  places  on  the  west  side  of  Jamestown,  with  the  two  ferry 
boats,  and  all  other  appurtenances,  if  the  same  might  be  had 
at  a  reasonable  rate,  and  cheaper  than  to  build  new,  &c.,  and 
having  undertaken,  and  gone  through  that  work,  made  the  fol- 
lowing report  of  their  doings,  &c, : 

*'  Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  Jamestown, 
October  22d,  1748. 

Pursuant  to  an  act  of  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  held  at  Newport,  by 
adjournment,  the  28th  of  August,  A.  D.,  1748,  we,  the  subscribers,  do  report  as 
followeth,  viz. : 

That  we  having  met  and  duly  considered  the  expense  of  buildings  suitable  for  fer- 
rying from  the  west  side  of  Jamestown  to  the  main,  and  the  season  being  so  far  spent 
that  we  had  no  hopes  of  completing  the  same,  so  as  to  accommodate  the  country 
this  winter,  thought  it  best  to  buy  those  already  erected  there,  and  have  purcliased 
the  same  of  William  Martin,  for  the  consideration  of  £3,155,  in  bills  of  public 
credit;  and  have  taken  a  deed  of  the  same,  made  to  the  Governor  and  Company  of 
the  colony  of  Rhode  Island ;  which  deed  we  have  lodged  in  the  clerk's  office,  in  or- 
der to  be  recorded ;  but  the  same  cannot  be  done  at  present,  there  being  no  money 
in  the  treasury  to  discharge  those  bonds  and  mortgages,  for  which  the  land  is 
surety,  or  we  should  have  presented  Your  Honors  with  the  deed  ;  £155,  of  the 
above  sum,  being  in  tenth  bonds,  the  remaining  sum  of  £3,000  we  have  given  bond 
for  payment,  in  two  months,  with  interest  at  ten  per  cent. ;  which  we  hope  Your 
Honors  will  take  into  consideration,  and  order  the  money  raised  to  discharge  the 
same,  lest  we  should  be  sufferers  in  the  affair. 

We  also  acquaint  Your  Honors,  that  we  have  agreed  with  Thos.  Spencer  to  keep 
the  ferries  two  months,  at  the  rate  of  £200  per  annum,  he  being  a  person,  who 
we  well  know,  is  capable  offending  and  taking  proper  care  of  the  boats  in  stormy 
weatlier ;  and  as  Your  Honors  are  well  sensible  that  the  purchasing  the  ferries  was 


260  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1748. 

for  the  better  accommodating  the  public,  we  doubt  not  but  Your  Honors  -will  be  of 
opinion  that  not  every  person  who  may  appear  eager  to  give  the  greatest  rent  for 
the  ferries,  and  perhaps  for  want  of  care  and  judgment  in  the  affair,  may  lose  one 
or  both  the  boats,  will  be  suitable  to  serve  the  public,  as  one  who  is  capable  of 
carrying  passengers  with  safety,  and  taking  that  due  care  of  the  boats,  which 
sometimes  requires  a  good  deal  of  judgment  in  bad  storms. 

We  would  further  inform  Your  Honors,  that  both  the  wharves  want  some  repairs  ; 
the  northernmost  not  being  sufficient  to  land  at  low  water ;  so  that  all  the  boats  are 
obliged  to  come  to  the  south  wharf;  which  oftentimes  is  attended  with  a  good  deal 
of  difficulty,  by  running  each  other  on  shore;  and  passengers  obliged  to  jump  their 
horses  into  the  water,  and  oftentimes  land,  and  take  on  board  through  two  qr  three 
boats ;  so  that  travellers'  horses  are  many  times  lamed  by  that  means  ;  all  which 
we  thought  proper  to  inform  Your  Honors  of.  JOSIAH  ARNOLD, 

JOHN  HULL, 
JOHN  GARDNER." 

Which  report  being  duly  considered,  this  Assembly  do  vote 
and  resolve,  that  the  same  be,  and  it  is  hereby  accepted  ;  and 
that  the  committee,  aforesaid,  be  still  continued ;  that  they 
make  such  repairs  at  the  aforementioned  ferry  places,  as  are 
necessary  at  present ;  that  they  let  out  said  ferry  places  until 
the  session  of  the  Assembly,  in  May  next ;  and  draw  money 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  and  discharge  the  aforesaid  bonds 
and  mortgage  of  the  premises,  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the  pur- 
chase money. 

God  save  the  King. 

[The  following  Public  Laws,  passed  during  the  year  1748,  are  printed  at 
length  in  the  volume  of  public  laws,  published  in  1767,  unless  repealed  previous  to 
that  time.] 

An  Act  in  addition  to  an  act,  entitled  "  An  act  enabling  the  town  council  of  each 

town  to  grant  licenses  for  the  retailing  strong  liquors,"  etc.     (February.) 
An  Act  enabling  the  several  towns  to  make  such  town  acts,  as  may  seem  to  them 

meet,  for  the  raising  of  monies  to  defray  the  charges  of  each  town.  (February.) 
An  Aft  in  aildition  to  an  act  directing  the  attendance  of  petit  jurors,  as  witnesses. 
An  Act  directing  of  gaining  a  legal  settlement  in  any  town  in  the  colony,  and  for  the 

removal   of  poor   persons  from  their   illegal   to  their  legal  place  of  settlement. 

(June.) 
An  Act  to  prevent  profane  cursing  and  swearing.     (August.) 
An  Act  to  render  the  session  of  the  General  Assembly  less  precarious  than  it  hatli 

been  hitherto.     (August.) 
An  additional  Act  to  prevent  the  spreading  of  the  small  pox,  and  other  contagious 

"jckness  in  tiin  (.-olony       (Oi-tober. ) 


1749.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  261 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemUy,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the  od,  day 
of  January,  1748-9. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Ellery,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Robert  Gibbs,  Stephen  Hop- 
kins, Daniel  Jenckes  and  George'  Brown,  Bsqs.,  be,  and  they 
are  hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  take  into  consideration 
the  letter  from  His  Excellency,  Governor  Shirley,  with  the 
other  papers  relating  to  the  paper  currency,  and  make  report 
thereon  to  this  Assembly,  at  their  next  session. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  27//«  day 
of  February,  1748-9. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Ellery,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee,  who  were  ap- 
pointed to  pay  off  the  soldiers  raised  for  the  expedition  intend- 
ed against  Canada,  render  an  account,  upon  oath,  unto  His 
Honor,  the  Governor,  how  much  sterling  money  hath  been  by 
them  paid  to  the  said  soldiers  ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Gov- 
ernor, draw  bills  for  the  same,  on  the  lords  of  tiie  treasury, 
payable  to  the  agent  of  this  colony. 


262  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1749. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  Col. 
Thomas  Haszard,  Capt.  Job  Handall  and  Mr.  Benjamin  Brown, 
be,  and  they  are  hereby  constituted  a  committee,  to  examine 
into  the  state  and  condition  of  the  several  bridges  in  this  colo- 
ny, and  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  at  their  next  session, 
what  bridges  ought  to  be  maintained  in  whole  or  in  part,  by 
the  colony,  and  by  what  ways  and  means  the  other  bridges 
are  to  be  supported. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  several  towns  in  this  colo- 
ny, pay  the  persons  by  them  respectively  appointed  to  take  an 
account  of  the  number  of  polls  and  rateable  estate  in  each 
town  in  the  government,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord,  1747  :  and 
also  the  persons  by  them  respectively  appointed  (in  conse- 
quence of  an  act  passed  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  ses- 
sion in  Providence,  in  October  last,)  to  number  the  inhabitants 
of  each  town,  whites,  Indians  and  negroes  ;  and  that  the  ac- 
count of  all  and  every  such  person  or  persons,  for  his  or  their 
time,  and  so  forth,  in  said  afiairs,  be  presented  to  their  con- 
stituents, the  town  council,  who  are  hereby  empowered  to  ex- 
amine the  same,  and  give  orders  on  their  town  treasurer  for  the 
payment  of  such  sum  or  sums  as  they  shall  find  justly  due  to 
the  person  or  persons  presenting  his  or  their  accounts,  as 
aforesaid. 

Whereas,  Peter  Bours,  Edward  Scott  and  George  Wanton, 
Esqs.,  Mr.  James  SheHield,  the  speaker  and  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Esq.,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  were  by  this  Assembly,  at  their 
session  in  Providence,  the  last  Wednesday  of  October  last, 
constituted  a  committee  to  sell  for  ready  money,  and  to  the 
best  advantage,  Ihe  bills  of  exchange  then  voted  and  resolved 
In  bo  (hMwn  hy  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  on  Mr.  Part- 
ri(lg(\  lh(;  colony's  agent  in  Great  Britain,  for  all  their 
money  in  his  hands;  ihat  when  they  had  so  done,  they 
should  exchange  all  the  bills  of  credit  of  the  neighboring  gov- 
ernments they  receive  in  pay  for  bills  of  credit  of  this  colony, 
and  bring  the  whole  to  this  Assembly,  to  be  burnt,  in  order  to 
sink  such  of  this  colony's  bills,  as  by  acts  of  Assemldy  are  to 
bo  liisl  suid;  :  and   llic    said    connuiKoe,  or   the    major  part  of 


1749.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  263 

them,  having  assumed  that  province,  and   gone  througli  the 
business,  made  the  following  report : 

"  We,  the  subscribers,  appointed  in  conjunction  with  Stephen 
Hopkins,  Esq.,  by  the  Honorable  General  Assembly  of  the 
colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  in  New 
England,  at  their  session  in  October  past,  to  sell  the  govern- 
ment's money,  in  the  hands  of  the  agent  Mr.  Richard  Part- 
ridge, do  report,  that  ^ve  have  sold  bills  on  the  said  agent,  to 
the  amount  of  £7,800,  at  the  rate  of  exchange  of  £1,050  cur- 
rency, for  £100  sterling ;  and  also,  that  we  have  received  of 
Messrs.  Oliver  and  Phillips,  the  sum  of  £3,150,  old  tenor,  for 
the  bill  of  £300,  sterling,  drawn  on  them  by  the  said  agent,  as 
per  account  hereunto  annexed. 

PETER  BOURS,  JAMES  SHEFFIELD, 

EDWARD  SCOTT,  THOxAIAS  CRANSTON." 

GEORGE  WANTON, 

[Here  follows  a  list  of  the  bills  of  exchange  drawn,  amount- 
ing to  £88,725  00  0.] 

And  forasmuch,  as  the  committee,  aforesaid,  have  delivered 
the  said  sum  of  £88,725,  in  bills  of  public  credit  (old  tenor), 
emitted  by  this  colony,  unto  the  committee,  by  this  Assembly 
appointed  to  receive  and  tell  the  same,  and  the  said  committee 
having  received,  told  and  brought  the  said  bills  hither,  and 
they  having  been  burnt  in  the  presence  of  this  Assembly ; — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  Peter  Bours,  Edward 
Scott,  George  Wanton,  James  Sheffield,  Thomas  Cranston  and 
Stephen  Hopkins,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  discharged  of  the 
trust  aforesaid. 

Whereas,  Robert  Lawton,  Jonathan  Peck  and  Matthew  Al- 
len, Esqs.,  were,  by  the  General  Assembly,  appointed  a  commit- 
tee, to  view  the  several  places  in  Middletown,  proposed  for  lay- 
ing out  a  highway  ;  (fhd  having  undertaken  and  performed  that 
service,  made  report  of  their  doings,  on  the  back  of  the  Assem- 
bly's vote,  which  qualified  them  ;  which  report,  follows  in  these 
words : 


264  RECORDS    OP   TILE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1749. 

"  We,  the  subscribers  (the  committee  within  named),  having 
considered  the  affair  to  us  committed,  and  pursued  the  direc- 
tion to  us  given,  as  within  written,  do  report,  as  follows,  viz. : 

"  1.  That  a  drift  way  is  sufficient ;  and  that  there  be  no 
open  highway,  as  prayed  for,  by  the  petitioners. 

2.  That  the  southwardmost  place  proposed  to  us,  that  is, 
from  the  double  gate  on  the  west  side,  to  another  gate  on  the 
east  side  of  Easton's  Neck,  being  the  old  accustomed  way,  is 
the  place  where  said  drift  way  shall  be,  in  our  opinion,  with 
the  greatest  convenience. 

Given  under  our  hands,  this  27th  day  of  February,  A.  D. 
1748.  ROBERT  LAWTON, 

JONATHAN  PECK, 
MATTHEW  ALLEN." 

Which  report,  being  duly  considered,  this  Assembly  do  vote 
and  resolve,  that  the  same  be,  and  it  is  hereby  accepted. 
God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Asscmhl//,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Bhode 
Idaml  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  Id  day 
of  May,  1749. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Ellery,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

^Ir.  Peter  Bours,  Mr.  Robert  Lawton, 

Mr.  John  Gardner,  Mr.  William  Richmond, 

Mr.  William  Burton,  Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 
Mr.  Stephen  IJruwnell, 

Mr.   Stephen  Hopkins,  speaker,   and    Mr.  Josias   Lyndon, 
cloik. 


1749.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


265 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  liliode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  first  Wednes- 
day of  May,  1749. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Ellery,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 


DEPUTIES. 


Newport. 
Capt.  George  Wanton, 
Mr.  Joseph  Whipple,  Jr., 
Mr.  Thomas  Cranston, 
Mr.  John  Tillinghast, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Easton, 
Mr.  James  Sheffield. 

Providence. 
]\Ir.  Jonathan  Randall, 
Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Mr.  Elisha  Brown, 
Mr.  Daniel  Jenckes. 

Portsmouth. 
Mr.  Oliver  Earl, 
Mr.  Gideon  Freeborn,  Jr., 
Mr.  John  Allen, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Tucker. 

WanvicJc. 
Mr.  Philip  Greene, 
Mr.  John  Holden, 
Mr.  John  Greene, 
Capt.  Amos  Lockwood. 


Westerly. 
Capt.  Silas  Greenman, 
Mr.  Joshua  Babcock. 

New  Shoreham. 
Mr.  John  Littlefield, 
Mr.  Abel  Franklin. 

North  Kingstown. 
Col.  Immanuel  Northup, 
Capt.  Daniel  Fones. 

South  Kingstown. 
Capt.  Robert  Haszard, 
Mr.  Rowland  Robinson. 

East  'Greenimch. 
Mr.  Joseph  Nichols, 
Capt.  Thomas  Spencer. 

Jamestown. 
Mr.  Daniel  Weeden, 
Mr.  Joseph  Clarke. 
Smithfield. 
Mr.  Thomas  Lapham, 
Mr.  John  Aldrich. 
Scitiiate. 
Mr.  Thomas  Ralph, 
Mr.  Thomas  Hudson. 


VOL.  V. 


34 


266 


RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND 


[1749. 


Glocesier. 
Mv.  Richard  Steere, 
Maj.  Richard  Smith. 
Chcuicstoivn. 
Col.  Joseph  Stanton, 
Mr.  James  Congdon. 
West  Greenwich. 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Ellis, 
Mr.  George  Gardner. 

Goveniry. 
Mr.  James  Colvin, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Nichols. 

Exeter. 
Capt.  John  "Weight, 
Mr.  Benoni  Gardner. 

Mkldletoivn. 
Capt.  Robert  Barker, 
Mr.  Jonathan  Easton. 


DEPUTIES. 

Bristol. 
Mr.  Thomas  Greene. 

Tiverton. 
Mr.  John  Howland, 
Mr.  Edward  Wanton. 

Little  Compton. 
j\lr.  William  Hall, 
Mr.  Nathaniel  Searle. 

Warren. 
Mr.  James  Smith, 
Capt.  Benjamin  Barton. 

Gumherland. 
Mr.  Israel  Whipple, 
Mr.  Job  Bartlett. 

Richmond. 
Mr.  Joseph  Clarke, 
Mr.  James  Rogers. 


The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyn- 
don, clerk. 

The  following  officers,  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged  : 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Ellery,  Deputy  Governor. 


ASSISTANTS. 


Mr.  Peter  Bours, 
Mi\  Simon  Pease, 
Mr.  William  Burton, 
Mr.  Edward  Kinnicutt, 
Mr.  Stephen  Brownell, 


Mr.  Robert  Lawton, 
Mr.  James  Arnold, 
Mr.  William  Ptichmond, 
Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 
Mr.  Jeoffrey  Watson. 


1749.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  207 


SECP.ETAIIY.  GENERAL  TREASURER, 

Mr.  Thomas  Ward.  Mr.  Thomas  Richardson. 

ATTORNEY    GENERAL, 

Mr.  Daniel  Updike. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of 
Newport,  provide  liquor,  to  the  amount  of  .£50,  to  entertain 
those  gentlemen  that  shall  attend  the  solemnity  of  proclaiming 
peace. 

God  save  the  King, 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemMi/,  held  for  the  Coloiyj  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  the  second  lion- 
da^  in  tlime,  1749. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Ellery,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Richard  Partridge,  agent 
for  this  colony,  be  allowed  the  sum  of  £100,  for  his  extraordi- 
nary trouble  in  the  affair  of  the  controversy  respecting  the 
affair  of  the  boundary  line  between  the  Province  of  the  Mas- 
sachusetts Bay  and  this  colony  ;  and  that  he  be  allowed  two 
per  cent,  for  receiving  the  money  granted  by  the  crown  to  this 
colony,  for  re-paying  the  charge  of  the  Canada  expedition ; 
and  that  the  agent  give  this  colony  credit  for  the  £400  by 
him  charged  the  2 1st  day  of  November,  1744,  for  future  ser- 
vices, &c. ;  and  that  the  charge  of  £82,  in  his  account,  for  the 
losses  in  the  bills  drawn  on  this  colony,  in  favor  of  Oliver  & 
Phillips,  be  not  allowed,  until  it  be  further  explained  by  the 
agent ;  and  that  the  rest  of  his  whole  account  be  allowed. 
•    And  that  Peter  Bours,  Esq.,  Messrs.  Thomas  Cranston  and 


2G8  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1749. 

Joseph  Whipple,  Jr.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  constituted  a 
committee  to  draught  a  letter,  to  be  perusec.  j  thi-  '  -o^^kit, 
and  signed  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  and  sent  to  the  agent ; 
and  that  he  be  properly  empowered  by  this  colony,  to  receive 
the  money  of  the  lords  of  the  treasury,  or  from  whomsoever 
else  it  may  be  due,  for  the  bills  of  exchange  that  this  govern- 
ment shall  have  a  right  to  draw,  for  what  they  have  paid  the 
soldiers  raised  for  the  intended  expedition  against  Canada,  that 
hath  not  been  already  refunded  this  colony. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  write 
a  letter,  in  behalf  of  the  government,  to  Sir  Peter  Warren,  re- 
questing that  he  would  certify  to  the  lords  of  the  treasury,  or 
where  else  it  may  be  necessary,  what  may  be  within  his  knowl- 
edge of  this  government's  sending  the  three  companies  raised 
for  the  intended  expedition  against  Canada,  to  Annapolis 
Royal,  by  his  and  Governor  Shirley's  request ;  and  that  he 
would  be  pleased  to  use  his  kind  offices  in  procuring  for  this 
government,  a  reimbursement  of  their  expense. 

"  We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  by  the  General  As- 
sembly, to  take  an  inventory  of  the  warlike  and  other  stores? 
&c.,  belonging  to  the  colony,  do  report  according  to  said  ap- 
pointment, as  followcth  : 

We  viewed  at  Fort  George,  in  the  lower  battery,  viz. :  twen- 
ty-five cannon,  in  carriages,  twenty-five  sponges  with  staffs, 
thirty-six  crab  handspikes,  four  ladles  for  the  cannon,  and  four 
cannon  wormcrs,  eight  hundred  and  seventy-four  cannon  shot. 
On  the  platform,  &c.,  twelve  cannon  in  carriages,  etc.,  etc.  etc. 

JOHN  TILLINGHAST,  JAMES  SHEFFIELD." 

THOMAS  CRANSTON, 

[The  report  contains  a  minute  account  of  all  the  military 
stores  possessed  by  the  colony,  and  of  the  places  where  kept ; 
also,  a  list  of  the  stores  belonging  to  the  sloop-of-war  Tartar  ; 
among  which,  arc  fourteen  carriage  and  twelve  swivel  guns. 
The  report  was  accepted ;  the  cannon,  small  arms  and  ammu- 
nition appropriated  to  various  parts  of  the  colony.] 


1749.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  269 

And  now,  this  Assembly,  having  duly  considered  the  premis- 
- . /!/>  v^^  < -rjd  I,-  Ave,  and  it  is  hereby  voted  and  resolved, 
that  the  aforesaid  refport  be,  and  it  is  hereby  accepted ;  and 
that  all  the  stores  therein  mentioned,  (excepting  the  musket 
balls,  and  also  the  powder  in  the  cartouch  boxes,)  be  forthwith 
sold  at  a  public  vendue,  and  the  money  arising  thereby,  be 
lodged  in  the  general  treasury ;  and  that  a  commissary  be  ap- 
pointed to  take  care  of  the  colony's  arms,  and  get  them  cleaned, 
and  lodge  them  in  the  garret  of  the  colony  house,  together 
with  all  other  warlike  stores  belonging  to  the  colony  (except- 
ing such  only  as  properly  belong  to  the  fort,  and  the  cannon 
and  swivel  guns,  which  belonged  to  the  sloop  Tartar) ;  and 
that  no  more  than  six  small  arms  be  left  at  the  fort. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee,  appointed  by 
the  General  Assembly,  to  pay  off  the  forces  raised  for  the 
Canada  expedition,  do  procure  two  regular  attested  copies  of 
the  muster-rolls  of  each  company,  and  make  oath  to  the  truth 
of  their  having  received  the  money  for  paying  the  soldiers ; 
and  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  desired 
and  empowered  to  send  the  same  home  to  England,  and  forth- 
with to  draw  bills  of  exchange,  payable  to  our  agent,  Mr. 
Partridge,  for  said  money,  on  the  lords  of  the  treasury,  or  any 
other,  on  whom  the  payment  of  the  same  may  be  incumbent. 

Whereas,  Peter  Bours,  Esq.,  Messrs.  Thomas  Cranston  and 
Joseph  Whipple,  Jr.,  were  constituted  a  committee,  to  draught 
a  letter  to  be  perused  by  this  Assembly,  signed  by  His  Honor, 
the  Governor,  and  sent  to  the  agent ;  and  having  performed 
the  same,  and  exhibited  their  draught ; — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  a  letter  of  the  same  purport  be 
drawn,  signed  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  and  sent  to  the 
agent,  together  with  a  copy  of  the  record  of  the  money  burnt 
at  the  last  session  of  this  Assembly,  held  at  Providence ;  and 
likewise  a  copy  of  the  act  empowering  His  Honor,  the  Gov- 
ernor, to  draw  bills  for  what  has,  by  the  colony,  been  paid  the 
soldiers  raised  for  the  Canada  expedition. 

God  save  the  King. 


270 


RECORDS  OF  THE  COLONY  OF  RHODE  ISLAND 


[1749. 


[At  the  close  of  the  October  session,  1718,  (p.  256,)  a  committee  was  appointed  to 
answer  the  queries  of  the  board  of  trade,  relative  to  the  population  of  the  colony, 
etc.  There  is  not  among  the  records  of  the  secretary's  office,  any  copy  of  this 
report.  The  statement  hereto  annexed,  is  taken  from  ^^  Douglass'  Summary,  etc., 
of  the  Jirst  planting,  progressive  improvements  and  present  state  of  the  British  set- 
tlements in  North  America."  London,  1754.  Vol.  2,  p.  89.  From  its  precise- 
ness,  it  was  doubtless  copied  from  the  original,  in  H.  B.  M.  State  Paper  Office,  in 
London.] 


17  4  8 


17  4  9 


Townships. 


Newjiort 

Providence 

Portsmouth 

Warwick 

Westerly 

New  Shoreham .  . . 
North  Kingstown, . 
South  Kingstown, . 

Greenwich 

Jamestown 

Smithfield 

Scituatc    

Gloeester 

Charlestown  .  .  . . 
West  (ircenwich,. 

Coventry 

Exeter 

Middletown   

Bristol 

Tiverton    

Little  Compton  . . 

Warren 

CuniVii-rland 

Ricliniond 


5335 

3177 

807 

1513 

1701 

260 

1665 

1405 

956 

284 

400 

1210 

1194 

641 

757 

769 

1103 

586 

928 

842 

1004 

600 

802 

500 


888  58  119  28439  3077  1257  51 


110 

225 

134 

176 

59 

20 

184 

380 

61 

110 

30/ 

16 

8 

58 

8 

16 

63 

76 

128 

99 

62 

50 

4 

5 


68 
50 
51 
93 
49 
20 
86 
193 
27 
26 
20 
6 

303 
1 


Governor  Greene  io  Txichard  Pcirtridcje,  Agent  for  Rhode  Island, 

in  London. 


Newport,  June  18,  1749. 
Sir:— The  letters  I  have  lately  received  from  you,  with  that  directed  to  the  com- 
mittee who  disposed  of  the  sterling  money  in  your  hands,  have  been  communicated 
to  the  General  Assembly,  who  have  ordered  me  to  inform  you,  that  on  examining 


1749.] 


AND    PEOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  271 


the  accounts  of  your  agency,  they  find  £400  charged  November  21st,  1744,  as  a 
reserve  in  your  hands,  for  future  services  ;  for  which,  they  judge  you  ought  to  have 
given  credit,  inasmuch  as  all  the  expenses  from  that  time  to  this,  which  you  have 
been  at  on  the  colony's  behalf,  are  charged  in  your  several  accounts. 

The  article  of  £82,  charged  as  a  loss  on  the  bills  of  exchange  you  drew,  payable 
to  Messrs.  Oliver  &  Phillips,  the  Assembly  expects  a  further  explanation  of  the 
equity  and  reasonableness  of,  before  they  can  readily  allow  of  it. 

And  as  to  the  article  of  commissions,  for  negotiating  the  affair  of  the  money  ad- 
vanced by  this  government  for  the  Canada  expedition,  they  have  voted  you  two 
per  cent,  for  receiving  the  same  ;  as  they  have  also,  £I00,  as  a  gratuity  for  your 
extraordinary  trouble  respecting  the  boundary  line  between  the  Province  of  the 
Massachusetts  Bay  and  this  colony  ;  the  remainder  of  your  account  seems  to  meet 
with  approbation. 

You  have  herewith  sufficient  power  to  qualify  you  in  behalf  of  the  government 
to  receive  the  money  we  have  advanced  for  paying  the  officers  and  soldiers  raised 
for  the  Canada  expedition,  together  with  attested  copies  of  the  muster-rolls  and 
the  oaths  of  the  committee,  Avho  received  the  money  from  the  government  to  pay 
the  same  ;  and  doubt  not,  as  it  was  expended  at  the  request  of  the  Duke  of  New- 
castle, in  behalf  of  the  crown,  that  we  shall,  on  your  application,  be  immediately 
reimbursed. 

As  to  Mr.  Lockman's  petition,  relating  to  the  naval  office,  we  doubt  not  but  that 
the  two  acts  of  Parliament,  made  in  King  Charles  2d,  and  King  William's  reigns, 
relating  to  said  office,  will  sufficiently  vindicate  the  colony's  conduct  in  rejecting 
his  patent ;  and  as  to  his  aspersions  so  liberally  cast  on  us,  was  his  character  as 
well  known  in  London,  as  it  is  in  Rhode  Island,  he  would  not  have  access  to  any 
public  board,  to  spread  his  false  reports,  which  it  is  obvious  are  only  the  result  of 
bis  disappointment. 

As  to  the  bill  in  Parliament,  relating  to  the  paper  currency,  the  Assembly  ex- 
pects you  will  strenuously  oppose  it ;  since,  should  it  pass  into  a  law,  it  would  anni- 
hilate all  the  legislative  power  granted  to  this  colony,  in  their  charter ;  and,  as  we 
judge  that  we  have  not  acted  anything  to  forfeit  those  privileges,  we  hope  on  an  im- 
partial consideration,  we  shall  not  be  stripped  of  them.  The  multiplicity  of  the 
paper  bills  emitted  by  New  England,  ought  to  be  considered  as  owing,  in  a  great 
degree,  to  the  expeditions  the  inhabitants  have  engaged  in,  for  His  Majesty's  ser- 
vice. Witness  the  undertaking  in  1710,  to  reduce  Port  Royal  and  Canada,  which 
first  gave  occasion  for  striking  off  bills  of  credit;  and  witness  the  remarkable  Cape 
Breton  exploit,  which  procured  such  an  inundation  of  them  from  the  Pi-ovince  of 
the  Massachusetts  Bay,  which  has  overwhelmed  that  Province  and  the  other  gov- 
ernments of  New  England ;  also,  and  we  would  observe,  that  all  the  money  allowed 
us  on  account  of  the  Canada  expedition,  has  been  appropriated  to  the  sending  the 
whole  amount  thereof,  in  bills  emitted  by  this  colony,  as  will  also  that  which  is 
granted  us  by  Parliament,  for  the  Cape  Breton  undertaking,  as  soon  as  yoa  shall 
have  received  it. 

We  are  surprised  at  Governor  Shirley's  writing  as  you  inform  us  he  has, 
to  the  lords  of  the  treasury  ;  you  have  been  informed  that  the  chiefest  part  of  the 
charge  of  the  transports  and  provisions  in  our  accounts,  was  owing  to  the  attempts 
we  made  of  succoring  Nova  Scotia,  at  the  pressing  instance  of  Mr.  Shirley,  in  con- 
junction with  Admiral  ^\'arrcu,  and  in  obedience  to  His  Majesty's  instructions  to 


272  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE  ISLAND  [1749. 

this  colony,  Anno  1745,  copies  of  which  you  have  herewith,  to  support  those 

articles. 

We  are  persuaded,  on  strict  inquiry,  you  will  find^that  all  the  expense  the  Prov- 
ince of  the  Massachusetts  was  at  on  the  same  occasion,  and  at  that  very  time, 
has  been  by  their  Governor  charged  to  the  crown,  and  .very  likely  paid  to  them  be- 
fore now  -,  and  as  Admiral  Warren  was  in  Newport  when  our  forces  sailed  for  An- 
napolis, and  assured  us  he  would  serve  the  government  whenever  in  his  power,  the 
General  Assembly  have  ordered  me  to  address  him  for  his  friendly  assistance  in 
this  case,  and  to  desire  him  to  declare  before  the  board,  who  will  Inquire  into  these 
charges  In  our  accounts,  what  he  knows  of  the  conduct  of  the  colony  relating  to 
that  undertaking.  Enclosed,  Is  a  letter  to  him  for  that  purpose,  which  you  are  to 
wait  on  him  and  to  deliver  yourself.  If  he  be  in  London,  and  to  inform  him  of  the  dif- 
ficulties we  are  under,  and  to  solicit  his  kind  interposition  to  serve  us  as  far  as  may 
be  consistent  with  justice,  which  no  doubt  he  will  readily  do. 

Your  assured  friend, 

WILLIAM  GREENE. 

To  liichard  Partridge. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemU/j  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  on  the  third 
Monday  in  Aiiyiist,  1749. 

The  lion.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Ellery,  Depnty  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Whereas,  Peter  Bours,  Simon  Pease  and  George  Wanton, 
Es({s.,  Messrs.  Thomas  Cranston  and  James  Sheffield,  were  by 
this  Assembly,  at  their  last  session,  constituted  a  committee  to 
audit  the  grand  committee's  accounts,  and  to  receive  of  them 
what  money  was  in  their  office,  paid  in  for  tenths ;  and  also  to 
receive  of  Jonathan  Nichols,  Esq.,  the  £'3,000  delivered  to  him 
by  a  former  committee,  to  be  exchanged,  and  burn  the  whole 
of  said  monies  when  by  them  so  received  ;  and  to  make  report 
of  their  doings  to  this  Assembly.  And  those  gentlemen  hav- 
ing performed  that  work,  exhibited  an  account  of  the  same  by 
tiiem  stated,  with  their  report  thereon,  as  follows,  to  wit : 


1T49.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  273 


Mr.  Benjamin  Nichols,  one  of  the  grand  committe, 

To  the  colony  of  Ehode  Island,  Dr. 

£    s.  d. 

1745-6.    February.     To  cash  paid  by  Jahleel  Brenton,  Esq., 1,600  00  0 

1747.        June.  "       "       "        Messrs.  Benjamin  Haszai'd,  Thos. 

"  "  To  Cranston  and  John  Channing,  a  committee 

appointed  by  the  Assembly 6,239  02  6 

"  "  "     Mortgages  and  bonds,  agreeing  of  the  third 

bank,  delivered  by  Jahleel  Brenton,  Esq.,. .  .22,394  17  3 
"  "  "     Mortgages  and  bonds,  agreeing  of  the  fourth 

bank,  delivered  by  said  Brenton 36,648  08  0 

"  "  "     A  number  of  bonds  without  mortgages,  of  the 

third  and  fourth  banks 2,383  19  7 

"  "  "     Mortgages  and  bonds  of  the  fifth  bank 101,397  10  0 

"  "  "     Mortgages  and  bonds  of  the  sixth  bank 101,966  00  0 

"  "  "     Mortgages  and  bonds  of  the  seventh  bank  in 

[new  tenor,  £20,078  Is. 
"  "  "  "  "     reckoned  in  old  tenor. .   80,313  04  0 

"  "  "     mortgages  and  bonds  of  the  eighth  bank,  in 

[new  tenor,  £40,001 
"                 "               "           "                     "        reckoned  in  old  tenor,  160,004  00  0 
"                 "               "     a  number  of  bonds,  delivered  by  Daniel  Up- 
dike, Esq.,  in  May,  1746 12,029  12  0 


£524,975  13  4 

Mr.  Benjamin  Nichols,  of  the  grand  committee, 

To  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  Cr. 

£    s.d. 

1746.  May  26.     By   cash  paid  to  Messrs.    Samuel   Wickham  and 

Abraham  Redwood,  a  committee  appointed  by 
the  General  Assembly,  who  burnt  the  same,  as 
per  report  made 1,600  00  00 

1747.  June  11.     "  cash  paid  to  Messrs.  Benjamin  Haszard,  Thomas 

Cranston  and  John  Channing,  a  committee  ap- 
pointed by  the  General  Assembly,  who  burnt  the 

same,  as  per  report 21,241,13  00 

"        "  "  cash  paid  to  Messrs.  Jas.  Sheffield  and  Thos.  Cran- 

ston, a  committee  appointed  by  the  General  As- 
sembly, who  burnt  the  same,  as  per  report  made,   16,700  00  00 
1749.  Aug.  15.     "  cash  paid  to  Messrs.  Peter  Bours,   Simon  Pease, 
George  Wanton,  Thomas   Cranston  and  James 
Sheffield,  a  committee  appointed  by  the  General 

Assembly,  to  receive  and  burn  the  same 26,722  02  10 

Balance  in  Mr.  Benjamin  Nichols'  hands, 458,711  17  06 


£524,975  13  04 

VOL.  V.        35 


274  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1749. 

"  We,  the  subscribers,  beinc;  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly,  a  committee, 
to  audit  the  grand  committee's  accounts,  and  to  receive  what  money  was  in  the 
grand  committee's  office,  paid  in  for  tenths,  and  to  burn  the  same ;  and  also  to 
receive  of  Capt.  Jonathan  Nichols  the  £3,000  delivered  to  him  by  a  former  com- 
mittee, to  be  exchanged,  do  report : 

That  we  have  carefully  examined  into  the  lists  of  the  mortgages  and  bonds,  in 
the  office ;  and  also  the  sums  which  have  been  paid  into,  and  delivered  out  of 
said  office,  since  the  time  that  Jahleel  Brenton,  Esq.,  resigned  the  same,  and  do 
find,  that  there  is  at  present  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Benjamin  Nichols,  as  a  bal- 
ance, £458,711  17s.  Gd.,  as  appears  by  the  above  account.  We  also  report,  that 
there  is  in  said  Nichols'  custody,  a  number  of  mortgage  deeds,  without  bonds  to 
match  them,  amounting  to  £38,639  12s.  id.,  agreeably  to  a  list  of  them  taken 
when  said  Jahleel  Brenton,  Esq.,  delivered  them  to  Capt.  Jonathan  Nichols,  his 
successor.  We  do  further  report,  that  we  have  received  of  the  aforesaid  Benjamin 
Nichols,  £2G,722  2s.  lOd.,  old  tenor,  as  he  is  credited  for  in  the  aforegoing  ac- 
count, (including  in  said  sum,  £8S  said  Benjamin  Nichols  paid  to  Joseph  Tur- 
pin,  by  order  of  Assembly,  for  the  same  sum  lost  by  him,  of  this  colony's  money,) 
which  we  have  burnt,  pursuant  to  the  act  of  Assembly ;  and  that  we  cannot  find 
that  there  were  £3,000  delivered  to  Capt.  Jonathan  Nichols  by  any  former  com- 
mittee, but  suppose  the  mistake  to  arise  from  the  article  of  £6,239  2s.  6d.,  paid  to 
Mr.  Benjamin  Nichols,  as  he  stands  chai-ged  with  in  the  account  above  stated. 

AH  which,  we  submit  to  the  Honorable  General  Assembly. 

PETER  BOURS,  GEORGE  WANTON, 

SIMON  PEASE,  JAMES  SHEFFIELD, 

THOMAS  CRANSTON, 

Newport,  August  19,  1749. 


And  now,  this  Assembly^  having  taken  the  said  report  into 
consideration, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  hereby  voted  and  resolved, 
that  the  same  be,  and  it  hereby  is  accepted  ;  and  that  the  ac- 
count by  said  committee  charged  against  the  colony,  for  their 
time,  trouble,  &c.,  in  auditing  the  aforementioned  accounts,  be 
allowed  ;  and  the  amount  thereof,  being  £112  \0s.,  paid  them 
out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  James  Mussey,  of  Mendon,  represented  to  this  As- 
sembly, that  at  the  session  thereof,  in  August  and  October, 
1748,  Daniel  Jenckes,  Henry  Harris  and  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Esqs.,  were  appointed  commissioners,  they,  or  the  major  part 
of  them,  to  run  the  northern  boundary  line  of  this  colony,  from 
llie  stake  set  up  by  Nathaniel  Woodward  and  Solomon  Saffery. 
in  the  year  1642,  as  by  said  acts  may  appear ;  but  as  the  said 


1749.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  275 

commissioners  have  hitherto  neglected  to  perform  said  work, 
according  to  the  intent  of  said  acts,  the  aforesaid  James  Mus- 
sey,  and  others,  who  are  now  under  the  jurisdiction  and  gov- 
ernment of  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay  (as  they 
apprehend,  wrongfully,)  prayed  that  this  Assembly  would,  at 
their  present  session,  be  pleased  to  appoint  three  or  more  such 
gentlemen,  commissioners,  to  run  the  northern  boundary  line 
of  this  colony,  according  to  charter,  who  will  undertake  said 
business,  and  go  through  with  it,  according  to  an  agreement 
made  between  the  commissioners  of  this  colony,  and  one  of,  and 
for  said  Province,  January  19,  1710-11  ;  that  they  may  be 
under  the  jurisdiction  and  government  of  this  colony,  as  they 
think  by  charter,  they  ought ; — 

On  consideration  whereof,  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
aforesaid  petition  be,  and  it  is  hereby  granted  ;  and  that  Jona- 
than Randall,  Thomas  Lapham  and  Richard  Steere,  Esqs.,  be, 
and  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  hereby  constituted  a 
committee  to  run  the  above  mentioned  line  ;  and  they  also  are 
fully  empowered  to  appoint  a  surveyor  or  surveyors,  and  chain- 
men  ;  and  to  appoint  time  and  place  to  begin  said  work ;  and 
that  the  secretary  acquaint  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts 
Bay,  of  this  act  being  passed ;  and  to  request  them  to  appoint 
a  a  committee  to  join  with  ours,  in  running  said  line ;  and  that 
if  none  be  appointed  by  said  Province,  that  our  committee  pro- 
ceed and  run  said  line  ex  parte. 

An  Act  for  laying  a  drift-way  through  part  of  Middletown. 

Whereas,  it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  way  for  His 
Majesty's  subjects  to  pass  and  re-pass  from  that  part  of  Middle- 
town,  in  the  county  of  Newport,  called  Sachmeast  Beach,  across 
to  Easton's  Beach,  for  the  want  of  which,  the  inhabitants  of  Lit- 
tle Compton  and  Middletown,  are  greatly  hindered  in  passing 
to  and  from  Newport,  no  public  way  ever  having  been  provided 
and  laid  out ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted,  and  it  is  hereby  enacted  by  the  au- 
thority of  this  General  Assembly,  that  there  shall  be  a  drift- 
way of  a  convenient  breadth,  laid  out  by  the  town  of  Middle- 


276  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY   OP   RHODE   ISLAM)         [1749. 

town,  from  the  double  gate  on  the  west  side,  to  another  gate  on 
east  side  of  Easton's  Neck  (being  the  old  accustomed  way) ; 
and  that  the  town  council  of  Middletown  are  hereby  required 
to  lay  out  said  drift-way,  within  one  month  from  the  rising  of 
this  General  Assembly,  in  the  manner  and  under  the  direc- 
tions, that  highways  are  laid  out  in  this  colony,  agreeably  to 
the  laws  now  in  force  in  this  colony ;  and  that  the  same  shall 
be  done  at  the  charge  of  the  said  town  of  Middletown ;  and 
that  if  there  be  any  persons'  land  to  be  run  through,  in  laying 
out  said  way,  who  will  not  grant  the  same  for  the  said  public 
use,  that  the  said  town  council  do  proceed  to  agree  with  said 
proprietor  or  owner  thereof,  and  pay  therefor  in  the  same  man- 
ner as  is  directed  by  other  laws  made  for  laying  out  highways 
in  this  colony. 

And  be  it  enacted,  that  the  said  drift-way  so  to  be  laid,  shall, 
when  laid  out,  be,  and  remain  a  public  drift-way,  for  the  use  of 
His  Majesty's  subjects,  for  ever. 

God  save  the  King-. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemUf/  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kings- 
town the  last  Wednesday  in  Octoher,  1749. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Ellery,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  Daniel  Updike,  James  Honeyman,  Jr., 
Matthew  Robinson  and  John  Aplin,  attornies  at  law,  by  a  me- 
morial und(n-  tlioir  hands,  have  represented  unto  this  Assembly, 
that  the  judges  of  the  superior  court  of  judicature,  &c.,  in  this 
colony,  have,  of  late,  judicially  determined  that  the  statues  of 
that  part  of  Great  Britain,  formerly  called  England,  are  not  in 
force  in  this  government,  except  such  as  are  introduced  by 


1749.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  277' 

some  law  of  the  colony  ;  and  this,  notwithstanding  that  in  all 
time  heretofore,  the  courts  throughout  the  colony,  hoth  superior 
and  inferior,  have  admitted  such  of  the  said  statutes  as  relate 
to  the  common  law,  to  be  in  force  here,  and  have  adjudged  up- 
on them  as  such,  so  that  there  has  been  no  occasion  of  an  act 
of  Assembly  for  the  formal  introduction  of  those  statutes ;  but, 
as  the  case  now  stands,  the  laws  of  this  colony  are  altogether 
imperfect,  and  rarely  any  one  law  proceeding  can  be  commenc- 
ed or  brought  to  issue  ; — 

And  now  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  premises  into 
consideration,  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  hereby  voted  and 
resolved,  that  the  memorialists  be,  and  they  are  hereby  consti- 
tuted a  committee  to  prepare  a  bill  for  introducing  into  this 
colony,  such  of  the  statutes  of  England  as  are  agreeable  to 
the  constitution,  and  present  the  same  to  this  Assembly  at 
their  next  session. 

Whereas,  several  bills  of  exchange  drawn  by  His  Honor, 
the  Governor,  in  behalf  of  this  colony^  on  Mr.  Agent  Partridge, 
were  protested; — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Gov- 
ernor, draw  new  bills  on  the  agent,  for  the  sums  contained  in 
those  bills,  which  already  have  been,  or  hereafter  may  be  pro- 
tested ;  together  with  the  lawful  damages  and  interest  accruing 
thereon,  and  lodge  them  with  the  general  treasurer. 

It  is  also  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  proprietors  of  said 
protested  bills,  receive  of  the  treasurer  those  new  bills  in  lieu 
of  the  old  ones,  if  they  think  proper ;  but  if  any  of  the  proprie- 
tors of  said  protested  bills,  shall  choose  to  have  currency  for 
them,  they  shall  be  paid  by  the  treasurer  at  the  rate  of  £950 
per  cent,  advance ;  and  for  raising  said  money,  those  new  bills, 
if  refused  by  the  proprietors  of  the  old  ones,  shall  be  disposed 
of  by  the  treasurer,  to  other  persons. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  write  to  the  agent,  directing  him  to  honor  those  new 
bills  which  shall  be  drawn  on  him,  as  aforesaid  ;  and  if  he  has 
not  cash  in  his  hands  belonging  to  the  government,  sufBcient 
to  pay  the  same,  that  he  hire  what  shall  be  wanting,  upon  the 


278  RECORDS   OP   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1749- 

best  terms  he  can,  imtil  he  be  in  cash  of  the  colony's,  for  pay- 
ing the  same. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Peter  Bours,  Stephen  Hopkins 
and  Daniel  Jenckes,  Esqs.,  with  Capt.  Robert  Haszard,  be,  and 
the}',  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  constituted  a  committee 
to  prepare  an  account  (agreeably  to  the  letter  of  the  Duke  of 
Bedford,  one  of  His  Majesty's  principal  secretaries  of  state,  to 
the  Governor  and  Company  of  this  colony ),===  of  the  tenor  and 
amount  of  all  the  bills  of  credit  which  have  been  created  and 
issued  l)y  this  government,  and  are  now  outstanding  ;  distin- 
guishing the  amount  of  them  here ;  and  the  respective  times 
when  such  bills  so  outstanding,  were  issued,  with  the  amount 
of  the  said  bills  in  money  of  Great  Britian,  both  at  the  times 
when  such  were  issued,  and  at  this  time ;  and  also  at  the  time 
fixed  for  calling  in,  sinking,  and  discharging  such  bills,  and 
the  funds  appropriated  for  that  purpose ;  and  that  the  said 
committee  present  the  said  account  to  be  by  them  so  prepared, 
unto  this  Assembly,  at  their  next  session. 

God  save  the  Kin";. 


'"■=  The  DuJce  of  Bedford  io  the  Governor  and  Comimmj  of  Rhode 

Island. 

Whitehall,  July  19,  1749. 

Gentlemen: — Upon  the  30th  of  May  last,  the  House  of  Commons  presented  an 
humble  address  to  the  Kinj^,  desiring  "  that  His  Majesty  would  be  gi-aciously  pleas- 
ed to  <rive  directions  that  there  be  laid  before  that  House,  in  the  next  session  of 
I'arliament,  an  account  of  the  tenor  and  amount  of  all  the  bills  of  credit,  which 
have  been  created  and  issued  in  the  several  British  colonies  and  plantations  in 
America,  as  well  those  under  proprietors  and  charters,  as  under  His  Majesty's  im- 
mediate commission  and  government,  that  shall  be  then  outstanding;  distinguishing 
the  amount  of  the  same,  in  each  colony  or  plantation ;  and  the  respective  times, 
when  such  bills,  so  outstanding,  were  issued,  with  the  amount  of  the  said  bills  in 
money  of  Great  Britain,  both  at  the  times  when  such  bills  were  issued,  and  at  the 
timeof  preparing  the  said  account;  and  also  the  times  fixed  for  the  calling  in, 
sinking  and  discharging  such  bills,  and  the  funds  appropriated  for  that  purpose." 

And  I  am  now,  in  consequence  thereof,  commanded  by  His  RLijesty,  to  signify 
his  pleasure  to  you,  that  you  should  order  all  such  accounts,  so  far  as  they  relate  to 


1750.]  AND    PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  279 

[The  following  Public  Laws,  passed  during  the  year  1749,  are  printed  at 
length  in  the  volume  of  public  laws,  published  in  1767,  unless  repealed  previous 
to  that  time.] 

An  Act  for  the  meeting  and  sitting  of  the  superior  court,  in  Providence 
(January.) 

An  Act  to  prevent  hogs  going  at  large  in  the  compact  parts  of  Newport  and  Provi- 
dence.    (February.) 

An  Act  to  prevent  the  fish  being  stopped  in  their  course  up  Pawcatuck  river. 
(February.) 

An  Act  for  the  relief  of  insolvent  debtors  that  are  or  shall  bo  imprisoned.  Feb- 
ruary.) 

An  Act  appointing  a  committee  to  build  a  light  house  on  Beaver  Tail,  in  James- 
town.    (February.) 

An  Act  enabling  the  clerks  of  the  inferior  courts  in  the  colony  for  the  time  being, 
to  surrogate  and  appoint  deputies  under  them.     (June.) 

An  Act  ascertaining  how  payment  shall  be  made  for  erecting  a  light  house  on  Bea- 
ver Tail.     (June.) 

An  Act  for  regulating  the  light  house.     (August.) 

An  Act  against  adultery,  polygamy  and  unlawfully  marrying  persons ;  and  for  the 
relief  of  such  persons  as  are  injured  by  the  breach  of  marriage  covenants.  (Oc- 
tober.) 

An  Act  to  pi-event  unlawful  gaming.     (October.) 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assenibli/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations^  at  South  Kingstoivn,  the  last 
Tuesday  in  Fehruary^  1749-50. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Ellery,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Whereas,  Jonathan  Randal,  Thomas  Lapham   and   Richard 
Steere,  Esqs.,  were  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  at 


your  government,  to  be  prepared  and  transmitted  forthwith  to  me,  that  I  may  lay 
the  same  before  His  Majesty,  and  receive  his  farther  pleasure  thereupon,  with  re- 
gard to  their  being  laid  before  Parliament. 

I  am,  gentlemen. 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

BEDFORD. 
To  the  Governor  and  Compraiy  of  Rhode  Island, 


280  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750. 

their  session  in  Newport,  the  third  Monday  in  August  last,  ap- 
pointed a  committee  to  run  the  northern  boundary  line  of  this 
colony,  according  to  the  charter,  &c.,  and  the  gentlemen  afore- 
named, having  gone  through  that  work,  made  the  following 
report  of  their  conduct : 

Report  on  the  the  Northern  Boundary  Line. 

"  To  the  Honorable  General  Assembly,  at  South  Kingstown,  In  and  for  the  colony 

of  Rhode  Island,  on  the  last  Tuesday  of  February,  Anno  Domini  1749. 

In  pursuance  of  a  commission  to  us  given,  for  running  the  northern  boundary 
line  of  this  colony,  according  to  charter,  &c.,  the  commission  bearing  date  Septem- 
ber the  25th,  1749,  we  did  seasonably  inform  the  secretai-y  of  this  colony  that  we 
had  appointed  to  meet  at  Man's,  in  Wrentham,  on  the  9th  day  of  October,  follow- 
ing, when  we  would  meet  with  a  committee  of  the  Province,  if  any  should  be  ap- 
pointed, and  proceed  on  the  business  aforementioned  ;  and  we  did  accordingly 
meet  on  the  said  9th  day  of  October,  at  said  Man's,  together  with  Henry  Harris, 
Esq.,  surveyor,  and  Israel  Wilkinson  and  Christopher  Waterman,  chainmen,  ready 
to  proceed  on  the  business ;  but  no  committee  from  the  Province  appearing,  we 
postponed  the  business  intended,  till  the  30th  of  said  October;  when  we  met  again, 
and  no  person  appearing  on  the  part  of  the  Province,  we  did  then  effect  the  busi- 
ness we  met  on  ;  concerning  which,  we  do  report  as  foUoweth : 

That  we  not  being  able  to  find  any  stake,  or  other  monument,  which  we  could 
imagine  to  be  set  up  by  Woodward  and  Saffery,  but  knowing  that  the  place 
thereof  was  described  in  the  agreement  mentioned  in  our  commission,  by  certain 
invariable  marks,  we  did  proceed  as  foUoweth,  viz. : 

We  found  a  place  where  Charles  river  formed  a  large  crescent  southerly ;  which 
place  is  known  to  many,  by  the  name  of  Poppotatick  Pond,  which  we  took  to  be 
the  southernmost  part  of  said  river ;  from  the  southernmost  part  whereof,  we  mea- 
sured three  English  miles  south,  which  three  English  miles  did  terminate  upon  a 
plain,  in  a  township  called  Wrentham,  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  north-easterly 
from  the  dwelling  house  of  Thomas  Man's ;  as  also  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  south- 
easterly from  the  house  of  Kobert  Blake,  where  we  marked  a  pine  tree,  and  erect- 
ed a  monument  of  stones,  and  found  the  same  to  be  in  latitude  forty-two  degrees 
eight  minutes  north  ;  which  we  made  for  the  north-east  bound  of  this  colony. 

And  we  do  further  report,  that  from  said  tree,  we  did  proceed  to  run  the  north- 
ern boundary  line  of  this  colony  on  a  west  course,  with  a  variation  of  eight  degrees 
and  a  lialf,  as  the  west  variation  from  the  magnetic  needle  ;  in  the  course  of  which 
running,  we  did  mark  many  trees ;  said  line  passing  over  the  southernmost  part  of 
a  certain  pond,  called  Manchaug  Pond,  ahd  did  terminate  about  thirty  rods  east- 
ward of  a  small  pond,  calleil  Grassy  Pond,  at  a  black  oak  tree,  which  we  marked ; 
and  did  erect  a  monument  of  stones  about  it ;  which  tree,  we  marked  for  the  north- 
western bounds  of  this  colony,  it  being  about  twenty-two  miles  from  said  pine  tree 
to  said  black  oak.  Reported  and  humbly  submitted  by 

.lONATHAN  RANDALL, 


Providence,  January  22d,  1749-50." 


RICHARD  STEERE, 
THOMAS  LAPHAM. 


1750.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  281 

And  now,  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  said  report  into 
consideration ; — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  hereby  voted  and  resolved, 
that  the  said  report  be  accepted. 

Whereas,  this  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  Newport,  on  the 
third  Monday  of  August  last,  appointed  commissioners  to  run 
the  northern  boundary  line  of  this  colony,  with  directions,  that 
if  the  commissioners  should  not  be  appointed  on  the  part  of 
the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  to  join  with  them 
therein,  they  should  proceed  to  run  said  line  ex  parte.  As  no 
commissioners  were  appointed  by  the  Province  in  season,  the 
gentlemen  appointed  by  the  colony,  run  the  said  line  ex  parte, 
and  made  report  thereof  to  this  Assembly,  which  hath  been 
accepted.  But  nevertheless,  upon  advice  from  the  Province, 
that  they  have  appointed  commissioners  since  our  committee 
run  the  line,  as  aforesaid  ; — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  hereby  voted 
and  resolved,  that  Jonathan  Randall,  Richard  Steere  and  Thos. 
Lapham,  Esqs.,  and  Capt.  Joseph  Harrison,  or  the  major  part 
of  them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  commissioners,  and 
fully  empowered  to  join  with  the  commissioners  of  the  Prov- 
ince of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  at  Pelatiah  Man's  in  Wren- 
tham,  the  second  Tuesday  of  April  next,  to  run  or  perambulate 
the  northern  boundary  line  of  this  colony,  according  to  charter, 
from  the  stake  set  up  by  Nathaniel  Woodward  and  Solomon 
Saffery,  in  the  year  1642,  pursuant  to  agreement  made  be- 
tween the  commissioner  of  this  colony,  and  one  of,  and  for  the 
Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  January  the  19th,  in  the 
year  1710-11,  with  full  power  to  appoint  a  surveyor  or  sur- 
veyors, and  chainmen.  ' 

And  it  is  also  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  gentlemen  on  the 
part  of  the  colony,  be  commissioned  for  the  end  and  purpose 
aforesaid,  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor. 

Whereas,  the  town  council  of  Middletown,  in  this  colony, 
have  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  on  consideration  of 
the  necessity  of  a  way  for  His  Majesty's  subjects  to  pass  and 
ro-pass  from  that  part  of  Middletowu,  called  Sachneast  Beach, 

VOL.  V.         36 


282  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1750. 

across  to  Easton's  Beach,  the  General  Assembl3%  at  their  ses- 
sion in  Newport,  the  third  Monday  of  August  last,  did  order 
and  direct  that  there  should  be  a  drift-way  of  a  convenient 
width  laid  out  by  the  said  town  of  Middletown,  from  the  dou- 
l)le  gate  on  the  west  side,  to  another  gate  on  the  east  side  of 
Easton's  Neck,  being  the  old  accustomed  way,  &c. ;  since 
which,  it  hath  been  discovered  that  the  land  from  the  said  dou- 
ble gate,  westerly,  down  to  the  creek,  on  Easton's  Beach,  be- 
longeth  to  private  persons,  as  likewise  does  the  land  to  the 
eastward  of  the  other  gate,  aforementioned,  for  some  small 
distance,  so  that  it  will  be  to  no  purpose  to  lay  out  a  drift-way 
from  one  of  the  said  gates  to  the  other,  unless  the  same  be  ex- 
tended farther  each  way  : 

Whereupon,  they  prayed  this  Assembly  to  empower  them 
to  lay  out  a  drift-way  from  the  creek,  on  Easton's  Beach,  to 
the  double  gate,  aforesaid  ;  and  from  thence  easterly  down  to, 
and  along  Sachneast  Beach,  until  it  comes  to  that  part 
v\^  said  Beach,  wdiich  was  reserved  by  the  town  of  Middletown, 
for  all  persons  whomsoever  to  pass  and  re-pass  over,  as  often 
as  occasion  should  require,  forever  ;  and  this  Assembly  taking 
the  premises  into  consideration,  do  grant  the  said  petition ; — 

And  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  town  council  of 
Middletown,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  empowered  to  lay  out  a 
drift-way  from  the  creek  on  Easton's  Beach,  to  the  double  gate, 
aforesaid  ;  and  from  thence,  to  the  other  gate,  aforesaid ;  and 
from  thence,  easterly,  down  to,  and  along  said  Sachneast  Beach, 
until  it  comes  to  that  part  of  said  Sachneast  Beach,  reserved 
by  the  town  of  Middletown  for  all  persons,  whomsoever,  to 
pass  and  re-})ass  over  as  often  as  occasion  shall  require, 
forever. 

Whereas,  this  Assembly,  at  their  session,  in  South  Kings- 
town, on  the  last  Wednesday  of  October  last,  appointed  a  com- 
mittee to  prepare  an  account  (agreeably  to  the  letter  of  the 
Duke  of  Bedford,  one  of  His  Majesty's  principal  secretaries 
of  state  to  the  Governor  and  Company  of  this  colony,)  of  the 
tenor  and  amount  of  all  the  bills  of  credit  Avhich  have  been 
created  and  i^;sued  ))y  this  governuient.  and  are  now  oulstand- 


1750.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  283 


ing,  &c.,  and  the  major  part  of  the  committee  having  assumed 
that  province,  and  perpetrated  the  business,  made  report  to  this 
Assembly,  as  followeth  : 

"  The  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  in  the  year  1728,  emitted  £40,000,  in  bills  of  pub- 
lic credit,  equal  then  to  £12,800  sterling,  to  be  let  on  loans  on  land  security  of 
double  the  value,  and  at  five  per  cent,  per  annum  interest,  for  thirteen  years  ;  the 
interest  was  appropriated  to  the  repairing  and  furnishing  Fort  George  ;  the  princi- 
pal to  be  sunk  by  ten  equal  annual  payments;  two  of  which  are  yet  outstanding, 
ec|ual  to  £727  5s.  6d.  sterling;  and  the  sinking  thereof,  will  be  completed  in  the 
year  1751. 

And  in  the  year  1731,  the  colony  emitted  £60,000,  in  bills  of  public  credit,  equal 
then  to  £16,841  17i'.  id.  sterling,  to  be  let  out  on  loan  on  land  security,  of  double 
the  value,  at  five  per  cent,  per  annum  interest,  for  ten  years  ;  the  interest  was  ap- 
propriated to  encourage  raising  hemp,  flax  and  the  catching  of  fish  and  making  oil, 
by  proper  bounties  given  by  the  emitting  act ;  the  principal  to  be  sunk  by  ten 
equal  payments;  two  of  which  are  yet  outstanding,  equal  to  £l,090  18s.  Sd.  ster- 
ling; and  the  sinking  of  it  will  be  finished  in  the  year  1751. 

And  in  the  year  1733,  the  colony  emitted  £100,000,  in  bills  of  public  credit, 
equal  to  £25,396  16s.  sterling,  to  be  let  out  on  loan,  on  land  security,  of  double  the 
value,  and  at  five  per  cent,  per  annum  interest,  for  ten  years ;  the  interest  was  to 
be  appropriated  to  purchasing  of  cannon  for  Fort  George,  and  erecting  a  pier  at 
Block  Island ;  the  principal  to  be  sunk  by  ten  equal  annual  payments ;  four  of 
which  are  yet  outstanding,  equal  to  £3,627  5s.  6c/.  sterling  ;  and  the  sinking  of  this 
sum  will  be  completed  in  the  year  1753. 

Aofain,  in  the  year  1733,  the  colony  emitted  £100,000,  in  bills  of  public  credit, 
equal  then  to  £19,753  Is.  4c?.  sterling,  to  be  let  on  loan,  on  land  security,  of  double 
the  value,  at  five  per  cent,  per  annum  interest,  for  ten  years  ;  the  interest  was  ap- 
propriated to  the  building  of  a  state  house,  for  the  colony,  and  a  light  house,  for  the 
benefit  of  navigation  ;  the  principal  to  be  sunk  by  ten  equal  annual  payments  ;  nine 
of  which  are  yet  outstanding,  equal  now  to  £8,181  16s.  4d.  sterling;  and  the  sink- 
ing of  this  sum  will  be  completed  in  the  year  1758. 

Again,  in  the  year  1740,  the  colony  emitted  £20,000,  in  bills  of  a  new  tenor, 
equal  to  £80,000  of  their  former  bills,  and  to  15,802  8s.  sterling,  to  be  let  out  on 
loan,  on  land  security,  of  double  the  value,  on  interest,  for  ten  years,  at  four  per 
cent  per  annum  ;  the  interest  appropriated  to  building  a  guard  sloop  for  the  colo- 
ny, and  paying  the  colony's  expenses  in  the  expedition  to  the  West  Indies  ;  the 
principal  to  be  sunk  by  ten  equal  annual  payments,  the  whole  of  which  is  now 
outstanding;  and  is  equal  to  £7,272  14s.  6d.  sterling  ;  the  sinking  of  this  sum  will 
be  completed  in  the  year  1760. 

And  lastly,  in  the  year  1743,  the  colony  emitted  £40,000,  of  the  new  tenor  bills, 
equal  to  £160,000,  in  bills  of  the  old  tenor ;  and  to  £28,444  5s.  4d.  sterling,  to  be 
let  out  on  loan,  on  land  security,  of  double  the  value,  to  pay  interest  ten  years,  at 
four  per  cent,  per  annum  ;  which  was  appropriated  to  put  the  colony  in  a  posture 
of  defence,  during  the  war ;  the  principal  to  be  pa*id  in  ten  equal  annual  payments  ; 
and  the  whole  of  this  sum  is  now  outstanding,  and  is  now  ec[ual  to  £14,545  9s.  Id. 
sterling;  and  the  smking  of  it  will  be  completed  in  the  year  1763. 

At  divers  times,  from  the  year  1  710,  to  the  year  174  7,  the  colony  has  emitted  bills 


284  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750. 

of  credit  to  the  amount  of  £312,300,  old  tenor ;  and  there  bath  been  called  in  and 
burnt,  at  several  times  from  the  year  1728  to  1748,  £  176,904  Cs.  lOd. ;  and  by  the 
last  settlement  ot  the  general  treasurer's  account,  it  appears  that  there  was  then  in 
the  public  treasury,  £24,891  10.-;.  10(/.,  from  all  which,  it  appears  that  there  is  now 
outstanding  of  the  bills  issued  to  supply  the  treasury,  £110,444  2s.  od. ;  the  whole 
of  which  outstanding  sum,  was  issued  in  the  years  1746  and  1747,  and  is  equal 
to  £10,040  7.S.  5^/.  sterling. 

And  the  Parliament  having  granted  to  this  colony,  for  their  services  in  the  Cape 
Breton  expedition,  £6,332  12s.  lOd.  sterling,  and  the  colony  having  paid,  by  order 
of  the  crown,  the  wages  of  the  officers  and  soldiers  raised  for  the  Canada  expedition, 
£3,000  sterling,  the  said  two  sums  being  £9,332  12s.  10(7.  sterling,  are  a  fund  for  sink- 
ing so  much  of  the  colony's  outstanding  bills ;  and  the  remainder  being  £708  14s, 
7(1,  sterling,  is  to  be  called  in  and  sunk,  by  a  tax  on  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony. 

The  reason  of  the  great  depreciation  observable  in  the  bills  issued  by  this  colony, 
is,  because  the  inhabitants  of  New  England  constantly  consume  a  much  greater 
quantity  of  British  manufactures  than  their  exports  are  able  to  pay  for  ;  which 
makes  such  a  continual  demand  for  gold,  silver  and  bills  of  exchange,  to  make  re- 
mittances with,  that  the  merchants,  to  procure  them,  are  always  bidding  one  upon 
another,  and  thereby  daily  sink  the  value  of  paper  bills,  with  which  they  purchase 
them. 

And  it  IS  plain,  that  where  the  balance  of  trade  is  against  any  country,  that  such 
part  of  their  medium  of  exchange  as  hath  universal  currency,  will  leave  them, ;  and 
such  part  of  their  medium  as  is  confined  to  that  country,  will  sink  in  its  value,  in 
proportion  as  the  balance  against  them  is  to  their  trade  ;  for  what  hath  been  the 
case  with  Rhode  Island  bills,  hath  also  been  the  common  fate  of  all  the  paper  bills 
issued  by  the  other  colonies  of  New  England  ;  they  having  been  all  emitted  at  near 
equal  value,  and  have  always  passed  at  par  one  with  another,  and  consequently 
have  equally  sunk  in  their  value. 

And  this  will  always  be  the  case  with  infant  countries,  that  do  not  raise  so 
much  as  they  consume  ;  either  to  have  no  money,  or  if  they  have,  it  must  be  worse 
than  that  of  their  richer  neighbors,  to  compel  it  to  stay  with  them." 

Which  report,  behig  duly  considered,  this  Assembly  do  vote 
and  resolve,  and  it  is  hereby  voted  and  resolved,  thart  His 
Honor,  the  Governor,  transmit  the  substance  thereof,  under  his 
hand,  to  Mr.  Agent  Partridge,  to  be  by  him  delivered  to  His 
Grace,  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  one  of  His  Majesty's  principal  sec- 
retaries of  state,  in  answer  to  His  Grace's  letter  to  this  colony, 
abitut  the  bills  of  public  credit  emitted  here,  &c. ;  and  also 
that  a  duplicate  thereof^  be  sent  to  the  said  agent,  for  his  own 
use. 

And  at  the  same  time,  the  committee  aforesaid,  presented 
with  their  report,  what  follows : 


1750.] 


AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS. 


285 


The  colony  for  all  the  money  emitted  for  supply  of  tlie  treasury, 


May. 

To  cash  emitted 

October. 

11     11 

11 

November. 

a      11 

(1 

June. 

((       u 

(1 

November. 

It      11 

(1 

June. 

11      11 

11 

June. 

11      ti 

11 

February. 

11      11 

11 

July. 

11      11 

a 

June. 

11      11 

11 

May. 

11      11 

li 

September. 

11      11 

11 

May. 

11      11 

" 

October. 

(.      11 

11 

March. 

11      (1 

It 

May. 

11      11 

ti 

September. 

11      11 

tt 

June. 

11      11 

11 

February. 

U         11 

11 

February. 

11      11 

It 

Dr. 

£5,000 

1,000 

1,000 

6,000 

300 

46,000 

2,000 

1,000 

4,000 

30,000 

10,000 

10,000 

8,000 

8,000 

10,000 

15,000 

20,000 

45,000 

60,000 

30,000 


£312,300 


For  -what  has  been  burnt,     Cr. 
£         s.     d. 
June.     By  cash  burnt  at   several   times   before   this  date,  as 

appears  by  a  settlement  of  the  general  treasurer,  12,550  00  00 

By  cash  burnt  this  year    9,019  16  10 

"  "  3,604  07  09 

"  "  6,430  10  07i 

"  1,3761306 

"  "  2,381  06  Oli 

"  " 3,946  02  06 

"  "  - 1,015  13  01 

"  "  3,525  09  OOi 

"  "  4,042  02  05 

"  "  26,269  15  10 

"  "  14,077  09  02 

"  "  88,725  00  00 

£176,964  06  IQh 
Balance  due  from  the  colony 135,335  13  01^ 

£312,300  00  00 

"  "We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  a  committee,  to  inquire  int  o  the  state 
of  the  bills  of  public  credit,  that  have  at  any  time  been  emitted  by  the  colony  of 
Rhode  Island,  do  report : 


286  RECORDS    OP   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750. 

That  the  colony  hath  issued  for  the  supply  of  the  general  treasury,  at  the  times 
noted  on  the  debt  side  of  the  above  account,  £312,300  ;  and  that  there  hath  been 
burnt  at  the  times  noted  ou  the  credit  side  of  this  account,  £176,964  65._10(/. ;  and 
that  there  is  now  circulating  of  bills  of  credit  emitted  by  the  colony,  for  a  supply  of 
the  treasury,  £135,335  13s.  Id.  PETER  BOURS, 

STEPHEN  HOPKINS, 

Newport,  February  27,  1749.  DANIEL  JENCKES." 

And  this  Assembly  having  taken  the  said  report  into  con- 
sideration, do  vote  and  resolve,  that  the  same  he,  and  it  is 
hereb}^  accepted. 

Governor    Greene  to   the   DiiJce   of  Bedford    and    to    Richard 

Partridge. 

Newport,  Rhode  Island,  March  13,  1849. 
Sir: — Conformably  to  an   act   of  the   General  Assembly,  I  send  you  enclosed  a 
letter  to  His   Grace,  the  Duke   of  Bedford,  with  an  account  of  the  bills  of  public 
credit,  issued  by  this  colony,  as  was  demanded  by  His  Majesty. 

You  have  also  a  copy  of  the  same,  for  your  own  use.  As  you  are  intimately  ac- 
quainted with  the  situation  of  affairs  among  us,  I  have  no  occasion  to  add  any  in- 
structions. The  zeal  wherewith  you  have  always  applied  yourself  to  what  the 
colony  have  committed  to  your  charge,  takes  away  even  the  color  of  a  doubt  what 
your  behaviour  will  be  on  the  present  occasion. 

I  am,  sir,  your  very  humble  servant, 

\Y.  GREENE. 
To  Richard  Partridge,  Esq.,  agent  for  Rhode  Island,  London. 

Governor  Greene  io  the  DuJce  of  Bedford. 

Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  March  13th,  1749. 

May  it  please  Your  Grace  : — I  had  the  honor  of  your  letter  of  the  19th  of  July, 
signifying  it  was  His  Majesty's  pleasure,  to  have  "  an  account  of  the  tenor  and 
amount  of  all  the  bills  of  credit  which  have  been  created  and  issued  by  this  colony, 
and  arc  now  outstanding  ;  distinguishing  the  same,  and  the  respective  times,  when 
such  bills  so  outstanding,  were  issued,  with  the  amount  of  said  bills  in  money  of 
Great  Britain,  both  at  the  times  when  such  bills  were  issued,  and  at  the  time  of 
preparing  the  said  account;  and  also  the  times  for  calling  in,  sinking  and  discharg- 
ing such  bills,  and  the  funds  appropriated  for  that  purpose." 

Your  Grace's  letter  came  to  hand  in  the  recess  of  the  General  Assembly  ;  but, 
at  their  next  meeting,  in  October,  I  laid  it  before  them. 

As  this  colony  hath  always  heretofore  exemplified  their  loyalty  by  a  cheerful 
obedience  to  His  Majesty's  commands,  so  on  this  occasion,  they  no  sooner  received 
the  royal  directions,  than  the}'  determined  to  pursue  them. 

For  that  purpose,  a  committee  was  appointed,  with  orders  to  inquire  into  the 
premises,  and  make  report  at  the  next  session,  which  they  accordingly  did  a  few 
days  ago.     The  Assembly  having  carefully  examined  the  doings  of  their  committee 


1750.]  AND   PKOVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  287 

found  sucli  an  account  as  His  Majesty  commanded  ;  wherefore,  they  accepted  the 
same,  and  desired  me  to  transmit  Your  Grace  a  copy  of  it. 

I  send  it,  accordingly ;  and  in  behalf  of  this  colony,  subscribe  myself,  may  it 
please  Your  Grace, 

Your  Grace's  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

W.  GREENE. 
To  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  one  of  His  Majesty's  principal  secretaries  of  state. 

Whereas,  this  General  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  October 
last,  appointed  Mr.  Elisha  Brown,  Joseph  Nichols,  Esq.  and  Mr. 
Samuel  Chace,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  a  committee,  to  au- 
dit the  accounts  of  the  managers  or  directors  of  the  Providence 
Lottery,  in  respect  to  the  building  Weybosset  Bridge,  and 
paying  the  benefit  tickets ;  and  also  to  receive  such  benefit 
tickets  as  have  been  paid,  &c.,  in  consequence  of  which  ap- 
pointment, the  committee  made  the  following  report  unto  this 
Assembly : 

Report  of  the  Loiterf/  Committee. 

"  We,  the  subscribers,  being  chosen  a  committee,  by  the  Honorable  General  As- 
sembly, in  October  last,  to  examine  the  directors'  accounts,  concerning  the  Provi- 
dence Lottery,  do  find  them  thus  : 

"  The  several  gentlemen  directors,     Dr. 
To  cash  obtained  by  them  in  the  lottery  granted  by  the  Assembly £12,000 

Contra.  Cr. 

By  as  many  benefit  tickets  paid  to  the  several  adventurers,  as  amounts  to 

the  sum  of £11,650 

x\nd  for^which,  we  have  given  receipts  to  the  several  directors. 

The  balance  yet  due  to  the  other  adventurers,  not  paid  by  said  directors, 

amounts  to  the  sum  of 350 

£12,000 
Errors  excepted.     Per  ELISHA  BROWN, 

SAMUEL  CHACE, 
JOSEPH  NICHOLS, 

Providence,  February  1G,'_1849.  Committee. 

The  several  gentlemen  directors,     Dr. 
£  d.   s. 
To  cash  lodgud  in   their  hands,  by  means  of  the   lottery,  for  building 

Wovbo'^set  Bridge •  ■ £3,00u  00  0 


288  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750. 

Contra.  Cr. 
By  the  whole  of  their  accounts,  for  work  done  on  said  bridge,  as  now- 
complete,  examined,  amounting  to  the  sum  of . .  1,G10  07  4 

The  balance  yet  in  their  hands,  due  to  the  bridge  is 1,389  12  8 


£3,000  00  0 
Errors  excepted.    Per  ELISHA  BROWN, 

SAMUEL  CHACE, 
JOSEPH  NICHOLS, 

Providence,  February  26,  1 749.  Committee. 

And  now  this  Assembly,  haying  taken  said  report  into  con- 
sideration, do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved, 
that  the  said  report  be,  and  it  is  hereby  accepted. 

And  it  is  also  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  com- 
mittee be,  and  they  are  hereby  directed  and  empowered  to 
burn  the  benefit  tickets  by  them  received  of  the  afore- 
said managers  or  directors  of  the  Providence  Lottery,  in  re- 
spect to  the  building  Weybosset  bridge ;  and  that  thereupon, 
they  be  discharged  from  the  receipt  they  gave  the  said  manag- 
ers or  directors,  for  the  said  tickets. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  South 
Kingstown,  on  the  last  Monday  of  February,  1747,  chose  and 
appointed  George  Wanton,  Esq.,  Messrs.  James  Sheffield  and 
Thomas  Cranston,  a  committee,  to  inspect  into  the  double 
mortgages  in  the  grand  committee's  of&ce ;  and  also,  to  inspect 
into  the  bonds  in  said  office. 

In  consequence  of  which  appointment,  the  said  George  Wan- 
ton, James  Sheffield  and  Thomas  Cranston,  having  undertaken 
the  business,  made  the  following  report  of  their  progress 
therein : 

[Here  follows  a  memorandum  of  mortgages  and  bonds.] 

Whereas,  this  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  October  last, 
appointed  a  committee,  to  prepare  a  bill  for  introducing  into 
tliis  colony,  such  of  the  statutes  of  England,  as  are  agreeable 
to  the  constitution,  and  make  rcpt>rt  of  their  doings,  tlie  grent- 
est  part  of  whom,  presented  what  followotli : 


1750.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  289 

"  We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  to  report  what  statutes  of  Great  Britain 
are,  and  ought  to  be  in  force  in  this  colony,  do  report  as  foUoweth  :  that  the  fol- 
lowing statutes,  viz. : 

The  statute  of  Merton,  concerning  dower. 

The  statute  of  Westminster  the  first,  as  far  as  it  concerns  bail. 

The  statute  of  Glocester. 

The  statute  of  Westminster  the  second,  de  donis  conditionalibus. 

The  statutes  of  the  1st  Henry  V.,  of  additions. 

The  statues  of  partition,  in  general.  , 

The  statutes  of  the  32  Henry  VIII.,  concerning  leases,  saving  and  excepting  the 
last  paragraph  of  the  said  statute. 

The  statutes  of  21  James  I.,  chapter  16th,  for  limiting  real  actions  ;  and  that  of  .32 
Henry  VIII.,  chapter  2d. 

The  statutes  of  James  and  Elizabeth,  and  all  statutes  that  concern  bastardy,  as 
applicable  to  the  constitution  of  this  colony. 

All  statutes  that  are  against  criminal  offenders,  so  far  as  they  are  descriptive  ot 
the  crime ;  and  where  the  law  of  this  colony  hath  not  described  and  enjoined  the 
punishment,  then  that  part  of  the  statute  that  relates  to  the  punishment,  also  ;  al- 
ways saving  and  exceping  such  statutes,  as  from  the  nature  of  the  offences  men- 
tioned in  them,  are  confined  to  Great  Britain,  only. 

The  statute  of  Henry  HI.,  commonly  called  the  statute  of  uses. 

The  statute  of  29  Charles  11.,  commonly  called  the  statute  of  frauds  and 
perjuries. 

The  statutes  of  22  and  23  Charles  II.,  chapter  10th,  for  distributing  the  estates  of 
intestates. 

The  statute  of  3  and  4  William  and  Mary,  chapter  14th. 

The  statute  of  4  and  5  Anne,  chapter  16th,  relating  to  joint  tenants,  and  tenants 
in  common. 

That  part  of  the  statute   of Anne,  that  subjects  lessees  that  hold  over  their 

term  against  the  will  of  the  lessor,  to  the  payment   of  double  rent,  during  the  lime 
they  hold  over. 

All  statutes  relating  to  the  poor,  and  relating  to  masters  and  their  apprentices ; 
so  far  as  they  are  applicable  in  this  colony,  and  where  we  have  no  law  of  the 
colony. 

All  which  statutes,  we  are  humbly  of  opinion  have  heretofore  been,  and  still 
ought  to  be  in  force  in  this  colony.  D.  UPDIKE, 

J.  HONEYMAN,  JR., 
J.  ALITN." 

And  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  said  report  into  con- 
sideration, do  vote  and  resolve,  that  all  and  every  of  the  stat- 
utes, aforesaid,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  introduced  into  this 
colony,  and  shall  be  in  full  force  therein,  until  the  General  As- 
sembly shall  order  otherwise. 

His  Honor,  the  Governor,  is  hereby  requested  to  write  to  the 
government  of  the  Massachusetts,  and  inform  them  that  this 
Assembly  have  appointed   a  committee  to   meet  and  join  the 

VOL.  v-  37 


290  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750. 

gentlemen  appointed  by  the  Province,  for  running  the  north- 
ern boundary  line  ol  the  colony.  Ilis  Honor  is  also  desired  to 
request  of  the  Province,  that  all  taxes  assessed,  or  that  shall  be 
assessed  on  persons  inhabiting  any  lands  to  the  southward  of 
the  line  lately  run  by  our  commissioners,  be  not  collected  or 
levied,  till  the  dividing  line  be  run  and  mutually  settled  ;  His 
Majesty  having  given  such-  directions,  since  the  controversy 
arose  between  the  two  governments,  respecting  their  boun- 
daries. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Messrs.  Joseph  Whipple,  Jr., 
Thomas  Cranston  and.  John  Tillinghast,  or  the  major  part  of 
them,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  constituted  a  committee,  to  re- 
ceive of  the  gentlemen  (who  were  formerly  appointed  to  pay 
off  the  soldiers  raised  for  the  expedition  intended  against  Can- 
ada,) their  accounts  with  the  colony,  and  to  adjust  the  same, 
and  receive  the  balance,  and  make  report  to  this  Assembly  at 
their  next  session,  of  their  conduct  in  the  affair. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  grand  committee  and  gen- 
eral treasurer,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  directed  not  to  receive 
any  bills  of  credit  of  the  Province  of  New  Hampshire,  in  dis- 
charge of  any  of  the  colony's  mortgages  and  bonds. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  Newport, 
the  tliird  Monday  of  August  last,  appointed  Peter  Bours,  Si- 
mon Pease  and  George  Wanton,  Esqs.,  Messrs.  Thomas  Cran- 
ston and  James  Sheffield,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  a  commit- 
tee to  inspect  (among  other  things)  into  the  circumstances  of 
all  the  mortgages  and  bonds  in  the  grand  committee's  office 
and  notify  the  inhabitants  of  the  colony,  by  printed  advertise- 
ments, that  all  persons  who  have  not  given  in  tenth  bonds  for 
the  money  they  took  up  of  the  banks  emitted  in  the  years 
1715,  1728  and  1731,  if  they  did  not  forthwith  pay  the  money 
already  due,  and  give  in  bonds  for  the  remainder,  they  might 
depend  upon  their  mortgages  being  put  in  suit ;  the  committee 
were  also  to  insert  in  the  advertisements,  a  list  of  all  the  per- 
sons who  had  neglected  to  give  bond,  as  aforesaid.  The  adver- 
tisements were  ordered  to  be  put  up  at  the  places  where  the 
town  meetings  are  held,  in  the  several  towns,  that  all  persons 


1750.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  291 

who  had  any  reasons  to  offer,  why  they  did  not  give  bond,  as 
aforesaid,  might  justify  themselves  to  the  said  committee,  and 
their  mortgages  in  the  meantime  should  be  laid  aside,  and  not 
put  in  suit. 

And  whereas,  those  gentlemen  have  not  perfected  the  busi- 
ness to  which  they  were  appointed  ; — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved  by  this  Assembly,  that 
the  said  committee  be,  and  they  are  hereby  further  continued 
for  the  ends  and  purposes  aforesaid  ;  that  they  take  notice  of 
all  the  banks  emitted  by  the  colony,  and  insert  in  the  advertise- 
ments, that  in  case  the  persons  who  have  not  given  tenth  bonds 
in  any  of  the  banks,  do  not  pay  what  money  is  due,  and  give 
bonds  for  the  remainder,  within  six  months  after  the  3d  day  of 
March,  1749,  their  mortgages  shall  forthwith  be  put  in  suit ; 
and  that  the  said  committee  send  a  copy  of  the  whole  list  of 
the  mortgages  (on  which  no  bonds  are  given,)  to  each  of  the 
town  clerks  in  the  colony ;  and  insert  in  the  advertisements, 
only  the  names  of  the  persons  deficient,  in  each  respective 
town,  and  send  the  same  to  the  respective  town  clerks,  to  be 
by  them  set  up  in  manner  as  aforesaid. 

Whereas,  sundry  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  represented  unto 
this  Assembly,  that  the  great  bridge  at  Pawtuxet  Falls,  in  the 
county  of  Providence,  is  very  much  decayed,  the  long  string 
pieces  and  caps  being  so  rotten,  that  it  will  not  be  safe  to  pass 
over  it,  in  a  little  time ;  and  as  the  said  bridge  stands  on  the 
main  country  road,  much  used  by  the  inhabitants,  as  well  as 
other  travellers,  and  the  post,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that 
something  should  be  done,  concerning  the  same ;  whereupon, 
they  prayed  a  public  lottery  might  be  set  up,  in  order  to  raise 
a  sum  of  money  sufficient  to  build  a  new  bridge,  with  stone 
abutments  at  each  end,  and  a  stone  cage  in  the  middle  of  the 
river,  which  will  be  durable,  and  last  a  long  while,  with  but 
little  charge  to  maintain  it  afterwards  ; — 

And  this  Assembly,  considering  the  absolute  necessity  of 
keeping  up  a  good  bridge  at  Pawtuxet  Falls,  do  vote  and  re- 
solve, and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that   the    said  petition  be, 


202  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750- 

and  it  is  herel)y  granted ;  and  to  that  end,  a  public  lottery 
shall  be  set  up,  according  to  the  following  scheme  : 

[Here  follo\YS  the  schedule  of" the  lottery.] 

An  Act  for  the  regulation   of  the  money  raised  by  lottery  to 

build  Weybosset  bridge. 

Whereas,  there  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the  directors  of  said 
lottery,  £1,389  125.  Scl,  over  and  above  what  hath  been  ex- 
pended in  building  said  bridge,  which  at  present  yields  no  ad- 
vantage to  the  colony,  or  to  said  bridge ;  and  as  said  sum  is 
part  of  the  £3,000  originally  appropriated  for  the  use  of  said 
bridge  ; — 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  it  is  hereby  en- 
acted, that  the  said  directors  pay  into  the  hands  of  Mr.  Joseph 
Slicldon,  who  is  hereby  appointed  to  receive  the  said  sum,  and 
give  the  said  directors  receipts  for  it ;  and  that  he  put  it  out  to 
interest,  at  six  per  cent,  per  annum,  and  keep  the  same,  and 
the  interest  thereof,  so  at  interest,  for  the  future. 

And  it  is  further  enacted,  that  the  said  Joseph  Sheldon  de- 
li \er  out  of  said  money  to  Mr.  Daniel  Smith,  who  is  hereby 
appointed  to  have  the  care  and  oversight  of  said  ^^'eybosset 
bridge,  and  repair  and  amend  the  same,  as  occasion  shall  re- 
<(uire,  such  sums  of  money  as  may  be  necessary  for  that  pur- 
pose, and  take  the  said  Smith's  receipts  for  the  same. 

Whereas,  this  General  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  War- 
wick, on  the  third  Monday  of  August,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord 
1735,  did.  upon  the  petition  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of 
Westerly,  pass  an  act  for  turning  the  course  of  Pawcatuck 
river  into  a  large  pond,  in  said  Westerly,  thereby  to  keep  open 
the  breaeli,  and  form  a  harbor,  &c.,  three  quarters  of  the  charg- 
es thereof  to  be  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  on  condition 
the  said  town  of  Westerly,  or  any  person  in  their  belialf,  would 
lirst  procure  and  give  suflicient  bond  to  pay  and  discharge  the 
other  fourth  part  of  the  charge;  and  also  to  make  and  main- 
tain such  and  so  many  bridges  as  there  should  ever  be  occa- 


1750.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  293 

sion  to  make  across  said  river,  between  the  place  where  it 
should  be  taken  from  its  usual  channel,  and  the  place  where  it 
Avould  fall  into  said  pond ;  for  the  performing  whereof,  Messrs. 
Joseph  Stanton,  Oliver  Babcock,  Samuel  Perry  and  Samuel 
Clarke,  were  appointed  a  committee,  &c. ;  and  as  the  town  of 
Westerly,  or  any  other  person  in  their  behalf,  have  not  from 
that  time  till  this  present  session,  given  bond  for  the  said 
town's  performing  the  conditions  aforesaid, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  hereby  voted 
and  resolved,  that  the  committee  aforesaid,  do  nothing  in  the 
affoir  before  the  next  session  of  this  Assembly ;  and  the  gen- 
eral treasurer  is  hereby  directed  and  ordered  to  pay  no  money 
out  of  the  general  treasury  for  the  purposes  aforesaid,  before 
that  time. 

Whereas,  the  Honorable  Spencer  Phips,  Esq.,  Lieutenant 
Governor  of  the  Massachusetts,  wrote  a  letter  to  our  Gov- 
ernor, requesting  payment  for  transporting  prisoners  belonging 
to  this  colony,  from  Canada  f — 


!i:  ^fom  Lieut.  Gov.  PJdps,  of  3iassacJiuseUs,  to  Gov.  Greene,  of 

Rhode  Island. 

Boston,  November  9th,  1749. 

Sir : — I  am  informed  that  His  Excellency,  Governor  Shirley,  had  settled  an 
agreement  with  the  Governor  of  Canada,  (so  far  an  related  to  this  government,) 
that  the  charge  of  transporting  English  prisoners  should  be  defrayed  by  the  Eng- 
lish governments,  and  the  charge  of  transporting  the  French  prisoners  by  their 
government ;  and  that  upon  His  Excellency's  informing  the  governors  of  the  neigh- 
boring colonies,  the  most  of  them  had  signified  their  approbation  of  this  method. 

I  am  likewise  informed,  that  in  the  year  1746,  there  were  brought  into  this  Prov- 
ince, in  a  flag  of  truce,  sent  by  the  Governor  of  Canada,  cajled  the  La  Vierge  do 
Grace,  a  gi-eat  number  of  English  captives,  some  of  them  being  Europeans,  but  the 
most  of  them  belonging  to  the  English  provinces  and  colonies  in  America  ;  and 
that  about  the  same  time.  His  Excellency  had  sent  a  flag  of  truce  to  Canada,  with 
French  prisoners,  at  the  expense  of  this  government ;  and  that  His  Excelleny  sent 
circular  letters  to  the  governors  of  the  English  colonies,  aforementioned,  with  lists 
of  the  several  prisoners  belonging  to  their  respective  governments,  wherein  he  in- 
formed them,  that  as  soon  as  the  accounts  of  the  charges  of  the  flags  of  truce  and  the 
proportions  of  the  several  English  governments  thereto  were  adjusted,  he  would 
send  them  to  the  said  governors,  that  so  they  might  reimburse  the  Governor  of 


294  RECORDS   OP   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750. 

On  considevation  whereof,  this  Assembly  do  vote  and  re- 
solve, and  it  is  hereby  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Thos,  Cran- 
ston inquire  into  the  proper  offices,  whether  any  thing  hath  been 
already  paid  on  the  above  account ;  and  if  it  shall  appear  that 


Canada,  what  charges  he  had  been  at  for  transporting  the  English  prisoners  be- 
longing to  their  government. 

Soon  after  this,  the  court  house,  in  Boston,  was  burnt,  and  therein  all  the  papers 
relating  to  the  fitting  out  the  French  flag  of  truce,  whi.-;h  made  it  necessary  that  those 
accounts  should  be  had  from  Canada  in  order  to  state  the  particular  part  each  of 
the  English  governments  ought  to  bear  to  the  charge  of  transporting  their  prison- 
ers ;  and  I  find  the  said  accounts  were  sent  here  a  little  before  Governor  Shirley's 
departure,  and  an  account  has  been  stated  between  the  said  Governor  Shirley  and 
the  Governor  of  Canada,  and  sent  to  Quebec  by  a  person  gone  there  for  the  re- 
demption of  captives ;  and  the  Governor  of  Canada  has  been  assured  that  all  possi- 
ble care  should  be  taken  lor  recovering  from  each  government  their  proportion  of 
the  charge. 

I  shall  now  send  Your  Honor  a  copy  of  the  account,  by  which  you  will  perceive 
the  number  of  persons  belonging  to  your  government,  is  six,  and  the  proportion  of 
the  charge  £l74  8s.  5d.,  which  I  must  pray  Your  Honor  would  cause  to  be  paid 
into  my  hands  as  soon  as  may  be,  and  the  same  shall  be  remitted  to  the  Gov- 
ernor of  Canada  ;  and  I  doubt  not  your  more  ready  compliance,  when  you  consid- 
er, as  appears  by  the  account,  that  this  Province  will  be  obliged  to  pay  in  propor- 
tion beyond  any  other  government ;  as  the  greatest  part  of  the  Europeans  and 
other  uncertain  persons,  both  in  this  vessel  and  another  sent  to  Louisbourg,  will 
fall  upon  them. 

I  am,  sir,  Your  Honor's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

S.  PHIPS. 

To  the  Hon.  William  Greene,  Esq. 


Governor  Grcmc  to  Governor  PJdps. 

Warwick,  December  1st,  1749. 

Sir  : — Yours,  of  the  Oth  of  Xovcmbcr  last,  I  lately  received,  by  which  you  inform 
nic  that  His  Excellencj'^  Governor  Shirley,  had  settled  an  agreement  with  the  Gov- 
ernor of  Canada,  (so  far  as  related  to  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts,)  that  the 
charge  of  transporting  English  prisoners,  should  be  defrayed  by  the  English  gov- 
ernments; and  the  charge  of  transporting  French  prisoners,  by  their  government ; 
and  that  upon  His  Excellency's  writing  circular  letters  to  the  governors  of  the 
neighboring  colonies,  the  most  of  them  had  signified  their  approbation  of  that 
method. 

I  also  find  enclosed,  an  account  of  si.x  English  prisoners,  belonging  to  the  colony 
nf  Rhode  Island,  who  arrived  at  Boston,  from  Quebec,  in  the  ship  La  Vierge  de 
Grace  ;  and  that  this  government's  proportionable  part  of  the  expense  for  keeping 
and  transporting  prisoners   from   Canada  to  Boston,  in  said  ship,  was  £174  8s.  5f/., 


1750.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  295 

the  colony  have  not  made  satisfaction  in  the  affair,  then  Mr. 
Cranston  is  hereby  empowered  to  draw  so  much  money  out  of 
the  general  treasury,  as  will  be  sufficient  to  pay  for  the  trans- 
portation of  five  prisoners  only ;  Jacob  Judah,  the  other,  not 
belonging  to  this  colony;  and  when  Mr.  Cranston  shall  have 
received  said  money,  he  is  to  deliver  it  to  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  who  is  hereby  requested  to  transmit  the  same  to  the 
aforesaid  Spencer  Phips,  Esq. 

Whereas,  the  town  of  North  Kingstown,  at  a  meeting  had 
on  the  26th  day  of  August,  1746,  appointed  Messrs.  Francis 
Willett,  Rouse  Helme,  Jr.,  and  James  Wightman,  a  committee,  to 
consider  some  proposals  made  by  Benjamin  Congdon,  of  said 
North  Kingstown,  for  exchanging  a  highway  on  the  great 
plain,  &c.,  and  the  gentlemen  having  assumed  that  province, 
made  report  to  the  town  meeting,  held  in  North  Kingstown, 
the  29th  day  of  August,  1749,  to  wit: 

"  That  having  viewed  the  highway  that  leads  from  Mr.  Jere- 
miah Gardner's,  and  so  across  the  hills  to  the  highway,  leading 
to  Robert  Eldred's,  they  found  the  highway  across  the  hills  (as 
it  was  shown  them  by  Mr.  Congdon),  to  be  in  some  places  so 
very  steep,  that  it  was  not  passable,  especially  with  carts ;  and 
were  of  opinion,  that  the  best  method  of  exchanging  said  way, 
would  be,  from  the  highway  that  leads  to  Mr.  Job  Tripp's,  and 
to  go  by  My.  Congdon's  house,  on  the  plain,  to  the  highway 
that  leads  to  Mr.  Robert  Eldred's,  according  to  a  draught  made 
by  Mr.  Benoni  Hall,  surveyor,  which  Mr.  Congdon  would  sub- 


wbich  Your  Excellency  requests  I  will  cause  to  be  paid  into  your  hands  as  soon  as 
may  be  :  and  say  that  the  same  shall  be  remitted  to  the  Governor  of  Canada. 

Sir,  as  to  this  government's  signifying  their  approbation  to  any  such  agreement, 
made  by  Governor  Shirley  and  the  Governor  of  Canada,  I  am  at  present,  unac- 
quainted with  it ;  and  therefore  can  by  no  means  give  any  encouragement  for  the 
payment  thereof;  nor  is  it  in  my  power  to  i-aise  the  money  (was  it  never  so  justly 
due),  without  the  assistance  of  the  General  Assembly,  which  is  adjourned  to  the 
last  Tuesday  in  February  next ;  at  which  time,  I  will  communicate  the  whole  affair 
to  the  General  Assembly;  and  as  soon  as  may  be,  afterward,  shall  inform  Your  Ex- 
cellency of  their  resolve  thereon. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  and  very  humble  servant. 

To  His  Excellency,  S.  Phips,  Esq.  W.  GREENE. 


296  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750. 

mit  to,  provided  ho  might  have  the  liberty  of  hanging  gates, 
and  making  bars  at  his  corner  house,  and  at  the  plain  where 
the  highway  turns  to  the  southward." 

Which  report  was  accepted  by  the  said  town,  at  their  last 
mentit)ned  meeting  ;  and  afterwards,  at  another  meeting  of  the 
said  town,  on  the  5th  day  of  December  last,  it  was  voted,  tliat 
the  report  of  the  aforesaid  Francis  Willett,  Rouse  Helme  and 
James  Wightman,  should  be  laid  before  the  General  Assembly, 
for  a  further  sanction,  and  a  more  sure  establishment ;  which 
was  accordingly  done  this  session,  by  the  deputies  of  the  said 
town  of  North  Kingstown. 

And  now  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  premises  into  con- 
sideration, do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved, 
that  the  exchange  of  the  highway,  as  laid  down  in  the  report  of 
the  aforesaid  committee,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  confirmed. 

God  save  the  Kino-. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Asscmlli/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Bhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  \st  day 
of  May,  1750. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Ellery,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

^Ir.  Peter  Bours,  Mr.  Stephen  Brownell, 

Mr.  Simon  Pease,  Mr.  William  Richmond, 

Mr.  William  Barton,  Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 

The  Hon.  Thomas  Cranston,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 


1750.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


297 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colon?/  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantoiions,  at  Neivport,  the  first  Wednes- 
day of  Mai/,  1750. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  William  Ellery,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 


DEPUTIES. 


Neioport. 
Mr.  Nathaniel  Coggeshall, 
Mr.  Joseph  Whipple,  Jr., 
Mr.  Thomas  Cranston, 
Mr.  John  Tillinghast, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Easton, 
Capt.  Job  Bennett. 

Providence. 
Mr.  Elisha  Brown, 
Capt.  Christopher  Harris, 
Mr.  John  Andrew. 

Portsmouth. 
Mr.  William  Anthony,  Jr., 
Mr.  John  Allen, 
Mr.  Thomas  Brownell, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Hickes. 

Warimch. 
Mr.  Philip  Greene, 
Mr.  Joseph  Lippitt, 
Mr.  William  Holden, 
Mr.  John  Watson. 
Westerly. 
Col.  Joseph  Pendleton, 
Capt.  Caleb  Church. 
VOL.  V.         38 


North  Kingstoimi. 
Col.  Immanuel  Northup, 
Mr.  Beriah  Brown. 

South  Kingstown. 
Mr.  Henry  Gardner, 
Mr.  Rowland  Robinson. 

East  Greenivich. 
Mr.  Joseph  Nichols, 
Capt.  Thomas  Spencer. 

Jamestown. 
Mr.  Edward  Carr, 
Mr.  Joseph  Clarke. 
Smithfield. 
Mr.  Thomas  Lapham, 
Mr.  Thomas  Arnold. 

Scituate. 
Capt.  Job  Randall, 
Mr.  Gideon  Hammond. 

Glocester. 
Maj.  Richard  Smith, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Smith. 

Charlestown. 
Mr.  James  Congdon, 
Capt.  Nathaniel  Lewis. 


298 


RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OP   RHODE   ISLAND 


[1750. 


Wed  Greemvich. 
Mr.  Samuel  Hopkins, 
Mr.  William  Comstock. 

Coventry. 
Mr.  Elisha  Johnson, 
Mr.  Samuel  Cooper. 

Exeter. 
Capt.  William  Tripp. 

Middletown. 
Mr.  Jonathan  Easton, 
Capt.  William  Turner. 

Bristol. 
Mr.  Jonathan  Peck, 
Major  Thomas  Greene. 


DEPUTIES. 

Tiverton. 
Capt.  John  Manchester, 
Mr.  Abraham  Barker. 

Little  Compton. 
Capt.  John  Hunt, 
Mr.  Joseph  Peckham. 

^Yarren. 
Mr.  Peter  Bicknel, 
Capt.  Benjamin  Barton. 

Cumberland. 
Mr.  Job  Bartlett, 
Mr.  John  Dexter. 
Bichmond. 
Capt.  James  Adams. . 


The  Hon.  Thomas   Cranston,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyn- 
don, clerk. 

The  following  officers  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Ptobert  Haszard,  Deputy  Governor. 


ASSISTANTS. 


Capt.  George  Wanton, 
Mr.  Jonatlian  Nichols, 
Mr.  John  Potter, 
Mr.  Jabez  Bowen, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Tucker, 


Mr.  Robert  Lawton, 
Mr.  James  Arnold, 
Mr.  William  Richmond, 
Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 
Mr.  Jeoffi-ey  Watson. 


SECRETARY. 

Mr.  Thomas  Ward. 

ATTORNEY    GENERAL. 

Mr.  Daniel  Updike. 


GENERAL  TREASURER. 

Mr.  Thomas  Richardson. 


1750.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  299 

An  Act  for  appointing  commissioners,  &c.,  to  run  and  settle 

the    northern   boundary  line  of  this    colony,  according   to 

charter. 

Whereas,  the  northern  boundary  line  of  this  colony  hath 
never  yet  been  settled  according  to  the  royal  charter;  and 
whereas,  divers  persons  have  made  application  to  this  Assem- 
bly, and  have  set  forth  their  just  right  to  be  under  the  juris- 
diction of  this  government^  as  dwelling  within  the  bounds 
thereof;  and  that  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay, 
have,  and  do  unjustly  exercise  jurisdiction  over  them ;  in  or- 
der, therefore,  to  have  the  said  line  rightly  run  and  settled,  and 
to  prevent  any  further  disputes  thereupon,  between  the  said 
Province  and  this  colony  ; — 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  as  soon  as  may  be,  the  northern 
boundary  line  of  this  colony  shall  be  run  and  settled  according 
to  the  royal  charter  granted  by  King  Charles,  the  Second,  in 
the  year  of  our  Lord  1663. 

Be  it  also  enacted,  that,  to  the  end  the  same  may  be  per- 
fected and  completed,  Jonathan  Bandall,  Richard  Steere  and 
Thomas  Lapham,  Esqs.,  and  Capt.  Joseph  Harrison  and  Mr. 
Matthew  Robinson,  are  hereby  appointed  commissioners  ;  and 
they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  fully  authorized  and  em- 
powered to  run  and  settle  said  line,  according  to  the  royal 
charter,  aforesaid,  as  near  as  may  be. 

And  that  they,  the  said  commissioners,  be  commissionated 
by  His  Honor,  the  Governor ;  and  that  the  said  commissioners, 
or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  fully  authorized  and  empowered 
to  appoint  times  and  places,  when  and  where  to  meet  any  com- 
missioners that  are,  or  shall  be  appointed  on  the  part  of  said 
Province. 

And  the  said  Jonathan  Randall,  Richard  Steere,  Thomas 
Lapham,  Joseph  Harrison  and  Matthew  Robinson,  or  the  ma- 
jor part  of  Ihem,  are  hereby  fully  authorized  and  empowered  to 
appoint  a  surveyor  or  surveyors,  and  chainmen ;  and  in  gener- 
al, to  act  and  do  all  and  every  other  matter  and  thing  what- 
ever, for  or  concerning  the  aforesaid  settlement  of  said  line. 


oUO  RECORDS   OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750. 

And  that  in  case  no  commissioners  on  the  part  of  said  Prov- 
ince, shall  and  do  on  the  first  Tuesday  in  October  next,  or  at 
any  other  time  as  shall  be  agreed  on,  meet  the  said  commis- 
sioners for  this  colony,  and  agree  to  run  and  settle  said  line,  as 
aforesaid ;  then  and  in  that  case,  the  said  commissioners  on  the 
part  of  this  colony,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  shall,  and  are 
hereby  required  to  proceed  to  the  running  and  settling  said 
line  ex  parte. 

Be  it  also  enacted,  that  the  secretary  of  this  colony  send  a 
copy  of  this  act  to  the  secretary  of  the  Province  of  the  Massa- 
chusetts Bay,  withal  desiring  that  the  said  Province  would  sus- 
pend all  assessments  upon  the  people  and  inhabitants  included 
within  this  colony,  by  the  line  already  run  by  Jonathan  Ran- 
dall, Thomas  Lapham,  and  Richard  Steere,  Esqs.,  as  by  their 
return  made  in  January,  1749,  as  was  directed  from  home  to 
the  said  Province,  relating  to  the  eastern  boundary  of  this 
colony. 

Be  it  also  enacted,  that  a  plat  of  the  land  contained  within 
said  line,  so  to  be  run,  as  aforesaid,  be  drawn  up ;  and  that  the 
said  commissioners  on  the  part  of  this  colony,  or  the  major  part 
of  them,  do  make  report  to  the  General  Assembly,  of  their  do- 
ings in  the  premises,  and  present  said  plat  at  the  same  time ; 
any  laws,  orders,  customs^  agreement  or  agreements,  to  the  con- 
trary hereof  in  any  wise,  notwithstanding. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be, 
and  he  is  hereby  desired  to  write  as  soon  as  may  be,  unto  the 
government  of  Connecticut,  and  request  their  assistance  in  set- 
tling the  northern  boundary  line  of  this  colony ;  and  send 
with  his  letter  a  copy  of  the  act  passed  by  this  Assembly,  at 
this  present  session,  for  appointing  commissioners  to  run  and 
settle  said  boundary  line. 

AVhercas,  William  Richmond  and  Nathaniel  Searl,  Esqs., 
and  Mr.  Samuel  Tompkins,  were,  pursuant  to  a  petition  pre- 
ferred by  John  Wilbore,  and  granted  at  a  session  of  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly,  held  at  Newport,  by  adjournment,  on  the  third 
Monday  of  August,  A.  D.  1749,  appointed  a  committee  to  view 
a  highway  laid    out    in  Tiverton,  and  report   thereon,  having 


1750.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  301 

said  trust,  on  a  copy  of  "said  petition  reported  as  follows,  to 
wit : 


"We,  the  subscribers,  pursuant  to  the  above  and  before- 
written,  have  viewed  the  premises  contained  therein,  and  re- 
port that  the  said  highway  mentioned  in  the  prayer  of  this 
petition,  be  re-laid.  NATHANIEL  SEARL, 

SAMUEL  T0MPKIN8, 
WILLIAM  RICHMOND." 

On  consideration  whereof,  this  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve, 
and  it  is  hereby  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  above  report  be, 
and  the  same  is  hereby  accepted  ;  and  that  the  said  John  Wil- 
bore  have  the  liberty  of  applying  to  the  town  council  of  Tiv- 
erton ;  and  that  he  enjoy  all  the  privileges  and  advantages  re- 
specting the  abovementioned  highway,  as  by  law  he  would 
have  been  entitled  to,  if  he  had  made  application  to  the  next 
town  council  after  said  highway  was  laid  out. 

God  save  the  Kino;. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemUi/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Bhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  second  Mon- 
day in  June,  1750. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Robert  Haszard,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

An  Act  incorporating  the  towns  of  East  Greenwich,  Warwick, 
West  Greenwich  and   Coventry,  in  this  colony,  now  in   the 
county  of  Providence,  into  a  county,  by  the  name   of  the 
county  of  Kent. 
Whereas,  the  number  of  inhabitants  in  the   said   county  of 

Providence,  is  much  increased,  and  the  bounds  thereof,  are  so 


302  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750. 

extensive,  that  the  inhabitants  in  the  distant  parts  thereof,  are 
put  to  great  charge  and  trouble  in  prosecuting  their  affairs  at 
the  town  of  Providence,  where  the  said  courts  in  said  county 
are  established  to  do  the  business  thereof; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this 
colony,  and  by  the  authority  thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  for 
the  future  the  towns  of  East  Greenwich,  Warwick,  West 
Greenwich  and  Coventry,  at  present  in  the  county  of  Provi- 
dence, shall  be  divided  off  from  said  county  of  Providence,  and 
shall  be  a  distinct  and  separate  county,  by  the  name  of  the  coun- 
ty of  Kent;  and  that  East  Greenwich  shall  be  the  county  town. 

Be  it  also  enacted,  that  within  the  said  county,  there  shall 
be  held  and  kept  at  the  said  town  of  East  Greenwich,  in  and 
for  said  county,  one  session  of  the  superior  court  of  judicature, 
court  of  assize  and  general  jail  delivery,  on  the  third  Tuesday 
of  October,  once  in  every  3'ear. 

Be  it  also  enacted,  that  for  the  future,  there  shall  be  held 
and  kept  in  said  county  of  Kent,  one  inferior  court  of  common 
pleas,  and  one  court  of  the  general  sessions  of  the  peace ; 
which  said  court  of  common  pleas,  and  court  of  general  ses- 
sions of  the  peace,  shall  have  two  sessions  at  the  said  town  of 
East"  Greenwich,  in  and  for  said  county  of  Kent,  yearly,  and 
every  year ;  one  on  the  second  Tuesday  of  July,  and  the  other 
on  the  second  Tuesday  of  January. 

And  that  there  shall  be  five  judges  or  justices  of  said  court 
of  common  pleas,  and  court  of  general  sessions  of  the  peace, 
chosen  every  year,  to  wit :  one  chief  judge,  and  four  other 
judges,  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  in  the  same 
manner  and  at  the  same  time,  that  the  other  judges  of  the  in- 
ferior cunrt  of  conunon  pleas  are  chosen  in  and  for  the  other 
counties  in  this  colony ;  and  that  the  said  judges  of  said  infe- 
rior court  of  common  pleas,  and  court  of  general  sessions  of  the 
peace,  shall  be  commissioned  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor  of 
this  colony,  in  like  manner  as  the  judges  of  said  courts  in 
(III!  (itlior  eonidios  in  this  colony  are  commissioned. 

And  thai  the  justices  of  the  peace  in  said  rountv,  sliall, 
and  arc  luTcby  authorized  and  empowered  to  attend  upon  and 


1750.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  303 

compose  the  said  court  of  general  sessions  of  the  peace,  in 
said  county  of  Kent,  in  like  manner  as  the  justices  of  the 
peace  in  the  other  counties  in  this  colony  do. 

And  that  the  said  court  of  common  pleas,  and  court  of  gen- 
eral sessions  of  the  peace,  in  said  county  of  Kent  are  hereby 
invested  and  clothed  with  the  like  powers  and  authorities  in 
all  respects,  as  the  said  courts  are  in  other  counties  in  this  colo- 
ny, by  the  acts  of  this  colony  heretofore  made,  without  an  ex- 
ception or  limitation. 

Be  it  also  enacted,  that  there  shall  be  one  clerk  of  said 
court  of  common  pleas,  and  court  of  general  sessions  of  the 
peace  ;  and  one  sheriff  of  said  county,  Avho  shall  be  chosen  as 
the  clerks  and  sheriffs  of  the  other  counties  in  this  colony  are ; 
who  are  hereby  empowered  to  act  and  do  in  all  respects,  in 
said  county  of  Kent,  as  the  clerks  and  sheriffs  of  the  other 
counties  in  this  colony  do. 

Be  it  also  enacted,  that  there  shall  be  one  seal,  with  the  de- 
vice of  a  dove  on  it,  for  said  courts  of  common  pleas,  and  gen- 
eral sessions  of  the  peace,  in  and  for  said  county  of  Kent,  to 
be  used  upon  all  proper  occasions,  as  is  by  law  required,  or 
made  proper  or  necessary ;  and  that  the  clerks  of  said  courts 
for  the  time  being,  shall  have  the  custody  thereof. 

Be  it  also  enacted,  that  the  said  courts,  as  to  the  number  of 
members  to  make  a  quorum,  in  their  respective  sessions,  and 
in  relation  to  all  other  matters  within  the  power  and  jurisdic- 
tion of  said  courts,  shall  be  subject  to  all  the  laws  of  this 
colony,  now  in  force,  and  the  laws  of  England,  in  every  re- 
spect, as  fully  and  effectually,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  as 
the  other  inferior  courts  of  common  pleas,  and  courts  of  gen- 
eral sessions  of  the  peace,  are  in  the  other  counties  in  this 
colony  ;  any  law,  custom,  or  usage,  to  the  contrary  hereof,  in 
any  wise,  notwithstanding. 

Provided,  that  a  court  house  of  the  dimensions,  or  near  the  di- 
mensions of  the  court  house  in  Providence,  be  built  in  the  town  of 
E.  Greenwich,  by  a  free  contribution  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  said 
county  of  Kent  •  and  that  if  the  same  be  not  so  far  finished  as  to 
be  fit  to  hold  courts  in,  by  the  last  day  of  October  next,  then  the 


304  RECORDS   OP   THE   COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750. 

present  act  is  to  determine,  be  mill,  void  and  of  none  effect;  but 
if  said  house  be  so  far  finished,  as  abovesaid,  that  the  judges 
and  other  officers  of  said  court  be  chosen  at  the  next  October 
session  of  this  Assembly,  to  hold  a  court  in  January  next. 

Whereas,  Col.  Joseph  Pendleton,  of  Westerly,  by  petition, 
represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  sometime  in  the  month  of 
Auo-ust  last,  he  had  a  brigantine,  laden  with  rum,  molasses, 
&c.,  which  was  a  new  vessel,  and  sailed  from  Anquilla,  bound 
home,  the  property  whereof  was  entirely  his  own,  and  of  the 
value  of  £18,000  or  £20,000  ;  that  that  the  said  brigantine 
and  cargo  were  not  insured,  and  have  not  been  heard  of  since ; 
and  so  are  supposed  to  be  lost ;  by  which  heavy  stroke  of 
Providence,  he  is  rendered  unable  to  pay  his  just  debts  at 
present,  without  selling  some  part  of  his  real  estate  ;  and 
whereas,  the  petitioner  owns  a  farm  in  said  Westerly,  adjoin- 
ing to  Pawcatuck  river,  near  the  mouth  thereof;  part  whereof, 
it  is  thought  might  not  only  be  convenient,  but  also  tend  to  a 
public  advantage,  if  settled  with  a  town ;  it  being  bounded 
westerly,  on  the  navigable  part  of  said  river,  where  there  are 
plenty  of  oysters  and  other  fish  to  be  taken  at  all  times  in  the 
year  ;  and  plenty  of  stone  and  brick,  with  good  timber,  suita- 
ble for  building  vessels  and  houses,  near  to  be  had,  very 
plenty  ;  with  saw  mills  on  said  river,  for  the  sawing  plank, 
&c.,  with  many  other  valuable  conveniences  ;  whereupon,  he 
prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  him  a  lottery,  of  about  £26,- 
000  ;  in  which  lottery,  he,  the  petitioner,  will  put  to  sale  one 
hundred  and  twenty-four  lots  of  land  (with  two  dwelling- 
houses  thereon) ;  part  of  the  aforesaid  farm,  adjoining  to  the 
aforesaid  river,  none  less  than  a  quarter  of  an  acre,  and  some 
half  acres,  at  a  certain  value  put  on  them  by  two  judicious  and 
disinterested  men,  namely :  Capt,  Isaac  Sheffield  and  Capt. 
Elias  Thompson  ;  the  sale  of  which  lots,  will  enable  the  peti- 
tioner to  pay  his  just  debts,  &c. 

[The  General  Assembly  accordingly  passed  a  resolution,  au- 
thorizing Mr.  Pendleton  to  dispose  of  his  estate  by  lottery,  the 
scheme  for  which,  appears  at  length  on  the  records.] 


1750.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  305 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  choice  of  the  several  com- 
mittees, in  the  several  towns,  for  the  management  of  the  colony's 
money,  let  or  to  be  let  on  loan,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby 
referred  unto  the  next  session  of  this  Assembly ;  and  that  the 
present  officers  be  continued  until  that  time,  with  full  power  of 
doing,  acting  and  transacting  all  business  appertaining  to 
their  offices,  in  the  meanwhile. 

God  save  the  King, 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembli/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Netvport^  the  od  Mon- 
day of  August,  1750. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Robert  Haszard,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

This  Assembly  having  considered  the  subject  matter  of  the 
petition  of  divers  persons,  inhabitants  on  the  land  claimed  by 
this  colony,  from  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  and 
their  circumstances, — 

Do  order,  that  the  secretary  of  this  colony  write  a  letter  to 
the  secretary  of  the  said  Province,  to  be  laid  before  their  Gen- 
eral Court,  representing  that  this  Assembly  has  had  certain  in- 
formation that  a  considerable  number  of  those  persons  inhabit- 
ing on  the  said  disputed  lands,  are  apprehended  and  prosecut- 
ed at  the  Worcester  court  of  sessions,  as  rioters,  occasioned  by 
some  indiscreet  proceedings  of  some  officers  in  the  colony  ; 
which,  as  they  were  done  in  the  recess  of  this  Assembly,  so 
they  were  begun  and  carried  on  without  the  knowledge  and 
privity  of  this  Court ;  and  that  all  these  things  have  happened 
since  the  last  letters  to  said  Province ;  they  therefore  desire,  that 
as  the  General  Court  of  said  Province,  has  always,  in  all  their 
letters  to  this  colony  since  this  dispute  has  subsisted,  shown  a 

VOL.  V.         39 


306  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750- 

disposition  to  have  the  said  northern  boundary  line  between 
us,  run  and  settled  in  the  most  amicable  way  possible  ;  so,  on 
our  part,  that  it  is  our  hearty  desire  that  every  thing  should 
be  done  to  cultivate  that  good  harmony  and  friendship  that 
ought  to  subsist  among  neighbors ;  and  that  those  poor  people 
who  are  settled  on  the  said  disputed  land,  may  not  be  made  a 
sacrifice  to  the  resentments  of  that  Province,  for  being  misled 
by  any  inconsiderate  officers  of  this  colony,  since  this  Assem- 
bly have  reason  to  believe  that  the  persons  so  prosecuted,  had 
no  riotous  intent  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the  government ; — 

Therefore,  this  Assembly  desires  that  the  General  Court  of 
said  Province  would  give  orders  to  the  judges  of  said  court  at 
Worcester,  to  suspend  any  furthOr  prosecution  against  said 
men,  till  the  said  matter  of  the  said  line  shall  be  issued ;  or 
that  the  secretary  write  something  to  the  like  purpose ;  and  to 
desire  them  also  to  suspend  the  levying  the  taxes  from  said 
jieople. 

Also,  His  Honor  the  Governor,  is  desired  to  write,  by  the 
first  ship,  to  the  agent  for  this  colony,  in  London,  directing 
him  to  represent  to  His  Majesty,  the  circumstances  of  said 
people,  and  the  rigorous  demands  that  are  made  on  them  for 
taxes,  &c.,  in  order  to  obtain  from  His  Majesty  in  council,  an 
order  to  said  Province  to  suspend  the  levying  any  more  taxes, 
or  using  any  violent  means  with  said  people,  till  the  said  north- 
ern line  shall  be  finally  settled  and  established. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  colony's  ferries  on  the  west 
side  of  Jamestown,  be  sold  to  the  best  advantage  of  the  gov- 
ernment ;  and  that  Daniel  Coggeshall,-  Thomas  Cranston  and 
Immanuel  Northup,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part  of 
them,  are  hereby  constituted  a  committee,  with  full  power  to 
sell  and  dispose  of  said  ferri(!S  by  public  vendue,  or  otherwise, 
as  they  shall  tliink  proper;  advertising  the  same  fourteen  days 
before  the  sale ;  and  when  they  have  sold  them,  the  said  com- 
mittee, in  Ix'lialf  of  the  colony,  make,  seal  and  execute  a  good 
and  suflicient  deed  or  deeds  of  said  ferries  to  the  buyer  or  buy- 
ers thereof;  and  that  the  money  arising  thereby,  be  lodged  in 
tlie  general  treasury  ;  and  that  out  of  the  same,  the  general 


1750.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  307 

treasurer  pay  ofF  all  such  money  as  was  by  him  hired  for  build- 
ing the  light  house. 

An  Act  to  prevent  the  falling  through  of  the  near  approaching 

superior  court  of  judicature,  &c.,  in  the  county  of  Newport. 

Whereas,  the  town  meetings  of  the  several  towns  in  this 
colony,  for  choosing  deputies  to  sit  in  the  General  Assembly, 
on  the  last  Wednesday  of  October  next,  are  held  on  the  same 
day  which  the  superior  court  of  judicature,  court  of  assize  and 
general  jail  delivery,  are  to  be  held  at  Newport,  Avithin  and  for 
the  county  of  Newport,  whereby  the  judges  of  said  court  Avill 
be  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  attending  said  town  meetings,  un- 
less they  sufi'er  said  court  to  be  discontinued  : 

For  remedy  whereof,  be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly 
of  this  colony,  and  by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that 
if  it  should  happen  that  none  of  the  judges  of  said  court  shall 
appear  at  Newport,  on  the  day  appointed  by  law  for  holding 
said  court,  that  then,  and  in  such  case,  said  court  shall  not  be 
discontinued  :  provided,  any  one  or  more  of  the  judges  appear 
the  next  day,  and  proceed  to  do  business,  or  adjourn  said  court 
according  to  the  law  now  in  force  j  and  that  all  business  done 
in  said  court,  if  so  held,  shall  be  as  valid  and  effectual,  as  if  the 
same  had  been  held  or  adjourned  on  the  day  appointed  by 
law. 

And  it  is  also  voted  and  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid, 
that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Newport,  shall  notify  all  per- 
sons concerned,  by  setting  up  a  copy  of  this  act  at  the  court 
house  door,  on  the  usual  day  of  holding  said  court. 

Whereas,  Moses  Lopez,  of  Newport,  in  the  county  of  New- 
port, merchant,  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  he  hath 
for  several  years  past,  translated  letters  and  papers  from  the 
Spanish  into  English,  for  the  use  of  the  government,  which  he 
has  declined  being  paid  for,  inasmuch  as  it  was  for  said  use;  that 
he  is  ready  and  willing  at  all  times  to  do  the  like,  and  desires 
no  other  gratuity  than  to  be  exempted  from  all  otlior  personal 
duties  in  the  colony,  during  his  residence  tlierein  ;  and  prayed 
that  an  act  might  be  passed  accordingly. 


308  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750. 

On  consideration  whereof,  this  Assembly  do  vote  and  enact, 
and  it  is  voted  and  enacted,  that  the  said  Moses  Lopez  be,  and 
he  is  hereby  exempted  from  all  personal  duties  in  this  colony, 
excepting  the  above  mentioned,  until  the  General  Assembly 
shall  order  otherwise. 

Whereas,  Col.  Joseph  Pendleton  and  Mr,  Gideon  Hammond, 
both  members  of  the  lower  house,  have  informed  this  Assem- 
bly, that  the  said  house  has  been  grossly  abused  by  Samuel 
Pemberton,  and  another  person  ; — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  persons 
be  brought  before  this  Assembly  (by  a  warrant  from  the  secre- 
tary), to  answer  for  their  behaviour,  and  sufier  what  shall  be 
enjoined  by  this  Assembly. 

Whereas,  complaint  hath  been  made  unto  the  lower  house, 
that  Samuel  Pemberton  hath  grossly  abused  this  Assembly,  by 
saying,  "  That  the  General  Assembly  are  a  parcel  of  damned 
rascals  and  scoundrels,  and  as  bad  as  thieves  and  robbers,  and 
had  taken  £5,000  out  of  his  pocket,"  and  the  said  Samuel 
Pemberton  being  brought  before  this  Assembly,  acknowledged 
that  he  had  so  said ;  but  that  he  intended  only  those  that 
voted  for  making  the  money; — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  Samuel 
Pemberton  be  committed  to  His  Majesty's  jail,  in  Newport, 
until  he  give  a  bond  with  sufficient  surety,  in  the  sum  of 
£5,000,  for  his  appearance  before  the  Assembly,  at  their  next 
session  to  be  held  the  last  Monday  in  September  next. 

God  save  the  King. 


1750.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  309 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Bhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the 
last  Wednesday  in  October,  1750. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Robert  Haszard,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  secretary  be,  and  he  is 
hereby  directed  to  write  to  the  secretary  of  the  Province  of  the 
Massachusetts  Bay,  informing  him  that  the  committee  appoint- 
ed by  this  government  to  run  the  northern  boundary  line  of 
this  colony,  will  meet  for  that  purpose,  at  the  house  of  Benja- 
min Tower,  in  Cumberland,  on  the  18th  day  of  December 
next;  and  request  of  the  Province  to  appoint  a  committee 
meet  ours  at  the  time  and  place  above  mentioned. 

Whereas,  the  committee  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly, 
at  their  session  in  Newport,  the  third  Monday  of  August  last, 
to  sell  the  colony's  ferries  on  the  west  side  of  Jamestown,  have 
performed  that  service,  and  made  the  following  report,  to  wit : 

Report  of  the  committee  on  the  sale  of  the  colony^ s  ferries. 

"  We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  a  committee  by  the 
General  Assembly,  to  sell  the  government's  ferries  on  the  west 
side  of  Jamestown,  do  report : 

That  agreeably  to  act  of  Assembly,  we  set  up  advertisements 
fourteen  days  before  sale,  and  at  the  time  appointed,  which  was 
the  19th  of  this  instant,  we  set  up  conditions  of  sale  at  the 
south  ferry  house,  when  ]\Ir.  Abel  Franklin  and  jNIr.  Stephen 
Wilcox  bought  said  ferries,  according  to  conditions  of  sale ; 
and  said  Franklin  paid  £100  cash,  in  part  of  the  purchase 
money ;  for  which  we  gave  them  our  receipts  in  behalf  of  the 
government,  and  then  appointed  the  25th  of  this  instant,  to  be 


olU  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750. 

the  time  to  complete  said  contract ;  and  upon  the  25th  of  this 
instant  October,  we  met  at  the  aforesaid  ferry;  all  parties 
being  present,  we  ordered  the  surveyor  to  run  out  said  land  ac- 
cording to  conditions  of  sale,  which  was  then  done  ;  and  two- 
thirds  of  said  land  laid  out  to  the  south  ferry,  and  the  other  third 
to  the  north  ferry ;  and  then  filled  up  the  deeds  of  sale,  and 
offered  them  to  the  parties  ;  when  Mr.  Stephen  Wilcox  com- 
plied with  conditions  of  sale,  and  signed  the  bonds,  and  received 
his  deed  of  sale,  executed  b}^  us  in  behalf  of  the  government ; 
but  Mr.  Abel  Franklin  refused  to  comply  with  conditions  of 
sale,  according  to  agreement.  All  which  is  humbly  submitted, 
by  DANIEL  COGGESHALL, 

THOMAS  CRANSTON, 
IMMANUEL  NORTHUP, 

Committee." 

And  this  Assembly  having  taken  the  said  report  into  con- 
sideration,— 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
said  report  be,  and  it  is  hereby  accepted. 

The  committee  appointed  by  an  act  of  Assembly,  to  buy  the 
two  ferries,  &c.,  on  the  west  side  of  Jamestown,  for  the  colony, 
exhibited  their  accounts,  which  was  received. 

An  Act  in  addition  to  an  act  of  the  General  Assembly,  made 
and  passed  on  the  17th  day  of  February,  A.  D.  1746,  enti- 
tled "  An  act  for  regulating  appeals  to  His  Majesty  in  coun- 
cil, in  Great  Britain,"  and  for  repealing  the  former  act  made 
for  tliat  purpose. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 
by  the  authority  of  the  same  it  is  hereby  enacted,  that  from 
and  atlor  the  pnl)lication  of  this  act,  no  defendant  in  any  suit 
of  law  iu  this  colony,  the  foundation  whereof,  being  a  bond 
conditioned  lor  the  payment  of  money  only,  shall  have  leave  to 
appeal  from  the  judgment  of  such  court,  where  such  action 
shall  ])C  tried,  to  His  Majesty  in  council;  but  that  the  last 
judgment   of  the  supei'iur  euurt  of  jiulieature,  iu  this  colony, 


1750.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  311 

as  trials  now  stand,  regulated  by  the  laws  of  this  colony,  shall 
in  all  such  cases  be  final. 

And  furthermore,  that  in  all  appeals  to  Ilis  Majesty  in 
council,  from  this  colony,  if  the  appellant  doth  not  obtain  a  re- 
versal of  the  judgment  appealed  from,  or  fails  in  prosecuting 
such  appeal,  the  appellee,  in  such  cause,  may,  by  action  of  the 
case,  recover  all  just  and  reasonable  costs  and  damages  ;  any 
law,  custom,  or  usage  to  the  contrary  hereof,  in  any  wise,  not- 
withstanding. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  attorney  general,  Daniel 
Jenckes,  Esq.  and  Capt.  Elisha  Brown,  be.  and  they  are  here- 
by constituted  a  committee,  to  make  the  draught  of  a  letter  to 
be  sent  to  our  agent  in  Great  Britain,  instructing  him  with  re- 
spect to  a  bill  now  pending  in  Parliament,  about  paper  bills  of 
credit,  &c.,  to  defend  us  against  a  complaint  lately  sent  home 
against  the  government,  by  sundry  merchants  and  others,  in 
this  colony  ;  and  to  desire  the  agent  to  procure  and  send  to 
this  government,  a  copy  of  the  said  complaint,  with  the  sign- 
ers' names  ;  but  that  the  said  draught,  when  made,  be  not  sent 
until  it  be  laid  before  this  Assembly. 

It  is  also  voted  and  resolved,  that  Daniel  Jenckes  and  Na- 
thaniel Lewis,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  constituted  a 
committee,  to  inquire  into  the  number  of  iron  works,  &c.,  in 
this  colony,  as  directed  from  home,  and  make  report  to  His 
Honor,  the  Governor,  in  order  that  he  may  give  proper  answers 
to  the  letters  he  has  received  on  that  head,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

God  save  the  King. 

Petition  to  the  King,  relative  to  hills  of  credit. 

Newport,  on  Rhode  Island,  4th  September,  1750. 

To  the  King's  Most  Excellent  Majesty  : — We,  Your  Majesty's  very  dutiful  and 
most  loyal  subjects,  inhabitants  of  your  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence 
Plantations,  in  New  England,  humbly  crave  leave  to  represent  to  Your  Maj- 
esty,— 

That  the  currency,  or  instrument  of  commerce  of  a  country,  being  tiie  standard 
and  measure  by  which  the  worth  of  all  things  bought  and  sold,  are  estimated  and 
determined,  it  ought  to  be  fixed  invariably,  otherwise  property  can  neither  be  as- 
certained nor  secured  by  any  plan  or  method  whatsoever. 


312  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750. 


That  the  currency  of  this  government  is  so  far  from  being  fixed,  that  it  hath 
sunk  in  its  value  above  one-half;  within  seven  years  last  past,  whereby  all  the  cred- 
itors of  the  colony,  have  been  greatly  defrauded  ;  and  all  whose  effects  or  estates 
have  consisted  of  money,  or  bills  of  public  credit,  so  called,  amongst  whom  are 
numbers  of  widows  and  orphans,  have  been  grievously  injured,  oppressed  and  al- 
most ruined. 

That  this  colony  hath  now  outstanding  the  sum  of  £525,335,  in  bills  of  public 
credit,  emitted  at  several  times,  partly  upon  loan,  and  partly  to  supply  the  colony 
treasury ;  that  the  sum  upon  loan  is  £390,000,  the  value  of  which,  at  the  time  of  is- 
suing, was  £78,111  sterling  ;  and  the  present  sterling  value  is  but  £35,445. 

That  the  bills  emitted  to  supply  the  treasury  by  acts  of  Assembly,  ought  to  be 
sunk  or  drawn  in  by  a  tax  ;  but  the  government  have  hitherto  delayed  the  execu- 
tion of  these  acts,  no  tax  having  been  yet  levied  for  that  purpose. 

That  several  petitions  for  a  new  bank,  or  another  emission  of  paper  bills  of  pub- 
lic credit,  have  been  preferred  to  the  present  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 
that  the  house  of  deputies,  notwithstanding  all  remonstrances  to  the  contrary,  have, 
at  their  session  of  August  last,  passed  a  vote  for  issuing  £50,000  in  bills  of  a  new 
tenor ;  and  have  appointed  a  committee  of  four  of  their  members,  to  prepare  and 
bring  forward  a. bill  for  such  effect,  and  then  adjourned  until  the  last  Monday  of 
this  instant  September. 

That  the  landholders  of  this  colony,  having  generally  mortgaged  their  farms,  or 
plantations,  as  a  security  for  the  bills  of  credit  they  have  taken  upon  loan,  have 
found  it  their  interest  to  multiply  such  bills,  that  they  may  depreciate  and  lessen  in 
value,  and  which  they  have  recourse  to,  as  a  legal  expedient  of  wiping  away  their 
debts  without  labor  ;  whereby,  the  laudable  spirit  of  industry  is  greatly  extinguish- 
ed, and  Your  Majesty's  trading  subjects  greatly  discouraged  for  want  of  produce 
and  remittances. 

Sensible  of  the  misfortune  and  hardships  we  labor  under,  we  do  therefore  most 
humbly  pray  Your  Majesty  that  the  legislature  or  authority  of  this  government, 
maybe  prevented  and  effectually  restrained  from  making  or  emitting  any  more  bills 
of  public  credit  upon  loan,  without  Your  Majesty's  royal  permission,  and  be  com- 
manded to  stop  and  recall  this  intended  emission  of  August  last,  from  circulating  or 
being  offered  or  taken  in  payment  of  debt,  or  from  passing  any  acts  whereby  any 
extant  bills  of  public  credit  may  be  either  debased  in  value  or  postponed  in  their 
period  of  being  drawn  in  ;  and  that  Your  Majesty  will  be  graciously  pleased  to  in- 
terpose in  this  matter,  in  such  manner  as  in  your  royal  wisdom  shall  seem  meet 
to  relieve  us  from  the  injury  and  oppression  of  a  flood  of  fluctuating  sinking  paper 
bilis  of  public  credit.     And  your  petitioners  shall  ever  pray,  &c. 


John  Freebody, 
Samuel  Freebody, 
John  Freebody,  Jr., 
Daniel  Ayrault, 
Stephen  Ayrault, 
Walter  Cranston, 
Francis  Iloncyman, 
Walter  Rodman, 
riiiiip  Wilkinson, 
Abraham  Redwood, 
Samuel  N'ernon, 


Andrew  Hunter, 
John  Thurston, 
Daniel  Ayrault, 
Samuel  Rhodes, 
Joseph  Harrison, 
Peter  Harrison, 
John  Beard, 
John  Tweedy, 
Edward  Cole, 
William  Stevens, 
Thomas  Rodman,  Ji 


Samuel  Pemberton, 
David  Moore, 
William  Rogers, 
Henry  Collins, 
James  Gould, 
John  Fryers, 
John  Belittia, 
Jacob  Dehane, 
Samuel  Dyno, 
Samuel  Engs, 
Benjamin  Willson, 


1750.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


31; 


Gideon  Sisson, 
Jeremiah  Finney, 
Henry  Bull, 
Joshua  Amy, 
John  Thurston, 
John  Dennis, 
Jahleel  Brenton, 
John  Brown, 
Simon  Pease, 
William  Richards, 
Fat.  Grant, 
Andrew  Heatly, 
Lodowick  Widicke, 


Robert  Jenkins,  Jr., 
John  Cook, 
Jonas  L.  Redwood, 
William  Coddington, 
Jeremiah  Brown, 
Jonathan  Thurston, 
Joseph  Sanfbrd, 
Solo.  Townsend, 
Pardon  Tillinghast, 
John  Whitehorn, 
Thomas  Freebody, 
Josei^h  Bruce, 
Samuel  Holmes, 


John  Cole, 
John  Paine, 
George  Gibbs, 
Jonathan  Tillinghast, 
Benoni  Gardner, 
Ebenezer  Richardson, 
Ebenezer  Flagg, 
Resolved  Waterman, 
John  Stevens, 
Joseph  Willson,  Jr., 
Benjamin  Smith, 
Daniel  Coggeshall, 
Jonas  Sisson. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhl//  held  for  Ihe  Colon//  or 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations^  at  Providence^  on 
the  first  Monday  of  December^  1750. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Robert  Haszard,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Before  this  Assembly  was  read  an  act  of  Parliament,  entitled 
"  An  act  to  encourage  the  importation  of  pig  and  bar  iron 
from  His  Majesty's  colonies  in  America ;  and  to  prevent  the 
erecting  of  any  mill,  or  other  engine,  for  slitting  or  rolling  of 
iron,  or  anj^  plating  forge  to  work  with  a  tilt  hammer,  or  any 
furnace  for  making  steel,  in  any  of  the  said  colonies ;"  and 
also  the  letter  and  instructions  from  the  lords  commissioners 
for  trade  and  plantations.'=' 


'^'  The  DuJce  of  Bedford  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Whitehall,  14th  April,  1750. 

Sir: — The  King  having  given  his  royal  assent,  the  last  session  of  Parliament,  to 
an  act,  entitled  "  An  act  to  encourage  the  importation  of  pig  and  bar  iron  from  His 
Majesty's  colonies  in  America,  and  to  prevent  the  erection  of  any  mill  or  other  en- 
gine for  slitting  or  rolling  of  iron  or  any  plating  foi'ge,  to  work  with  a  tilt  hammer, 

VOL.  V.  "10 


314  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1750. 

And  the  same  being  taken  into  consideration,  this  Assembly 
is  well  assured,  that  there  is  not  in  this  colony,  any  such  mill 
or  engine  for  slitting  or  rolling  of  iron,  or  any  plating  forge  to 


or  any  furnace  for  making  steel,  in  any  of  the  said  colonies  ;"  -which  act  is  to  take 
place  the  24th  June  next ;  and  His  Majesty's  governors  in  North  America,  having 
particular  instructions  given  them  therein,  I  have  the  King's  commands  to  transmit 
it  to  vou,  to  the  end  that  you  may  have  the  same  duly  published  and  observed 
throughout  your  government. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

BEDFORD. 
To  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Thomas  Hill  io  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

Whitehall,  May  the  29th,  1750. 

Gentlemen  : — Three  acts  having  been  passed  in  the  last  session  of  Parliament, 
■wherein  the  British  plantations  are  concerned,  viz. : 

An  act  for  extending  and  improving  the  trade  to  Africa  ; 

An  act  for  encouraging  the  growth  and  culture  of  raw  silk  in  His  Majesty's  colo- 
nies or  plantations  in  America; 

An  act  to  encourage  the  importation  of  pig  and  bar  iron  from  His  Majesty's  colo- 
nies, in  America ;  and  to  prevent  the  erection  of  any  mill  or  other  engine  for  slit- 
tiiig  or  roHing  ot  iron  ;  or  any  plating  forge,  to  work  with  a  tilt  hammer  ;  or  any 
furnace,  for  making  steel  in  any  of  the  said  colonies ; 

I  am  directed  by  my  lords  commissioners  for  trade  and  plantations,  to  send  you 
the  enclosed  printed  copies  of  them,  for  your  information  and  government  in  the 
several  matters  therein  contained.  I  am,  gentlemen, 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  HILL. 
To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

P.  S.  As  to  the  last  mentioned  aft,  to  encourage  the  importation  of  pig  and  bar 
iron.  I  am  further  directed  to  recommend  to  you  a  punctual  compliance  therewith  ; 
and  in  pirticular,  that  you  do  immediately  transmit  to  their  lordships,  certificates 
under  your  hand  an<l  seal  of  office,  containing  an  account  of  every  mill  or  engine 
for  slitting  and  rolling  of  iron  ;  and  every  plating  forge  to  work  with  a  tilt  hammer; 
and  every  furnace  for  making  steel,  at  the  time  of  the  commencement  of  this  act, 
erected  in  your  government;  expressing  also,  in  the  said  certificate  such  of  them  as 
are  used  ;  and  the  name  of  the  proprietor  or  proprietors  of  each  such  mill,  engine, 
forge  and  furnace ;  and  the  place  where  each  such  mill,  engine,  forge  and  furnace 
is  erected  ;  and  the  number  of  engines,  forges  and  furnaces  in  your  government. 

And  you  are  to  take  especial  care,  that  if  after  the  time  limited  by  the  said  act» 
any  mill  or  other  engine  for  slitting  or  rolling  of  iron,  or  any  plating  forge  to  work 
with  a  tilt  hammer,  or  any  furnace  for  making  steel,  shall  be  erected  or  continued 
within  your  government,  you  do  cause  the  same  to  be  abated  within  the  time  and 
in  the  manner  prescribed  by  the  said  g,ct.  T.  II. 


1750.]  AND   PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  315 

work  with  a  tilt  hammer,  or  any  furnace  for  making  steel,  as 
mentioned  and  expressed  in  said  act. 

And  therefore  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  requested  to  inform  the  Right 
Honorable  and  Honorable,  the  Lords  Commissioners  for  Trade 
and  Plantations,  of  the  same,  as  soon  as  conveniently  may 
be. 

Whereas,  the  committee,  that  was  appointed  to  form  the 
draught  of  a  letter  to  be  sent  from  this  government,  to  Mr. 
Agent  Partridge,  have  performed  that  service,  and  presented 
this  Assembly  with  one; — 

Which  being  duly  considered,  this  Assembly  do  approve 
thereof;  and  thereupon  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  a  fair 
copy  of  the  same  be  drawn,  to  be  signed  by  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  and  sent  to  the  agent  by  the  first  good  opportunity. 

Governor   Greene  to  Richard  Partridge,  Agent  for  Rhode  Island, 

in  London. 


Newport,  December  4,  1750. 

Sir: — The  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  having  been  informed  that  some 
small  number  of  the  inhabitants  have  lately  sent  a  petition  to  the  King ;  but  as  the 
petitioners  sent  it  away,  without  ever  communi(;ating  the  contents  of  it  to  any  in 
authority  here,  it  is  not  certainly  known  what  they  pray  for,  or  what  their  design 
in  it  is ;  however,  the  common  report  here  is,  that  they  ask  that  some  alteration 
may  be  made  in  the  form  of  the  government  of  this  colony,  by  procuring  a  negative 
to  be  put  on  the  acts  of  government,  made  by  the  General  Assembly. 

And  as  the  General  Assembly  are  apprehensive,  that  if  what  they  ask  for,  or  any 
thing  like  it  be  obtained,  it  will  utterly  overthrow  the  valuable  liberties  and  privi- 
leges this  colony  have  hitherto  enjoyed,  and  which  they  think  they  have  still  a 
right  by  their  charter,  to  continue  in  the  possession  of,  not  knowing  of  any  pro- 
ceedings that  have  been  had  in  this  colony,  which  could  occasion  so  unnatural  a 
prayer  from  some  of  their  own  brethren,  or  so  far  provoke  a  gracious  King,  as  to 
grant  the  petition  of  the  betrayers  of  their  country's  liberties. 

By  the  directions  of  the  General  Assembly,  I  therefore  write  this,  to  desire  you 
to  make  diligent  inquiry  after  the  aforesaid  petition,  and  to  use.  all  means  in  your 
power,  to  prevent  (if  possible)  its  ever  being  laid  before  the  King.  But  if  that 
cannot  be  done,  then  to  oppose  any  thing  being  done,  in  consequence  of  it,  to  the 
prejudice  of  the  colony. 

And  I  am  further  to  desire  you,  to  procure  a  copy  of  the  petition,  with  the  peti- 
tioners' names,  and  transmit  to  the  Governor  of  this  colony,  by  the  first  opportu- 
nity ;  and  also  to  signify,  if  there  be  any  thing  necessary  for  the  General  Assembly 
to  do  fuither  in  this  affair. 


316  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISL.VKD  [1750. 

If  there  should  be  another  bill  ia  Parliament  this  session,  against  our  paper  cur- 
rency, you  are  also  desired  to  make  all  proper  defence  against  any  such  bill  or  bills 
that  may  in  any  measure  have  a  tendency  to  infringe  on  our  charter  privileges. 

As  your  labors  hitherto,  in  the  affairs  of  this  colony,  have  been  crowned  with 
success,  the  General  Assembly  hope  your  care  and  prudence  will  bring  this  also  to 
a  happy  issue. 

I  salute  you  in  the  name  of  the  council,  and  house  of  representatives. 
And  am,  with  much  respect,  sir. 

Your  humble  servant, 

To  Ilichard  Partridge,  Esq.  WILLIAM  GREENE. 


Whereas,  this  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  Providence,  the 
last  Wednesday  of  October  last,  made  and  passed  an  act,  enti- 
tled "  An  act  in  addition  to  an  act  of  the  General  Assembly? 
made  and  passed  on  the  17th  day  of  February,  A.  D.  1746, 
entitled  '  An  act  for  regulating  appeals  to  His  Majesty  in  coun- 
cil, in  Great  Britain,  and  for  repealing  the  former  act  made  for 
that  purpose  ;'  "  part  of  which  act  last  made,  is  expressed  in 
terms  so  general,  that  it  may  be  construed  to  look  back,  and 
take  effect  in  actions  brought  before  said  act  was  passed  ;  this 
Assembly,  therefore,  having  taken  the  matter  into  considera- 
tion,— 

T)o  vote,  resolve  and  declare,  and  it  is  voted,  resolved  and 
declared,  that  it  was  not  their  intent,  meaning  or  design,  when 
they  voted  and  passed  the  said  act  last  made,  that  the  same 
sliould  retrospect,  nor  shall  it  retrospect,  or  take  effect  in  any 
action,  the  original  w^rit  whereof  bears  date  before  the  said  act 
last  passed  was  voted  and  passed  ;  any  thing  therein  con- 
tained to  the  contrary,  notwithstanding. 

Whereas,  Thomas  Relph,  Jr.,  of  Scituate,  in  the  county  of 
Providence,  in  behalf  of  himself  and  company,  represented  unto 
this  Assembly,  that  they  went  out  to  hunt  wolves ;  and  on  the 
I  titli  day  of  November  last,  he,  the  said  Relph,  shot  at  a  black- 
ish colored  wolf,  in  Scituate,  aforesaid,  but  did  not  follow  him  ; 
afterwards,  such  a  wolf  was  found  dead,  Avhich  they  apprehend 
to  be  the  same  tliat  said  Relph  shot  at ;  but  not  having  the 
proof  by  law  required,  to  entitle  them  to  the  bounty,  he  prayed 
to  have  the  same  allowance  out  of  the  general  treasury,  as  he 
should  have,  were  the  wolf  killed  in  sight ;  and  this  Assembly 


1750.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  317 

having  taken  the  subject  matter  of  the  said  petition  into  consid- 
eration, and  made  due  inquiry  into  the  truth  thereof, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
said  petition  is  hereby  granted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, Benjamin  Tucker,  James  Honeyman,  and  Immanuel 
Northup,  Esqs.,  Messrs.  Benjamin  Peckham,  Jr.  and  Joseph 
Lippitt,  be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  hereby 
constituted  a  committee,  to  take  the  affair  of  the  paper  curren- 
cy into  consideration,  and  present  a  bill  or  bills  to  this  Assem- 
bly, at  their  next  session. 

God  save  the  Kine;. 


[The  following  Public  Laws,  passed  during  the  year  1750,  are  printed  at 
length  in  the  volume  of  public  laws,  published  in  the  year  1767,  unless  repealed 
previous  to  that  time.] 

An  Act  providing  that  in  case  of  fire  breaking  out  in  the  town  of  Newport,  and  for 

the  more  speedy  extinguishing  thereof,  and  lor  preserving  goods  endangered 

thereby.     (May.) 
An  Act  to  prevent  delays  in  the  several  courts  of  trials  in  this  colony.     (June.) 
An  Act  relating  to  the  taking  of  bail  in  civil  actions.     (June.) 
An  Act  explaining,  altering  and  amending  "  An  act  for  establishing  and  regulating 

of  fees."     (June.) 
An  Act  for  the  assessing  of  persons  who  are  not  the  proper  inhabitants  of  any  town 

in  this  colony,  that  shall  sell  or  dispose  of  any  goods  or  merchandize  within  the 

same.     (June.) 
An  Act  to  prevent  the  falling  through   of  the   near  approaching  superior  court,  of 

judicature,  &e.,  in  the  county  of  Newport.     (August.) 
An    Act   for    raising    the    prices    of  ferriage    at   several   ferries   in    this   colony. 

(October.) 
An  Act  ascertaining  the  number  of  jurors  to  be  sent  by  the  towns  in  the  county  of 

Kent,  to  the  several  courts  in  that  county.     (October.) 
An  Act  for  setting  up  a  lottery,  to  raise  a  sum  of  money,  in  order  to  build  a  bridge 

over    Pawtucket   river,   between    the    towns    of   Smithfield    and     Cumberland. 

(December.) 
An  Act  establishing  and  appointing  the  quota  of  jurors  to  be  sent  by  the  several 

towns  in  the  county  of  Providence,  to  the   future  courts  within  the  same.     (De- 
cember.) 
An  Act  to  naturalize  Joseph  Antunes,  merchant,  of  Newport,  late  a  subject  of  the 

King  of  Portugal.     (December.) 


318  RECORDS    OF   TUE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1751- 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the  third 
Monday  of  March,  1750-51. 

The  lion.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Robert  Haszard,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

[An  act  was  passed  at  tbis  session,  for  promoting  the  raising  of  flax  and  wool,  and 
for  the  manufiicturing  of  the  same  into  cloth;  also  for  the  encouragement  of  the 
whale  and  cod  fishery  ;  for  which  purpose,  the  same  act  authorized  an  emission  of 
£25,000  in  bills  of  public  credit.     The  preamble  to  the  act  is  as  follows : 

"  Whereas,  it  is  conceived,  that  giving  a  proper  encouragement  for  the  raising  of 
llax  and  wool,  and  manufacturing  the  same  into  cloth,  will  greatly  conduce  to  pro- 
mote frugality  and  industry  ;  and  as  a  consequence  whereof,  it  may  justly  be  ex- 
pected, that  the  vacant  lands  within  this  colony,  now  unimproved  and  lying  waste 
(occasioned  in  some  measure  by  the  late  long  and  tedious  war),  may  be  greatly  im- 
proved to  the  advantage  and  interest  of  His  Majesty's  subjects,  the  inhabitants  of 
this  colony  ;  and  they  under  such  better  circumstances,  be  therefore  enabled,  in  case 
of  another  war,  not  only  to  defend  and  protect  themselves,  &c.,  but  also  greatly 
to  distress  and  annoy  His  Majesty's  enemies  in  these  parts. 

And  whereas,  the  carrying  on  the  whale  and  cod  fishery  within  this  colony,  will 
not  only  much  promote  and  increase  the  trade  and  commerce  thereof;  but  amongst 
(ither  things,  may  be  very  beneficial  to  merchants  and  others,  trading  to  Great 
Britain,  by  furnishing  them  with  proper  remittances  for  the  payment  of  such  goods 
and  merchandise  as  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  may  from  time  to  time,  stand  in 
need  of  from  thence  ;  it  is  therefore  conceived,  that  a  proper  premium  or  bounty 
may  be  necessary,  as  an  encouragement  for  the  purpose  aforesaid. 

And  whereas,  the  colony  hath  been  at  great  and  expensive  costs  and  charge  in 
jnittiiig  themselve  in  a  position  of  defence  in  the  late  war,  and  that  the  treasury  is 
thereby  near  exhausted,  and  no  fund  therein  sufhcient  or  adequate  to  answer  such 
good,  useful  and  beneficial  ends  and  purposes  as  are  designed  and  intended  by  this 
act,  it  is  apprehended  therefore,  that  there  is  a  necessity  of  making  and  emitting 
the  sum  of  X25,000  in  bills  of  public  credit,  of  the  tenor  and  form  hereafter  ex- 
pressed. 

And  whereas,  it  bath  been  found  by  said  experience,  that  one  great  and  principal 
cause  of  the  depreciation  of  the  bills  of  public  credit  already  emitted,  hath  been  owing 
to  the  indirect  and  illegal  practices  of  sundry  persons  giving  and  offering  from  time 
to  time  for  gold,  and  silver,  and  bills  of  exchange,  for  sterling  money,  greater  and 
larger  sums  and  proportions  of  the  bills  of  public  credit  of  this  colony,  than  was 
provided  for,  stated  and  allowed  for  such  silver  and  gold  at  the  respective  times  the 
■-everal  emissions  were  made  ;  and  whieh  not  only  sunk  in  value  such  bills  of  public 


1751.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  319 


credit,  to  the  injury  and  oppresf^ion  of  many  poor  widows,  orphans,  and  others,  but 
thereby  the  gold  and  silver  hath  been  drawn  and  carried  out  of  this  colony,  to  the 
great  discouragement  and  prejudice  of  trade  and  commerce  ;  and  which  practices  are 
still  carrying  on  ;  it  is  therefore  conceived  of  the  highest  importance,  that  such  evil 
practices  for  the  future  be  restrained." 

The  following  was  the  form  of  these  bills  of  credit : 

"  By  a  law  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,  made  and  passed  the  third  Mon- 
day of  March,  A.  D.  1 750,  this  bill  of  due  to  the  possessor  thereof, 
from  the  colony,  shall  pass  current,  and  be  equivalent  to  the  respective  proportions 
of  silver  and  gold,  as  are  regulated  and  stated  in  said  act,  and  shall  be  accordingly 
accepted  by  the  treasurer  of  said  colony,  and  the  receiver  thereof  in  all  payments. 
Providence,  March  the  18th,  1750. 

Death  to  counterfeit  this  bill." 

This  act  provided  that  these  bills  of  credit  should  be  equivalent  to  silver  at  the 
rate  of  6s.  dd.  per  ounce  of  sterling  alloy  ;  or  gold  coin  at  £5  Is.  Gd.  per  ounce  ; 
evei-y  6s.  9d.  of  which  bills,  shall  be  equal  to  54s.  of  the  old  tenor.  They  were  then 
to  be  put  into  the  hands  of  trustees  of  the  several  towns,  and  by  them  let  out  upon 
loan,  at  the  rate  of  six  per  cent,  per  annum,  for  the  space  of  five  years,  to  be  se- 
cured by  mortgages  on  land  double  the  value  of  the  money  loaned. 

The  bounty  on  cloth,  manufactured  of  wool  or  flax,  of  a  certain  texture  and 
length,  was  one-third  its  appraised  value;  that  on  every  pound  of  cured  and 
dressed  flax,  one  penny  a  pound.  Besides  these,  the  manufacturers  were  to  be  ex- 
empt from  taxation  and  all  public  duties.  The  bounty  allowed  on  every  barrel  of 
whale  oil,  was  four  shillings ;  on  every  pound  of  whale-bone,  one  shilling,  and  on 
every  quintal  of  codfish,  2s.  Gd. 

At  the  June  session,  following,  another  act  was  passed,  "  explaining,  amending 
and  repealing  "  certain  portions  of  this  act.  The  preamble  declared  that  the  bounty 
provided  for  manufactured  goods  of  wool,  "  may  draw  the  displeasure  of  Great 
Britain  upon  us,  as  it  wdl  interfere  with  their  most  favorite  manufactory,  while  that 
on  flax,  and  the  fisheries,  have  been  already  tried  and  not  been  found  beneficial." 
These  bounties,  were  therefore  repealed. 

The  portion  of  the  act  which  regulated  the  value  of  the  bills  of  credit,  was  also 
amended,  so  that  it  should  stand  that  sixty-four  shillings  of  the  old  tenor  bills,  and 
sixteen  shillings  of  bills  of  the  new  tenor,  should  be  equal  to  the  ounce  of  silver. 
This  money  was  then  to  be  loaned  at  the  rate  of  five  per  cent,  (instead  of  six  as  be- 
fore provided),  for  the  term  often  years.  A  change  was  also  made  in  the  form  of 
the  bills.  The  following  protest  was  then  made  to  the  amendments  in  the  new 
law: 

"  We,  the  subscribers,  do  dissent  from  the  alterations  in  this  bill  proposed,  and 
do  protest  against  them,  for  the  following  reasons  : 

1.  Because  we  are  of  opinion  the  committee  have  greatly  exceeded  their  power, 
and  made  alterations  which  were  never  voted,  or  even  so  much  as  demanded  in 

V 

this  house. 

2.  Because  we  are  of  opinion  the  alterations  so  made,  are  material  and  essen- 
tial, relating  to  the  very  form  and  denomination  of  the  bills,  and  so  entirely  difl'er- 
ent  from    the  act  passed  in   March   last,  that  the  bills  which  are   to  be  emitted, 


320  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1751. 

cannot  with  any  truth,  be  said  to  be  emitted  by  an  act  made  and  passed  at  that 
time. 

3.  Because  the  other  alterations  in  this  bill  proposed,  have  a  natural  tendency 
to  depreciate,  not  only  the  bills  that  are  to  be  emitted,  but  also  all  the  bills  of  this 
colony  that  are  now  outstanding,  and  must,  in  our  opinion,  unavoidably  produce 
that  effect. 

4.  Because  by  these  alterations,  C.s\  dd.  are  made  to  be  ec^ual  to  16s.,  and  must 
be  so  received  in  all  payments  made  in  this  colony,  with  the  bills  now  proposed  to 
be  emitted,  if  said  alterations  are  passed  as  a  law  of  this  government. 

PETER  BOURS, 
EDWARD  SCOTT."] 

The  committee  that  were  appointed  to  sell  the  hills  of  ex- 
change drawn  b}^  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  in  consequence  of 
an  act  of  the  General  Assembly,  upon  Mr.  Agent  Partridge, 
having  performed  that  service,  made  the  following  report, 
to  wit : 

"Newport,  March  16,  1750-1. 
To  the  Honorable  General  Assembly  : — Whereas,  an  act  of 
this  Assembly,  directed  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  to  draw  bills 
of  exchange  on  Mr.  Richard  Partridge,  of  London,  agent  for 
this  colony,  for  £1,742  65.  10^/.,  sterling,  and  appointed  us,  the 
subscribers,  a  committee,  to  sell  said  bills  of  exchange,  for  bills 
of  credit  emitted  by  this  colon}^  f- — 

In  obedience  to  said  act,  we  have  disposed  of  bills  drawn  on 
said  Partridge,  to  the  amount  of  the  aforesaid  sum,  payable  at 
twenty  days'  sight,  for  bills  of  credit  of  this  colony,  at  eleven 
hundred  per  cent. ;  and  are,  gentlemen, 

Your  most  humble  servants, 
GEORGE  WANTON,  PETER  BOURS, 

DANIEL  JENCKES,  THOMAS  CRANSTON." 

An  Act  to  prevent  all  persons  keeping  house  within  this  colo- 
ny, from  entertaining  Indian,  negro  or  mulatto  servants  or 
slaves.f 


*  This  i  1,742  (;.■-•.  lOd.,  sterling,  at   eleven   hundred   per  cent.,  was  in  old  tenor 
equal  to  £20,908  2s.  0<L 

t  This  act  provided  that  no  Indjan,  mulatto  or  negro  servant  or  slave,  may   pre- 


1751.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS. 


321 


It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  George  Wanton  and  Peter 
Bours,  Esqs.,  together  vpith  Messrs.  Joseph  Harrison  and 
Matthew  Robinson,  be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them, 
are  hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  make  the  draught  of  a 
letter,  respecting  the  northern  boundary  line  of  this  colony,  to 
the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  and  present  the  same 
to  this  Assembly  at  their  next  session. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  £25,000  in  bills  of  credit, 
by  this  Assembly  ordered  to  be  emitted,  be  proportioned  to 
the  several  towns,  as  followeth,  to  wit  : 


£      s. 

Newport    2,750  00 

Providence 2,750  00 

Portsmouth 1,378  15 

Warwick 1,197  00 

Westerly     1,450  00 

New  Shoreham  .  .  415  00 
North  Kingstown.  .1,725  00 
South  Kingstown.  .2,350  00 
East  Greenwich....    625  00 

Smithfield 1,395  00 

Scituate 860  00 

Glocester 788  ]  5 


£     s. 

Jamestown 601  15 

Charlestown 475  00 

West  Greenwich .  . .  546  05 

Coventry 447  10 

Exeter 725  00 

Middletown 745  00 

Bristol •  872  10 

Tiverton    700  00 

Little  Compton  ...  .  83710 

Warren 575  00 

Cumberland 517  10 

Richmond   ... 372  10 


And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  men 
for  the  several  towns,  take  for  each  of  the  mortgages  and  bonds 
in  these  bills,  one  half  of  the  sum  allowed  to  the  committees 
who  let  out  the  last  bank,  and  Is.  od.  of  the  same  bills,  for  every 
right  which  shall  be  transferred ;  and  that  no  one  person  take 
out  of  said  bills,  more  than  £37  10^.,  or  less  than  £3. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  grand  commit- 


sume  to  be  absent  from  the  family  whereto  he  or  she  shall  respectively  belong,  or 
be  found  abroad  in  the  night  time,  after  9  o'clock,  unless   it  be  upon  some  errand 
for  his  or  her  respective  master  or  mistress,  or  owner.     The  act  also  prohibited  all 
traffic  with  any  servant  or  slave. 
VOL.  V.  41 


322 


RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1751. 


tee  purchase  plates  for  the  colony,  and  get  them  engraved  after 
the  best  manner  they  can ;  and  that  the  bills'ibe  printed  on  the 
back  ;  and  such  other  devices  used,  as  the  grand  committee 
shall  think  needful, to  prevent  the  counterfeiting  of  said  bills; 
thatthe  said  committee  procure  paper  for  impressing  said  bills, 
draw  money  out  of  the  general  treasury  for  that  end,  and  get 
tliem  impressed  ;  that  the  grand  committee,  or  any  three  of 
them,  shall  sign  said  bills ;  and  that  when'^^and  as  soon  as  the 
said  bills  shall  be  impressed,  the  plates  shall  be  delivered  to 
His  Honor,  the  Governor. 

Whereas,  there  is  an  act  of  Assembly,  which  among  other 
things,  directs  the  choosing  of  town  committee  men,  annually, 
and  this  Assembly  having  taken  the  same  into  considera- 
tion,— 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  that 
part  of  said  act  that  directs  the  choosing  the  said  towns'  com- 
mittee men  annually,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  repealed. 

Whereas,  Jonathan  Randall,  Richard  Steere  and  Thomas 
Lapham,*  Esqs.,  Capt.  Joseph  Harrison  and  Mr.  William  Robin- 
son, were  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session,  held  in 
Newport,  on  the  first  Wednesday  of  May  last,  appointed  com- 
missioners to  run  and  settle  the  northern  boundary  line  of  this 
colony,  according  to  the  royal  charter,  &c. ;  and  the  aforemen- 
tioned gentlemen  having  assumed  that  province,  and  performed 
that  business,  made  report  as  follows,  to  wit : 

Report  of  the  Commissioners  on  the  Northern  Boundary  Line. 

Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.  To  the  Honorable  General  Assembly,  to  sit  at  Provi- 
dence, in  for  the  said  colony,  on  the  third  Monday  in  March,  1750  : 
Whereas,  this  Honorable  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  Newport,  in  far  said  colo- 
ny, on  the  first  Wednesday  of  May  last  past,  did,  by  an  act  of  Assembly,  constitute 
ami  appoint  us,  the  subscribers,  a  committee,  and  invested  us  with  full  power  and 
authority,  to  run  and  settle  the  northern  boundary  line  of  this  colony,  according  to 
the  royal  charter,  granted  by  King  Charles  the  Second,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord, 
1663 ;  and  also,  to  appoint  times  and  places,  when  and  where  to  meet  commission- 
ers that  wiM-e  or  should  be  appointed  on  the  part  of  the  Province  of  the  Massachu- 
setts Bay,  to  appoint  a  surveyor  or  surveyors  and  cbainmen,  and  in  general  to  act 
and  do  all  and  every  matter  and  thing  for  and  concerning  the  aforesaid  settle- 
ment of  said  line ;  and  that  in  case  no  commissioners  on  the  part  of  said 
Province,  should  and  did  on  the  first  Tuesday  of  October,  thence  next 
after,  or   at   any  other   time  as   should  be   agreed  on  to  meet  us,  the  said  com- 


1751.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  323 


mittee,  and  agree  to  run  and  settle  said  line  as  aforesaid,  then,  and  in  that  case,  we 
or  the  major  part  of  us,  were  thereby  required  to  run  and  settle  the  said  line  ex 
parte,  and  to  draw  a  plat  of  the  land  containeil  within  said  line;  and  with  our  re- 
port to  this  Assembly,  as  by  said  act  and  His  Honor,  Governor  Green's  commis- 
sion for  that  purpose,  reference  being  thereto  had,  will  at  large  appear. 

By  virtue  whereof,  we,  the  said  committee,  do  report,  that  on  the  second  Tues- 
day of  October  last;  past,  wt  repaired  to  Lieut.  Pelatiah  Man's,  in  Wrentham,  where 
we  expected  to  be  met  by  a  committee  on  the  part  of  the  Province  of  the  IVlassachu- 
setts  Bay,  agreeably  to  the  notification  of  our  meeting,  then  given  by  Matthew 
Eobinson,  one  of  our  committee,  to  Col.  John  Chandler,  who  was  then  one  of 
the  committee,  for  said  I'rovince  ;  and  after  waiting  two  days  for  them,  and  no  per- 
son appearing  on  the  part  of  said  Province,  we  entered  upon  the  execution  of  our 
said  commission  ex  parte. 

We  appointed  a  surveyor  and  chainmen,  and  before  we  attempted  to  run  any 
line  or  lines,  or  make  any  survey,  we  thought  it  necessary  to  consult  the  charter  of 
the  colony,  to  find  the  said  northern  boundary  line,  whereby  this  government  is 
thus  bounded : 

"  And  on  the  north  or  northerly,  by  the  aforesaid  south  or  southerly  line  of  the 
Massachusetts  colony  or  plantation  ;"  whereby  we  were  referred  to  the  Massachu- 
settts  colony  charter,  which  we  find  thus  expressed  :  "  All  that  part  of  New  Kno'- 
land,  in  America,  aforesaid,  which  lies  and  extends  between  a  great  river  there, 
commonly  called  Monomack,  alias  Merimack,  a  certain  other  river  there,  called 
Charles  river,  being  in  a  bottom  of  a  certain  bay  there,  commonly  called  Matta- 
chusetts,  alias  Massachusetts,  alias  Massatusetts  Bay ;  and  also,  all  and  singular 
those  lands  and  hereditaments  whatsoever,  lying  within  the  space  of  three  English 
miles  on  the  south  part  of  the  said  Charles  river,  or  of  any  and  every  part  thereof;  ' 
and  also,  all  and  singular  the  lands  and  hereditaments  whatsoever,  lying  and  be- 
ing within  the  space  of  three  English  miles  to  the  southward  of  the  southernmost 
part  of  the  said  bay,  called  Massachusetts,  alias  Mattachusetts,  alias  Massatusetts 
Bay  ;  and  also  all  those  lands  and  hereditaments  whatsoever,  which  lie  and  be  within 
the  space  of  three  English  miles  to  the  northward  of  the  said  river  called  Monomack, 
alias  Merimack  ;  or  to  the  northward  of  any  and  every  part  thereof;  and  all  lands 
and  hereditaments,  whatsoever,  lying  within  the  limits  aforesaid,  north  and  south, 
in  latitude,  and  in  breadth  and  in  length  and  longitude,  of  and  within  all  the 
breadth,  atbresaid,  throughout  the  main  land  there  from  the  Atlantic  and  Western 
sea  and  ocean  on  the  east  part,  to  the  south  sea  on  the  west  part ;"  which  said  charter 
having  been  vacated  in  1684,  we  find  that  by  the  new  charter  grant^  by  King 
William  and  Queen  Mary,  to  the  said  Province,  there  is  granted  "  all  tnat  part  of 
New  England,  in  America,  lying  and  extending  from  the  great  river,  commonly 
called  Monomack,  alias  Merimack,  on  the  north  part,  and  from  three  miles  north- 
ward of  the  said  river,  to  the  Atlantic  or  Western  sea  or  ocean  on  the  south  part, 
and  all  the  lands  and  hereditaments  whatsoever,  lying  within  the  limits  aforesaid, 
and  extending  as  far  as  the  outermost  points  or  promontories  of  land  called  Cape 
Cod  and  Cape  Mallabar,  north  and  south,  and  in  latitude,  breadth,  and  in  length 
and  in  longitude  of  and  within  all  the  breadth  and  compass  aforesaid  ;  throughout 
the  main  land  there,  from  the  said  Atlantic  or  Western  sea  and  ocean  on  the  east 
part,  towards  the  South  sea  ;  or  westward,  as  far  as  our  colonies  of  Rhode  Island, 
Connecticut  and  the  Narragansett  country." 

And  upon  comparing  the  words  of  the  said  charters  together  recited,  as  aforesaid, 


324  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1751. 

it  appeared,  that  the  first  thing  necessary,  was  to  find  the  southernmost  part  or 
parts  of  said  Charles  river;  in  order  whereto,  we  surveyed  the  same,  beginning 
on  the  12th  day  of  October,  Anno  Domini  1750,  a  little  below  the  bridge,  called  the 
JHcw  Bridge,  near  Partridge's  house ;  from  hence  the  course  of  said  river  runs 
northward  ;  and  also  proceeded  upwards  so  far  as  where  Hopping  Brook  and  Sec- 
ond Bridge  river  meet  and  form  said  Charles  river,  being  at  the  corner  of  Hollis- 
town  and  Bellingham  ;  and  having  accurately  planned  the  said  survey  with  the  vari- 
ous turnings  and  windings  of  the  said  river,  we  found  the  southernmost  part  there- 
of to  be  about  four  rods  to  the  westward  of  the  place  where  Mill  Brook  falls  into 
said  river,  which  is  thirty-six  poles  south,  thirty  degrees  west  from  the  said  bridge, 
called  the  New  Bridge  ;  and  from  the  said  place  or  turning,  where  Mill  Brook  fails 
into  said  river,  we  measured  accurately  with  two  wooden  poles,  three  English  miles, 
due  south,  which  terminated  upon  a  shrubby  plain,  in  Wrentham,  where  we 
made  a  monument  with  a  heap  of  stones,  and  set  up  a  pine  stake  in  said  heap  of 
stones.  From  whence,  we  run  a  due  west  line  to  where  it  intersects  a  due  north 
line  from  Pawtucket  Falls;  which  intersection  is  the  north-cast  corner  of  this  colo- 
ny, and  is  about  fifty  rods  north-easterly  from  Robert  Blake's  house,  in  Wrentham ; 
and  at  the  said  north-east  corner,  we  erected  a  monument,  with  a  heap  of  stones  at 
a  pitch  pine  tree,  then  proceeded  to  run  a  due  west  line  ;  and  in  the  running  said 
course,  we  marked  divers  trees  and  made  observations  of  particular  and  notable 
places,  to  know  said  line  by,  as  follows  : 

Said  line  passed  about  sixty  rods  southward  of  Wrentham  West  Precinct  meeting 
house,  just  touched  the  southernmost  part  of  Thompson's  river,  alias  Second  Bridge 
river,  in  Bellingham  ;  passed  about  four  foot  to  the  northward  of  Uriah  Thayer's 
barn,  and  eleven  rods  to  the  northward  of  William  Thayer's  house,  in  Mendon, 
and  between  Thomas  Taft's  house  and  barn,  and  four  rods  southward  of  Ebenezer 
Burt's  house,  and  crossed  the  farm  of  Nathan  Rosen,  near  his  house,  about  fifty 
rods  eastward  of  Blackstone's  river  ;  then  passed  about  fifteen  rods  northward  of 
Samuel  Read's  barn,  then  to  a  remarkable  pine  tree,  about  one  hundred  rods  to  the 
south-east  of  David  Draper's  house,  in  Uxbridge,  and  passed  about  fourteen  rods 
southward  of  Isaac  Martm's  house,  in  Douglass,  and  about  ten  rods  northward  of 
Jonathan  Wheeler's  house,  in  Sutton,  crossed  Manchaug  pond,  where  the  brook 
runs  out ;  then  crosses  an  arm  of  the  said  pond,  and  passes  about  five  rods  north- 
ward of  Leonard's,  in  Douglas,  then  to  the  north-west  corner,  which  is  made  by  an 
intersection  of  the  dividing  line  between  Connecticut  and  this  colony,  which  was 
<ontinued,  to  make  said  corner,  where  we  erected  a  monument  of  stones,  near  to  a 
large  whita^ak  tree,  which  we  marked. 

During  the  whole  of  our  proceedings,  as  aforesaid,  we  made  frequent  observa- 
tions, of  the  variation  of  the  compass,  and  made  allowances  accordingly  ;  finding  it 
generally  to  be  about  eight  degrees  westward. 

And  whereas,  we  find,  by  the  report  made  by  the  committee  on  the  part  of  this 
colony,  that  run  the  north  line  of  said  colony,  in  the  year  1J49,  that  "  they  found  a 
place  where  Charles  River  formed  a  crescent  southerly,  which  place  is  known  to 
many  by  the  name  of  Popotatick  pond,  which  we  take  to  be  the  southernmost  part 
of  said  river,  from  tho'southernmost  part  whereof  they  measured  three  English  miles 
south,"  we  thought  it  necessary  to  inquire  into  the  same,  to  see  if  the  said  pond  was 
any  part  of  said  Charles  river ;  andfound  upon  strict  examination,  that  it  could  by  no 
means  be  deemed  any  part  thereof;  tor,  that  there  is  a  ridge,  or  bank  of  sand  and 
gravel,  that  dividcB  between  said  pond  and  river  on  the  south  side  of  said  river  ;  and 


1751.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  S25 

when  the  stream  of  said  river  is  low,  said  bank  is  almost  dry,  whereby  said'pond  is 
distinct  from  any  part  of  said  river ;  consequently,  the  set  off,  made  by  said  com- 
mittee, was  owing  to  their  insufficient  examination  of  the  said  pond  ;  therefore, 
their  doings  thereon,  were  erroneous,  and  ought  to  be  rejected. 

And  whereas,  it  so  happened,  that  we  were  obliged  to  make  several  adjourn- 
ments before  we  could  get  through  with  said  line,  we  took  special  care  that  notice 
was  given  by  the  secretary  of  this  colony,  to  the  secretary  of  the  Province  of  the 
Massachusetts  Bay,  of  each  and  every  of  our  adjournments,  except  the  last,  and  of 
the  times  and  places  of  our  meeting,  that  we  might  (if  possible,)  have  a  committee 
onthe  part  of  the  Province  to  meet  us,in  order  to  a  full  and  satisfactory  settlements 
of  said  line  between  the  said  two  governments ;  but  as  no  committee  from  said 
Province  did,  at  any  time  meet  us,  we  proceeded  and  run  said  line  throughout,  ex 
parte. 

And  in  obedience  to  said  act  of  this  Honorable  Assembly,  appointing  us,  as 
aforesaid,  we  have  hereto  annexed  a  plat  of  the  land  contained  within  the  aforesaid 
line ;  which  said  line  runs  as  aforesaid  ;  we  find,  by  comparing  said  charters  to- 
gether, as  aforesaid,  to  be  the  true  north  boundary  line  of  this  colony,  dividing  be- 
tween it  and  the  said  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  upon  the  strictest  exami- 
nation we  could  make  ;  and  of  right,  the  land  on  the  soutli  side  thereof,  to  belong 
to  this  colony. 

All  which,  is  humbly  submitted  by —  ' 

JONATHAN  PvANDALL,  JOSEPH  HARRISON, 

RICHARD  STEERE,  MATTHEW  ROBINSON. 

THOMAS  LAPHAM, 
Providence,  March  16th,  1750-1. 

And  this  Assembly  having  taken  the  said  report  into  consid- 
eration,— 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  said 
report  be,  and  it  is  hereby  accepted  ;  and  that  the  committee 
aforesaid,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  further  continued  ;  and  they, 
or  the  major  part  of  them,  have  the  liberty  to  make  all  needful 
and  necessary  additions  to  the  report,  aforesaid,  and  plat  there- 
with delivered  in. 

God  save  the  Kino-. 


326  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1751. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhli/,  held  for  the  Coloui/  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newjwrt,  the  last  day 
of  April,  1751. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Ptobert  Ilaszarcl,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

Capt.  George  Wanton,  Mr.  James  Arnold, 

Mr.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Mr.  William  Richmond, 

Mr.  John  Potter,  Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 

Mr.  Robert  Lawton,  Mr.  Jeoffrey  Watson. 

The  Hon.  Thomas   Cranston,  speaker,  and   Mr.  Josias  Lyn- 
don, clerk. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhlg,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  first  Wednes- 
day of  May,  1751. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Robert  Haszfird,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

DEPUTIES. 

Newport.  ]\Ir.  Peter  Bours, 

Mr.  Nathaniel  Coggeshall,  Mr.  Jonathan  Easton, 

Mr.  Edward  Scott,  Capt.  Job  Bennett. 
Mr.  Thomas  Cranston, 


1751.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


DEPUTIES. 


Providence. 
Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Mr.  Elisha  Brown, 
Mr.  Joseph  Wanton, 
Mr.  Christopher  Harris. 

Portsmouth. 
Mr.  William  Anthony,  Jr., 
Mr.  John  Allen, 
Mr.  Thomas  Brownell, 
Mr.  Gideon  Freeborn,  Jr. 

Warwick. 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Lippitt, 
Capt.  John  Greene, 
Major  John  Rhodes, 
Major  Stephen  Low. 

Westerlif. 
Col.  Joseph  Pendleton, 
Capt.  Caleb  Church. 

New  Shoreham. 
Mr.  John  Dodge, 
Mr.  Abel  Franklin,  Jr. 

North  Ivingstoivn. 
Col.  Immanuel  Northup, 
Mr.  Beriah  Brown. 

South  Kingstown. 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Niles, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Peckham,  Jr. 

East  Greenwich. 
Mr.  Joseph  Nichols, 
Capt.  Thomas  Spencer. 

Jamestown. 
Mr.  John  Hull, 
Mr.  Joseph  Clarke. 


Smithfield. 
Mr.  Thomas  Arnold, 
Mr.  John  Aid  rich. 
Scituate. 
Capt.  Job  Randal], 
Capt.  Charles  Harris. 

Glocester. 
Maj.  Richard  Smith, 
Capt.  Timothy  Wilmot. 

Charlestown. 
Col.  Christopher  Charaplin, 
Capt.  Nathaniel  Lewis. 

West  Greenwich. 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Ellis, 
Mr.  George  Gardner. 

Coventry. 
Mr.  George  Hall, 
Mr.  John  Greene. 
Exeter. 
Capt.  John  Reynolds, 
Mr.  Benoni  Hall. 

Middletoimi. 
Mr.  John  Rogers, 
Mr.  Peter  Barker. 

Bristol. 
Mr.  Jonathan  Peck, 
Mr.  Joseph  Russell. 

Tiverton. 
Capt.  John  Manchester, 
Mr.  Samuel  Durfey. 
Little  Compton. 
Lieut.  Col.  John  Hunt, 
Mr.  Charles  Brownell. 


328 


RECORDS   OF   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1751. 


Warren. 
Capt.  John  Adams, 
Mr.  John  Cole. 

Cumberland. 
Mr.  Job  Bartlett, 
jNIr.  John  Dexter. 


DEPUTIES. 

Bichmond. 
Mr.  Samuel  Tift, 
Capt.  Joseph  Enos,  Jr. 


The  Hon.  Thomas  Cranston,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 

The  following  officers  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 


ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  John  Tilliughast,  Mr.  Robert  Lawton, 


Mr.  Jonathan  Nichols, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Cooke, 
Mr.  Jabez  Bowen, 
Mr.  Stephen  Brownell, 


Mr.  James  Arnold, 
Mr.  William  Richmond, 
Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 
j\Ir.  Jeoffrey  Watson. 


SECRETARY. 

Mr.  Thomas  Ward. 

ATTORNEY    GENERAL. 

Mr.  Daniel  Updike. 


GENERAL  TREASURER. 

Mr.  Thomas  Richardson. 


God  save  tlie  Kino-. 


1751.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  329 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemUy,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  second  Mon- 
day in  June,  1751. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Daniel  Coggeshall,  Stephen 
Hopkins  and  Job  Randall,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  form  the  draught  of  a  letter  to  be  sent 
from  the  agent,  and  present  the  same  to  this  Assembly  as  soon 
as  may  be. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Daniel  Coggeshall,  William 
Anthony,  Jr.,  and  Immanuel  Northup,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby  constituted  a  committee,  to  examine  into  the  state  and 
circumstances  of  the  several  ferries  in  this  colony  ;  examine 
the  laws  relating  thereto,  and  report  to  this  Assembly,  at  their 
next  session,  what  they  shall  think  necessary  to  be  done,  in 
order  to  put  said  ferries  under  a  good  regulation. 

WhereaSj  sundry  persons,  who  call  themselves  inhabitants  of 
this  colony,  have  lately  petitioned  His  Majesty,  respecting  our 
paper  currency ; — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  Jabez  Bowen,  Esq., 
Mr.  Elisha  Brown  and  Joseph  Nichols,  Esq.,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  inquire  into  the  relation,  sta- 
tion and  circumstances  which  the  said  petitioners  stand  in,  to 
His  Majesty  and  this  colony,  and  make  report  to  this  Assem- 
bly, at  their  next  session. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved^  that  Nicholas  Cook  and  Stephen 
Hopkins,  Esqs.,  Col.  Immanuel  Northup,  and  Mr.  Jeremiah 
Lippitt,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  constituted  a  committee,  to 
examine  into  the  facts  contained  in  a  petition  preferred  to  His 
Majesty,  by  sundry  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  colony, — a  copy  of 

VOL.  V.         42 


330  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1751. 

which  is   now  lying  before  this  Assembly — and   report  their 
opinion  thereon,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

And  the  said  committee  having  assumed  the  province  as- 
signed them,  made  the  following  report : 

'•  We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  a  committee  by  the 
General  Assembly,  to  examine  the  matters  of  fact  contained  in 
a  petition  preferred  to  His  Majesty,  by  sundry  of  the  inhabit- 
ants of  this  colony,  and  to  report  our  opinion  thereon ;  and  we 
having  taken  that  business  upon  us,  and  having  duly  exam- 
ined the  facts  asserted  in  said  petition,  and  having  carefully 
inquired  into  the  records  of  the  colony,  that  have  any  relation 
to  those  matters  of  fact,  do  report,  as  our  opinion  : — 

That  the  first  fact  asserted, '  That  the  currency  of  this  gov- 
ernment is  so  far  from  being  fixed,  that  it  hath  sunk  in  its 
value  above  one  half,  within  seven  years  last  past ;'  which  as- 
sertion, we  think,  is  not  strictly  true. 

That  the  second  fact  asserted,  '  That  this  colony  hath  now 
outstanding,  the  sum  of  £525,335,  in  bills  of  public  credit ; 
which,  upon  examination,  we  fi.nd  not  to  be  true ;  there  not  be- 
ing, at  the  date  of  the  petition,  bills  amounting  to  that  sum, 
outstanding. 

That  as  to  the  other  facts,  asserted  in  this  petition,  we,  on 
the  most  exact  examination,  cannot  say,  but  that  they  are 
strictly  true. 

NICHOLAS  COOKE,         JEREmAH  LIPPITT, 
STEPHEN  HOPKINS,       IMMANUEL  NORTHUP. 

Newport,  June  17,  1751." 

And  now,  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  said  report  into 
consideration, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
said  report  be,  and  it  is  hereby  accepted. 

Whereas,  upon  occasion  of  the  death  of  His  late  Royal 
Highness,  Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales,  &c.,  it  was  ordered  by 
His  Majesty's  privy  council,  that  a  particular  form  shall  be  ob- 
served, in  praying  for  the  royal  family  ;  and  this  colony  have 


1751.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  331 

received  directions  to  cause  the  same  to  be  published  in  the 
several  parish  churches,  and  other  places  of  Divine  worship 
within  this  colony, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  re- 
quested to  cause  proclamation  to  be  made,  that  said  order  be  ob- 
served throughout  this  colony,  according  to  the  true  intent 
and  meaning  thereof. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Jonathan  Nichols,  Stephen 
Hopkins  and  Peter  Bours,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  con- 
stituted a  committee,  to  take  into  consideration  the  petition  of 
the  sugar  planters,  merchants,  and  others,  trading  to,  and  inter- 
ested in  His  Majesty's  sugar  colonies,  in  America,  and  to  col- 
lect and  gather  such  facts  as  shall  be  thought  proper,  to  furnish 
the  agent  with,  as  necessary  in  opposing  said  petition ;  and  to 
that  end,  the  said  committee  are  hereby  invested  with  full 
power  to  send  for  persons  and  papers  from  any  part  of  the  col- 
ony'; and  that  said  committee  prepare  a  letter  for  His  Honor 
the  Governor,  to  sign,  to  be  sent  to  the  neighboring  govern 
ments,  requesting  their  assistance  in  the  affair. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  copy  of  the  petition  pre- 
ferred to  His  Majesty,  by  sundry  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  re- 
specting the  paper  currency,  with  the  petitioners'  names  there 
to,  together  with  the  resolutions  of  the  House  of  Commons 
thereon  ;  and  also  the  bill  prepared  in  consequence  thereof,  and 
presented  to  Parliament,  be  forthwith  put  into  print,  at  the 
colony's  charge ;  and  that  two  hundred  copies  thereof,  be 
struck  off,  and  that  each  of  the  members  of  the  General  As- 
sembly, each  of  the  towns'  committee  for  letting  out  the  bank 
money  (being  not  a  member  of  the  Assembly),  and  each  town 
clerk,  in  this  colony,  be  furnished  with  a  copy  ;  and  that  the 
secretary  procure  the  same  to  be  done. 

Whereas,  Jonathan  Easton,  of  Middletown,  in  the  county  of 
Newport,  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  upon  the  report 
of  Messrs.  Robert  Lawton,  Jonathan  Peck  and  Matthew  Allen, 
to  the  General  Assembly,  concerning  a  way  from  Easton's 
Beach,  easterly,  in   the   town    of  Middletown,   aforesaid,  the 


332  RECORDS    OP   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE  KLAND  [1751. 

town  council  for  the  town  of  Middletown,  were  ordered  and 
empowered  to  lay  out  a  drift-way  of  a  convenient  breadth, 
across  the  land  of  him,  the  said  Jonathan  Easton,  in  part  ac- 
cording to  the  direction  of  said  report ;  in  consequence  where- 
of, the  said  council  did  proceed  and  lay  out  said  way,  but  not 
according  to  the  said  directions  of  the  General  Assembly,  in 
the  place  where  the  old  way  used  to  be,  but  in  another  place  ; 
and  by  altering  the  ancient  way,  the  said  road  where  it  passeth 
through  the  said  Jonathan  Easton's  land,  is  twenty-eight  rods 
in  breadth ;  although  that  part  where  it  so  passeth  through  his 
land,  is  but  twenty-five  rods  in  length ;  so  that  the  order  of  the 
General  Assembly  is  disobeyed,  and  the  said  Jonathan  greatly 
hurt,  and  the  public  no  way  benefited  thereby ;  whereupon, 
he  prayed  relief,  &c. ; — 

And  this  Assembly  having  taken  the  premises  into  consid- 
eration, do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that 
James  Arnold,  Job  Randall  and  Christopher  Harris,  Esqs.,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  go  and  examine 
into  the  circumstances  of  the  drift  way,  in  said  petition  men- 
tioned ;  and  that  the  said  committee,  or  the  major  part  of  them, 
be,  and  they  are  hereby  directed  and  fully  impowered  to  deter- 
mine how,  and  in  what  manner,  and  of  what  width  the  said 
drift  way  shall  run  through  the  lands  of  the  said  Jonathan 
Easton,  at  his,  the  said  Easton's  charge ;  and  that  their  report 
in  the  matter  be  final. 

And  the  said  committee  having  entered  upon,  and  performed 
the  business,  made  the  following  report : 

"  Whereas,  we,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  a  committee, 
by  the  General  Assembly,  to  settle  and  state  part  of  the  drift 
way  through  Middletown,  from  beach  to  beach,  through 
Jonathan  Easton's  land,  do  report  as  followeth  : 

To  begin  at  the  northern  and  easternmost  gate,  that  stands 
where  the  old  bars  were,  upon  the  dividing  line  between  Edw. 
Easton's  and  Jonathan  Easton's  land ;  and  to  begin  one  rod 
northward  of  said  gate,  and  to  run  s.  80,  e.  twenty-five  rods, 
near  to  a  rock,  and  to  be  four  rods  wide,  lying  south   of  said 


1751.]  AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  333 

line,  as  it  appears  by  the  plan  abovesaid,  which  we  think  to  be 
sufficient  drift  way.  JAMES  ARNOLD, 

JOB  RANDALL, 
June  19,  1751."  CHRISTOPHER  HARRIS. 

And  now,  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  said  report  into 
consideration,  and  duly  examined  the  same,  do  vote  and  re- 
solve, and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  report  be,  and 
it  is  hereby  accepted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £200  be  allowed 
and  paid  to  Capt.  Joseph  Harrison,  and  Mr.  Matthew  Robin- 
son, out  of  the  general  treasury,  towards  satisfying  them,  for 
their  time,  trouble  and  expenses,  as  commissioners  in  the  ser- 
vice of  the  colony,  respecting  the  northern  boundary  line. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  Capt. 
Joseph  Harrison  and  Mr.  Matthew  Robinson,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  examine  into  all  the  cir- 
cumstances and  matters  of  fact,  relating  to  the  northern  boun- 
dary line  of  this  colony,  with  full  power  to  procure  all  such 
evidences,  records  and  papers,  as  may  be  thereunto  necessary, 
and  to  correspond  and  join  with  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  or 
a  committee  by  them  appointed,  if  it  be  found  most  expedient, 
in  the  prosecution  of  that  affair ;  and  upon  the  whole,  to  pre- 
pare as  complete  a  state  of  the  case  as  they  are  able,  and  to 
lay  the  same  before  this  Assembly  at  their  next  session,  or  as 
soon  as  the  same  can  conveniently  be  done. 

God  save  the  King. 


334  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLO^T    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1751. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Asscmhl^,  held  for  the  Colon?/  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport^  the  third  Mon- 
day of  August,  1751. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Edward  Scott,  Peter  Bours 
and  Edward  Easton,  Esqs.,  together  with  the  secretary,  be,  and 
they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  hereby  constituted  a  com- 
mittee, to  collect  all  the  public  laws  and  acts  of  this  colony 
that  have  been  made  since  the  termination  of  the  printed  book, 
and  put  them  into  print,  and  make  a  book  thereof,  with  a  pro- 
per table  ;  and  that  five  hundred  such  books,  and  no  more,  on 
any  pretence  whatsoever,  be  printed  ;  the  whole  to  be  at  the 
charge  of  the  colony ;  and  when  done,  to  be  lodged  in  the 
hands  of  the  general  treasurer. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  committee 
take  security  of  the  printer,  that  he  will  not  print,  or  suffer  to 
be  printed  in  his  press,  any  greater  than  the  above  mentioned 
number  ;  and  that  one  of  said  books  be  delivered  to  each  town 
clerk  in  the  colony,  to  and  for  the  use  of  each  respective 
town. 

The  committee  that  was  appointed  by  this  Assembly,  at 
their  last  session,  to  inquire  into  the  relation,  station  and  cir- 
cumstances of  sundry  persons,  who  (calling  themselves  inhab- 
itants of  this  colony,)  lately  petitioned  His  Majesty,  respecting, 
our  paper  currency,  made  the  following  report : 

"  To  the  General  Assembly,  now  sitting  in  Newport,  the  22d 

of  August,  A.  D.  1751 : 

By  virtue  of  the  vote  of  the  General  Assembly,  in  June  last, 
appointing  us  to  inquire  into   tlio  relation,  station  and  circum- 


1751.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  335 

stances,  which  certain  persons,  lately  petitioners  to  His  Majes- 
ty, stand  in  to  His  Majesty  and  this  colony,  as  by  said  vote 
may  appear,  we  have  inquired  into  the  same,  in  the  best  man- 
ner we  are  capable,  for  the  time,  and  do  report : 

That  we  find,  upon  the  best  information  we  can  obtain,  that 
all  but  twelve  of  the  said  petitioners  are  freemen  6f  this  colo- 
ny, or  of  some  town  or  other  in  this  colony  ;  and  that,  as  to 
their  relation,  station  or  circumstances,  we  find  that  two  of  the 
are  officers,  to  wit :  Ebenezer  Richardson,  is  the  justice  of  the 
peace,  in  this  colony,  in  the  county  of  Newport;  and  that  the 
circumstances  o(  some  of  them,  are  visibly  very  considerable  ; 
but  the  circumstances  of  others  are  to  us  unknown. 

JABEZ  BOWEN, 
ELISHA  BROWN, 
JOSEPH  NICHOLS." 

And  now,  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  said  report  into 
consideration, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
same  be,  and  it  is  hereby  accepted. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  draught  of  a  letter  to  our 
agent  in  Great  Britain,  made  by  a  committee,  appointed  for 
that  purpose,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  approved ;  and  that  a 
fair  copy  thereof,  be  made,  to  be  signed  by  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  and  sent  to  the  agent,  by  the  first  opportunity. 

Whereas,  the  bills  of  credit  that  have  been  emitted  by  this 
colony,  have  all  along,  from  their  first  being  current  as  a  me- 
dium of  exchange,  depreciated,  and  gradually  grown  less  in 
their  value,  down  to  this  time,  which  hath  occasioned  many 
people  to  complain,  and  that  with  just  cause,  that  they  have 
been  sufferers  by  such  the  alteration  of  the  medium  established 
by  the  laws  of  this  colony ;  therefore,  for  the  preventing  any 
such  inconveniency  from  happening  for  the  future, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authority 
thereof  it  is  hereby  enacted,  that  in  all  debts  that  now  are,  or 
hereafter  shall  become  due  in  this  colony,  by  any  manner  or  way 
whatsoever,  that  for  every  sixty-four  shillings  appearing  to  be 


336  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1751. 

due  ill  old  tenor  bills,  or  for  every  16-5.  appearing  to  be  due  in 
new  tenor  bills,  or  for  every  six  shillings  and  nine  pence 
appearing  to  be  due  in  the  bills  emitted  in  March,  A.  D. 
1750,  the  debtor  at  the  time  of  payment,  shall  pay  as  much 
in  any  of  the  aforementioned  bills,  as  at  the  time  of  payment 
are  really  aiid  truly  worth  one  ounce  of  silver,  of  sterling  alloy ; 
and  that  all  judgments  in  all  the  courts  in  this  colony,  shall 
at  all  times  hereafter,  be  made  up  agreeably  to  this  act. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
no  court  shall  at  any  time  hereafter,  in  this  colony,  make  up 
judgment  against  any  man  for  any  debt,  whatsoever,  that  does 
not  exceed  sixty-four  shillings,  in  old  tenor  bills,  or  sixteen 
shillings  in  new  tenor  bills,  or  six  shillings  and  nine  pence,  in 
the  bills  emitted  in  March,  A.  D.  1750,  for  more  of  said  bills 
than  at  the  time  of  making  up  such  judgment,  are  truly  and 
really  worth  one  ounce  of  silver  of  sterling  alloy  at  that  time  ; 
and  so  in  proportion  for  any  greater  or  less  sum. 

Protest. 

"  We,  the  subscribers,  do  dissent  from  and  protest  against 
this  bill,  for  the  following  reasons  : 

1.  Because  we  are  of  opinion,  that  the  method  proposed  in 
this  bill  will  not  prevent  a  further  depreciation  of  the  bills  we 
have  now  outstanding,  which  are  fixed  by  laws  of  the  colony, 
at  a  very  different  value  from  what  they  are  stated  at  in  this  bill. 

2.  Because  our  bills  of  the  new  tenor  are,  by  the  acts 
whereby  they  were  emitted,  of  the  same  value  as  the  bills  by 
the  act  of  March  passed  to  be  emitted  ;  and  it  is  manifestly 
absurd  and  unjust,  that  six  shillings  and  nine  pence  of  the  one, 
should  be  made  equal  to  sixteen  shillings  of  the  other. 

3.  Because  six  shillings  and  nine  pence  in  bills  of  the  new 
tenor,  are  by  a  law  of  this  colony,  made  in  May,  1741,  equal 
only  to  twenty-seven  shillings  in  bills  of  old  tenor ;  but  by 
this  bill,  sixty-four  shillings  in  our  old  tenor  bills,  are  made 
equal  to  six  shillings  and  nine  pence  in  bills  of  the  same  value 
as  the  ))i]ls  of  the  new  tenor,  which  appears  to  us  to  be  mani- 
festly unreasonable  and  unjust. 


1751.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  337 

4.  Because  if  this  bill  sliould  pass  into  a  law,  we  apprehend 
that  the  public  faith  and  credit  of  the  government  will  be 
violated.  PETER  BOURS, 

Newport,  August  23,  1751."  EDWARD  SCOTT. 

The  gentlemen  that  were  appointed  to  audit  the  accounts  of 
the  committee  that  paid  off  the  officers  and  soldiers  raised  in 
this  colony  for  the  expedition  intended  against  Canada,  pre- 
sented this  Assembly  with  the  following  report  and  account : 

The  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,  to  Stephen  Hopkins,  Dr. 

Sterling.  Currency. 
£      s.  d.  X,       s.  d. 
1750,  Oct.  31.     To  money  paid  to  the  officers  and  sol- 
diers raised  for  the  Canada  expedi- 
tion, per  account  rendered 1,295  10  7  12,955  5  10 

900  per  cent,  exchange,  or  10  for  1,  is          19  08  1  194  0  10 


Balance  due  to  the  colony,  £1,314  18  8         13,149  6  08 

.The  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  &c.,  to  Stephen  Hopkins,  Cr. 

Sterhng.  Currency. 

£      s.  d.  £        i'.  d. 

1749,  June  17.  By  the  muster  roll  of  the  company  in 
His  Majesty's  service,  raised  in  this 
colony,  for  the  reduction  of  Canada ; 
first  commanded  by  Capt.  William 
Rice,  until   his  death ;  afterwards, 

by  Capt.  Nathan  Carpenter 1,314  18  8 

900  per  cent,  exchange,  or  10  for  1,  is  13,149  C  8 

"  We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly,  a  committee  to 
audit  the  accounts  of  that  committee,  which  was  appointed  to  pay  off  the  officers 
and  soldiers  raised  for  the  intended  expedition  against  Canada,  do  report  conforma- 
bly to  said  appointment : 

We  have  audited  the  above  account  of  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  one  of  said  com- 
mittee, and  do  find  there  is  due  from  him  to  the  colony,  £194  10s.,  old  tenor,  as 
appears  by  the  above  account  stated.  JOSEPH  WHIPPLE, 

JOHN  TILLINGHAST, 

Dated  Newport,  August  21,  1751.  THOMAS  CRANSTON." 

The  colony  of  Rhode  Island,         Dr. 
To  our  time  and  trouble,  auditing  the  above  account ;  likewise  audit- 
ing the  account  of  Messrs.  George  Wanton  and  James  Sheffield, 

two  others  of  said  committee £45  Os.  Oa. 

JOSEPH  WHIPPLE, 
JOHN  TILLINGHAST, 
THOMAS  CRANSTON." 

VOL.  V.         43 


338  RECORDS    OF    THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1751. 

And  now  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  premises  into 
consideration,  and  duly  examined  the  same, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
said  report  be,  and  it  is  hereby  accepted ;  that  the  amount 
charged  by  the  committee  against  the  colony,  be  allowed,  and 
£45,  the  amount  thereof,  paid  them  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kings- 
tovm,  the  last  Wednesday  in  October,  1751. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Whereas,  upon  His  Majesty's  creating  His  Royal  Highness, 
Prince  George,  Prince  of  Wales,  he  was  pleased  to  order  in 
council,  that  a  particular  form  of  prayer  should  be  used  in 
praying  for  the  royal  family,  and  hath  directed  this  govern- 
ment to  cause  the  same  to  be  published  in  the  several  parish 
churches,  and  other  places  of  divine  worship,  within  this  colo- 
ny, &c.,— 

This  Assembly  therefore  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted 
and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  cause  proclama- 
tion to  be  made  of  the  aforesaid  order  throughout  the  colony, 
requiring  it  to  be  observed  according  to  the  true  intent  and 
meaning  thereof 

Whereas,  the  town  of  Providence,  did,  by  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Esq.,  one  of  their  deputies,  represent  unto  this  Assembly,  that 
in  and  near  said  town,  for  some  time  past,  there  hath  been, 
and  still  is  carried  on,  a  considerable  trade  by  sea,  whereby  the 
small  pox  hath  of  late  been  very  often  brought  into  said  town; 
and  as  there  is  no  pest  house  in  that  part  of  the  colony  for  the 
receiving  such  infected  persons,  there  is  very  great  danger  of 
the  distemper's  spreading ;  which  (should  it  happen)  would  be 


1751.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  339 

of  very  fatal  consequence  to  this  colony  ;  he  therefore,  in  be- 
half of  said  town,  prayed  a  grant  of  such  a  sum  of  money  out 
of  the  general  treasury,  as  this  Assembly  shall  think  reasona- 
ble for  the  purpose  aforesaid  ;  which  being  duly  considered, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £600,  be  allowed 
and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  towards  building  a  pest 
house,  for  the  end  and  purpose,  aforesaid. 

And  that  Mr.  William  Smith,  of  Providence,  be  empowered 
to  draw  said  sum,  for  the  use  aforesaid,  upon  sufficient  securi- 
ty's being  lodged  in  the  general  treasury  that  all  parts  of  the 
government  shall  have  the  privilege  of  making  use  of  said 
house  as  often  as  occasion  shall  require  ;  the  county  of  New- 
port excepted. 

Whereas,  Thomas  Haszard,  keeper  of  His  Majesty's  jail,  at 
South  Kingstown,  in  the  county  of  Kings  county,  by  petition, 
represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  on  the  24th  of  February 
last,  one  Thomas  Carter,  of  Newport,  was  committed  to  said 
jail,  for  the  murder  of  William  Jackson,  late  of  Virginia  ;  that 
said  Carter  was  by  the  said  Haszard,  safely  kept  in  said  jail, 
till  the  10th  of  May,  when  he  was  executed ;  that  from  a  gen- 
eral fear,  which  spread  itself  through  the  country,  that  at- 
tempts might  be  made  to  rescue  said  Carter,  the  petitioner  was 
forbidden  by  the  authority,  to  entertain  strangers  or  travel- 
lers, and  was  obliged  to  be  constantly  at  home,  to  his  great 
loss,  &c. ;  and  thereupon  prayed  that  the  sum  of  £5  per  week 
might  be  allowed  and  paid  him,  out  of  the  general  treasury ; 
this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  premises  into  consideration, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
said  petition  be,  and  it  is  hereby  granted. 

God  save  the  King. 

[The  following  Public  Laws,  passed  during  the  year  1751,  are  printed  at 
length  in  the  volume  of  public  laws,  published  in  the  year  1767,  unless  repealed 
previous  to  that  time.] 

An  Act  in  addition  to  an  act,  entitled  "  An  act  prohibiting  sports  and  labor  on  the 
first  day  of  the  week,"  made  and  passed  by  the  General  Assembly,  May  6,  1679. 
(March.) 

An  Act  for  promoting  the  raising  flax  and  wool,  and  manufacturing  the  same  into 
cloth;  and  also  for  giving  a  proper  and  suitable  encouragement  for  carrying  on 


340  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1752. 

the  whale  and  cjd  fishery  ;  and  for  these  ends,  making  and  emitting  the  sum  of 

£25,000  in  bills  of  public  credit  of  this  colony,  and  settling  and  ascertaining  the 

value  thereof,     (March.) 
An  Act  to  prevent  all  persons  keeping  house  within  this  colony,  from  entertaining 

Indian,  negro  or  mulatto  servants  or  slaves.     (March.) 
An  Act  for  reviving  the  superior  court  of  judicature,  court  of  assize  and  general 

jail  delivery,  of  the  county  of  Newport.     (March.) 
An  Act  for  granting  an  excise  upon  wines,  liquors  and  other  strong  drink,  sold  by 

retail  within  the  town  of  Newport.     (March.) 
An  Act  to  prevent  breaking  lamps,  that  are  already,  or  shall  hereafter  be  set  up  in 

the  town  of  Newport.     (Marcb.J 
An  Act  for  the  preventing  of  damage  to  be  done  by  the  firing  of  the  woods  in  any 

town  in  this  colony. 
An  Act  in  addition  to  an  act,  entitled  "  An  act  for  granting  an  excise  upon  wines, 

liquors  and  other  strong  drink,  sold  by  retail  in  the  town  of  Newport."     (May.) 
An  Act  for  amending,  explaining   and   repealing  several  paragraphs  in  the  act 

jiassed  in  Maixh,  of  the  present  year,  for  promoting  the  raising  of  flax  and  wool, 

the  encourageuK'nt  of  the  whale  fishery,  etc.  etc.     (June.) 
An  Act  regulating  and  establishing  a  just  and  equal  mode  of  gauging,  throughout 

the  colony.     (June.) 
An  Act  for  naturalizing  Francis  Ferrari,  of  Newport,  merchant,  late  a  subject  of 

the  Republic  of  Genoa.     (June.) 
An  Act  for  erecting  and  establishing  the  office   of  notary  public,  in   the  town  of 

Providence.     (August.) 
An  Act  increasing  the  allowance  to  insolvent   debtors,  in   His   Majesty's  jail,  and 

that  of  poor  prisoners  at  the  King's  suit.     (August.) 
An  Act  for  naturalizing  Peter  Simon,  of  Newport,  merchant,  late  a  subject  of  the 

French  king.     (August.) 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Bhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kingstown,  the  last 
Tuesday  in  February,  1751-52. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  ihQ  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Wherea.s,  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  at  their  ses- 
sion in  June  last,  appointed  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  Capt.  Jo- 
seph Harrison  and  Mr.  Matthew  Robinson,  a  committee,  to  ex- 
amine into  all  the  circumstances,  and  other  matters  of  fltct,  re- 
lating to  the   northern   boundary  line  of  tliis  colony,  with  full 


1752.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  341 

power  to  procure  all  such  evidences,  records  and  papers,  as  may- 
be thereunto  necessary ;  and  to  correspond  and  join  with  the 
colony  of  Connecticut,  or  a  committee  by  them  appointed  (if  it 
be  found  most  expedient),  in  the  prosecution  of  that  affair ; 
and  upon  the  whole,  to  prepare  as  complete  a  statement  of  the 
case  as  they  are  able  ;  and  to  lay  the  same  before  the  Assem- 
bly as  soon  as  it  can  conveniently  be  done  ;  and  the  business 
remaining  still  unperpetrated, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  A^oted  and  re- 
solved, that  Thomas  Arnold,  Esq.,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  added 
to  said  committee ;  and  that  they,  or  any  two  of  them,  proceed 
on  the  affair,  and  complete  it  as  soon  as  the  same  can  be  well 
done  ;  and  make  report  of  their  doings  to  this  Assembly,  at 
their  next  session. 

Whereas,  William  Barber  and  others  represented  to  this  As- 
sembly that  sundry  of  the  inhabitants  of  Westerly  had  peti- 
tioned their  town  council,  to  order  two  highways  to  be  laid  out 
in  said  town ;  one  from  Wood  river,  to  Exeter  ;  and  the  other 
from  Crandall's  Mill,  through  said  town,  northerly,  to  meet  with 
the  said  intended  highway  ;  and  notwithstanding  the  said  pe- 
tioners  had  showed  the  said  town  council  the  necessity  of  said 
highways,  their  petition  was  rejected ;  whereupon,  thoy  made 
application  hither :  and  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  prem- 
ises into  consideration,  and  duly  weighed  the  arguments  of  the 
parties, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Rob- 
ert Lillibridge,  Esq.,  Stephen  Richmond,  Esq.  and  Mr.  Benja- 
min Brown,  be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  hereby 
constituted  a  committee,  with  full  power  to  lay  out  highways, 
agreeably  to  the  prayer  of  the  aforesaid  petition,  and  agree 
with  the  owners  of  the  land,  through  which  said  highways  shall 
run  ;  or  in  case  they  cannot  agree,  then  to  set  a  price  on  the 
land  that  shall  be  so  converted  into  highways ;  that  the  whole 
charge  be  paid  by  the  town  of  Westerly ;  and  that  the  said 
committee  make  report  to  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  next 
session. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  some  time 


342  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1752. 

past,  being  well  informed  of  the  great  necessity  of  paving  the 
streets  of  Newport,  and  more  especially,  that  leading  from  the 
colony  house,  did,  for  that  end,  grant  a  public  lottery ;  but 
some  of  the  directors  declining  being  concerned  therein  ;  and 
the  time  for  drawing  the  same  elapsed  ; — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved  by  this  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof,  that  the  said  lottery  be,  and  it  is  hereby 
revived  in  the  following  manner,  viz. : 

The  lottery  shall  consist  of  twelve  thousand  and  five  hun- 
dred tickets,  at  £4  old  tenor,  each ;  three  thousand  and  forty- 
nine  of  which,  to  be  fortunate,  in  the  following  manner : 

[Here  follows  the  scheme  of  the  lottery.] 

Whereas,  Col.  Christopher  Champlin  and  Capt.  Nathaniel 
Lewis,  deputies  of  Charlestown,  did,  in  behalf  of  said  town,  rep- 
resent unto  this  Assembly,  that  they  are  under  great  difficulty 
and  disadvantage,  for  want  of  some  convenient  harbor  or  land- 
ing, for  transportation,  it  being  about  sixteen  miles  from  said 
town  to  Point  Judith  Pier,  and  almost  as  far  to  Pawcatuck 
River,  which  places  are  the  nearest  harbors  they  have  to  de- 
pend on  ;  which  they  set  forth  to  the  General  Assembly,  some 
years  past,  who  appointed  a  committee  to  inspect  into  the  cir- 
cumstances of  said  affair,  and  find  out  whether  said  difficulty 
might  not  not  be  remedied,  by  turning  a  branch  of  Pawcatuck 
[river]  into  a  large  salt  pond,  in  said  town ;  which  stream  of 
water  (when  turned  into  said  pond,)  will  undoubtedly  keep 
open  a  large  breach  running  out  of  said  pond  into  the  sea ; 
that  the  committte  did  view  and  examine  into  the  aflair,  and 
reported  to  the  Assembly,  that  it  might  be  very  well  effected, 
and  that  without  an  extraordinary  charge,  &c. ;  that  upon  the 
report  of  said  committee,  the  Assembly,  in  their  wisdom,  passed 
an  act  for  turning  said  river  for  the  purpose  aforesaid,  on  con- 
ditions which  were  not  easily  to  be  performed  by  the  petition- 
ers ;  they  being  to  procure  sufficient  bonds,  to  make  and  main- 
tain such  and  so  many  bridges  as  should  become  necessary, 
and  occasioned  Ijv  taming  said  river;  and  also  to  carry  on  the 


1752.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  343 

fourth  part  of  said  work,  the  other  three  parts  to  be  done  at  the 
charge  of  the  colony ;  that  now  the  conditions  enjoined  by  said 
act  of  Assembly,  are  performed,  &c. ;  whereupon,  they  prayed 
to  be  directed  to  go  on  in  the  aforesaid  work,  agreeably  to  the 
aforesaid  act  of  Assembly ;  and  that  the  colony's  part  of  the 
charge  be  paid  out  of  the  interest  of  the  present  bank,  &c. ; 
and  this  Assembly  having  taken  the  premises  into  considera- 
tion,— 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Ben- 
jamin Haszard,  Jeremiah  Lippitt  and  Joseph  Nichols,  Esqs.,  to- 
gether with  Messrs.  Joseph  Harrison  and  Isaiah  Wilkinson,  be, 
and  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  hereby  appointed  a 
committee,  to  inspect  into  all  the  circumstances  relating  to  the 
aforementioned  affair,  and  form  an  estimate  of  the  cost  and 
charge  of  performing  said  work,  and  report  to  this  Assembly 
at  their  next  session. 

It  is  voted,  resolved  and  declared,  that  the  true  intent  and 
meaning  of  the  act  passed  by  the  General  Assembly,  in  their 
session  at  Newport,  in  June  last,  for  settling  and  ascertaining 
the  value  of  silver ;  that  Spanish  silver  milled  dollars  pass  for 
fifty-six  shillings  each,  in  bills  of  credit  of  the  old  tenor,  and 
for  all  other  bills  of  credit  of  the  other  emissions,  equivalent 
thereto. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembli/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Hhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  the  hth  day 
of  May,  1752. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  John  Tillinghast,  Mr.  Nicholas  Cooke, 

Mr.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Mr.  Jabez  Bowen, 


344  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1752. 


ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  Stephen  Browuell,  Mr.  William  Ptichmond, 

Mr.  Robert  Lawton,  Mr.  Jeoffrey  Watson. 

Mr.  James  Arnold, 

The  lion.  Thomas   Cranston,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyn- 
don, clerk. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhl//,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  the  first  Wednes- 
day/ of  May,  1752. 

The  Hon.  William, Greene,  Governor. 

The  lion.  Joseph  Whipple,  Depnty  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 


DEPUTIES. 

Newport. 

WarwicJc. 

Mr.  Nathaniel  Coggeshall, 

Capt.  John  Greene, 

]Mr.  Edward  Scott, 

Mr.  John  Ilolden, 

Mr.  Thomas  Cranston, 

Lieut.  Col.  Stephen  Low^ 

INIr.  Peter  Bours, 

]Mr.  Benjamin  Arnold. 

Capt.  Job  Bennett,  Jr. 

Westerly. 

Providence. 

Col.  Oliver  Babcock, 

Mr.  Stephen  Hopkins, 

Mr.  Joshua  Babcock. 

Mr.  Elisha  Brown, 

New  Shore  ham. 

Mr.  George  Brown. 

Mr.  John  Littlefield, 

Portsmouth. 

Mr.  Joshua  Sands. 

Mr.  William  Anthony,  Jr., 

North  Kingstown. 

Mr.  John  Allen, 

Col.  Immanuel  Northup, 

Mr.  Caleb  Hill, 

Mr.  Beriah  Brown. 

Mr.  Gideon  Freeborn,  Jr. 

1752.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS. 


345 


DEPUTIES. 


South  Kmgstoim, 
Mr.  Jeofl'iy  Haszard, 
Col.  Thomas  Hazard. 
East  Greenwich, 
Mr.  Joseph  Nichols, 
Mr.  John  Fry. 

Jamestown. 
Mr.  Joseph  Clarke. 
Mr.  Josiah  Arnold,  Jr. 

Smithfield. 
Mr,  Thomas  Arnold, 
Mr.  John  Aldrich. 
Scitucde. 
Capt.  Job  Randall, 
Capt.  Charles  Harris. 

Glocester. 
Col.  Richard  Smith, 
Mr.  Andrew  Brown. 
Charlestown. 
Capt.  Nathaniel  Lewis, 
Mr.  James  Congdon,  Jr. 

West  Greenwich. 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Ellis, 
Mr.  George  Gardner. 

Coventry. 
Mr.  John  Greene, 
Mr.  Caleb  Greene. 


Exeter. 
Capt.  John  Reynolds, 
Mr.  Job  Tripp." 

Mlddlctmvn. 
Capt.  William  Turner, 
Mr.  Joshua  Coggeshall. 

Bristol. 
Mr.  Jonathan  Peck, 
Capt.  Simeon  Potter. 

Tiverton. 
Mr.  Edward  Wanton, 
Mr.  Thomas  Howland. 

Little  Compton. 
Mr.  William  Hall, 
Mr.  Richard  Greenhill. 

Warren. 
Capt.  John  Adams, 
Mr.  John  Cole. 

Cimiberland. 
Mr.  Job  Bartlett, 
Mr.  John  Dexter. 
Richmond. 
Mr.  John  Weston, 
Mr.  Joseph  Hoxsie, 


The  Hon.  Thomas  Cranston,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 

The  following  officers  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged. 


The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor, 

VOL.  V.         44 


34G  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    KHODE   ISL.\ND  [1752. 


ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  John  Tillinghast,  Mr.  Robert  Lawton, 

Mr.  Jonathan  Nichols^  Mr.  James  Arnold, 

Mr.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Mr.  William  Richmond, 

Mr.  Jabez  Bowen,  Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 

Mr.  Stephen  Brownell,  Mr.  JeolTrey  Watson. 

SECRETARY.  GENERAL  TREASURER. 

Mr.  Thomas  Ward.  Mr.  Thomas  Richardson. 

ATTORNEY    GENERAL, 

Mr.  Daniel  Updike. 

The  united  committees  of  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  and  of 
this,  presented  the  Assembly  Avith  the  following  report,  viz. : 

RejJOii  on  the  Northern  Boundary. 

"jWe,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  by  the  General  Assemblies  of  the  colonies 
of  Connecticut  and  Khode  Island,  respectively,  to  examine  into  all  the  matters  ol'f'act, 
records,  evidences,  papers  and  circumstances  relating  to  the  northern  bounds  of  the 
said  colonies,  towards  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  'with  authority  in  be- 
half of  each  colony,  to  join  together  and  correspond  in  the  prosecution  of  this  mat- 
ter ;  and  in  pursuance  of  the  things  committed  to  us,  we  met  together  at  Hartford, 
in  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  and  having  duly  examined,  to  the  best  of  our  abili- 
ties, the  whole  of  this  dispute,  have  agreed  to  jointly  make  the  following  report : 

That  we  find  King  Charles  the  First,  in  the  fourth  year  of  his  reign,  granted  a  char- 
tor  to  the  Massachusetts  colony,  bounding  them  southerly  in  these  words :  '  And  a 
certain  other  river  there,  called  Charles  River,  being  in  the  bottom  of  a  certain  bay 
there  ;  and  also  all  and  singular  those  lands  and  hereditaments  whatsoever,  lymg 
wit]}in  (he  space  of  threa  English  miles,  on  the  south  part  of  said  Charles  River,  or 
iifaiiy  and  every  part  thereof;  by  which  description,  compared  ^xith  the  other  parts 
iifsaid  charter,  it  plainly  appears,  that  the  place  or  point,  which  is  three  English 
miles  south  from  the  most  southern  part  of  Charles  River,  is  the  place  Where  a  line 
ought  to  commence  and  run  from  thence  due  west,  to  form  the  southern  boundary 
of  the  abovesaid  Province. 

That  afterwards,  King  Charles  the  Second,  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  his  reign, 
granted  a  charter  to  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  and  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  his 
reign  granted  a  charter  to  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  ;  and  in  his  said  charters 
bounded  both  the  said  colonics  northward,  on  the  south  line  of  the  said  Province  of 
the  iSIassachusetts  Pay. 

That  the  said  colonics  of  Connecticut  an<l  Kliodc  T>land,  lying  far  distant  from  the 
plaii'  or  point  where  the   said    Massachusetts  south  line  onoliih  to  commence,  were 


1752.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  347 


utterly  ignorant  about  it ;  nor  doth  it  appear  they  ever  concei-ned  themselves  about 
the  knowledge  thereof,  until  the  inhabitants  on  both  sides  began  to  settle  pretty 
near  the  place  where  it  was  supposed  the  line  would  pass ;  and  many  disorders 
and  confusion  arising  among  those  borderers,  made  it  necessary  to  find  where  the 
dividing  line  between  the  Province  and  the  said  colonies  ought  to  be  ;  which  occa- 
sioned both  the  colonies  of  Connecticut  and  Rhode  Island  to  apply  to  the  Province, 
to  have  the  said  line  ascertained  and  marked  out ;  and  that  when  commissioners  in 
order  thereto  were  first  appointed  by  the  colony  of  R.  Island,  in  the  year  1710-11, 
and  by  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  in  the  year  1713,  to  meet  with  commissioners  ap- 
pointed by  the  said  Province,  with  intent  to  find  the  true  place  where  the  said 
Province  south  line  ought  to  commence  ;  who  being  for  that  purpose  met,  the  Prov- 
ince commissioners  informed  them  that  the  point  or  place  for  their  south  line  to 
commence  at,  had  long  before,  in  the  year  1642,  been  found  out  and  fixed  by  Na- 
thaniel Woodward  and  Solomon  Saflery,  skillful  artists,  by  the  said  Province  ap- 
pointed for  that  purpose :  and  also  showed  forth  a  plan  or  map,  (as  they  then  as- 
serted) of  the  doings  of  the  said  Woodward  and  Saffery,  on  which  was  deciphered 
the  southernmost  part  of  the  said  Charles  River  and  a  station,  said  to  be  by  them 
erected,  standing  three  miles  (and  no  more)  south  from  the  southernmost  part  of  the 
said  Charles  River,  and  confidently  aflirming  the  said  measure  to  be  rightly  made  ; 
and  the  said  station  to  be  truly  affixed. 

And  all  this  matter  being  out  of  the  knowledge  of  the  commissioners  for  both  col- 
onies ;  but  they,  by  giving  credit  to,  and  believing  the  said  Province  commissioners 
were  thereby  induced,  the  commissioners  for  Connecticut,  on  the  13th  day  of  July, 
1713,  and  the  commissioners  for  Rhode  Island,  finally  in  October,  1718,  to  agree 
that  the  stake  or  station  set  up  and  erected  by  Nathaniel  Woodward  and  Solomon 
Saffery,  in  the  year  1642,  should  be  the  place  for  the  said  Province  south  line  to 
commence  at,  fully  believing  they  had  been  told,  and  as  by  the  said  plat,  it  appear- 
ed, that  the  said  station  was  no  more  than  three  miles  south  from  the  southernmost 
part  of  Charles  River,  agreeably  to  the  Massachusetts  charter. 

That  in  consequence  of  the  said  agreements  entered  into  as  aforesaid,  the  said 
colony  of  Connecticut,  in  the  said  year  1713,  and  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  in  the 
year  1719,  appointed  persons  called  riding  commissioners,  to  meet  with  persons  in 
the  same  character,  appointed  by  the  said  Province,  to  go  and  begin  at  the  place 
in  the  said  agreements  mentioned  (three  miles  south  of  the  southernmost  part  of  said 
Charles  River)  and  marked  out  the  said  dividing  line,  according  to  the  respective 
charters  ;  who  meeting  with  the  said  Province  commissioners,  and  not  being  ac- 
quainted in  that  part  of  the  country,  nor  having  knowledge  of  the  places  where 
the  said  Woodward  and  Saffery's  station  was,  the  said  Province  riding  commissioners 
deceitfully  carried  them  to  a  place  on  Wrentham  Plain,  affirmed,  that  there  the 
station  erected  by  Woodward  and  Saffery,  had  formerly  stood  ;  and  the  said  colo- 
nies' commissioners  not  knowing,  but  really  believing  it  was  the  right  place,  and 
within  three  miles  of  Charles  River,  (though  in  truth  the  place  so  shown  them,  was 
seven  miles  and  fifty-six  poles  more  southward  than  the  southernmost  part  of 
Charles  River)  did  there  begin,  and  did  run  and  mark  out  a  line,  as  the  true  line  south 
of  the  said  Province  ;  and  in  consequence  of  the  Ime  so  run,  though  it  was  so  er- 
roneously done,  the  said  Province  have  hitherto  exercised  and  held  the  jurisdiction. 
That  the  truth  of  those  several  facts  is  clearly  made  to  appear  ;  the  first,  by  the 
Massachusetts  charter  ;  the  second  by  the  Connecticut  and  Rhode  Island  charters; 
the  third,  by  the  face  of  the  agreements   themselves,  and   by  the   copy  of  the  pre- 


o4(S  RECOUDS    OF    THE    COLO.NV    OF    EHOL>E    ISLAND  [1752. 

tended  plan  of  Woodward  and  Saffery  ;  the  fourth,  that  the  place  Logan  at  by  the 
riding  commissioners,  is  really  seven  miles  and  fifty-six  poles  to  the  southward  of 
I  he  most  southern  part  of  Charles  River,  by  the  plan  or  map  drawn  by  Mr.  Joseph 
Harrison,  and  proved  by  Henry  Harris,  Esq.,  and  Mr.  Israel  Wilkinson,  who  have 
actually  and  accurately  measured  the  said  distance. 

That  the  place  they  measured  from,  is  really  the  most  southern  part  of  Charles 
lliver,  is  proved  by  the  original  grants  of  the  towns  of  Medfield,  Wrentham.',Medway» 
Bellin^ham  and  Holliston,  all  towns  within  the  said  Province ;  and  also  by;  a 
•Teat  number  of  grants  of  lands  to  private  persons ;  all  which  serve  to  show  what  is> 
and  always  was  called  Charles  River ;  and  also  to  show  that  the  small  stream  (now 
called  Mill  Brook),  and  pretended  now  by  the  Province  to  cover  their  aforemen- 
tioned deceit,  to  be  the  southern  part  of  Charles  River,  is  only  a  small. brook,' and 
was  never  at  any  time  called  Charles  River,  but  was  all  along  known  by  the  name 
of  Jack's  Pasture  Brook,  and  Mill  Brook  ;  and  can  no  more  properly  be  called  a 
part  of  Charles  River,  than  the  water  in  the  clouds  may  fitly  be  so  |  called,  if  it 
should  chance  to  fall  in  such  place  as  to  be  conveyed  to  the  sea  in|_the  channeFof 
said  river. 

That  an  agreement  procured  and  perfected  in  the  manner  aforesaid,  is  so'far 
from  altering  the  true  lines  and  limits  of  jurisdiction,  and  thereby_depriving^or 
abridging  the  people  of  those  privileges  and  advantages  granted  them  by  their  sov- 
ereign, that  we  are  humbly  of  opinion,  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  any  to  whom  the 
right  of  jurisdiction  IS  granted  by  the  King,  to  transfer  the  same  to_^any_ other, 
though  it  might  be  pretended  to  be  done  on  the  most  reasonable  and  equitable  mo- 
tives, and  on  the  most  certain  knowledge  ;  for  if  this  were  allowable,  the  several 
provinces  and  colonies  in  America  might  all  transfer  their  right  of  jurisdiction  to 
some  one,  and  thereby  erect  one  great  and  dangerous  government,  without  the 
knowledge  of,  and  contrary  to  the  express  intention  and  interest  of  the  crown,  that 
first  granted  such  rights  of  jurisdiction,  but  never  made  them  assignable. 

That  it  appears  to  us  clearly,  that  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  have 
all  along,  and  still  do  hold  the  jurisdiction  of  a  tract  of  land  four  miles  and  fifty-six 
poles  in  breadth,  and  the  whole  length  of  the  colonies  of  Connecticut  and  Rhode 
Island,  which  they  have  no  right  to  the  jurisdiction  of,  and  are  humbly  of  opinion 
that  it  is  advisable  for  the  said  colonies  of  Connecticut  and  Rhode  Island  to  make 
their  application  to  the  King,  their  sovereign,  praying  that  he  would  be  graciously 
pleased  to  order  the  south  line  of  the  said  Province  of  the  Masssachusetts  Bay  to  be 
marked  out  according  to  their  charter ;  that  the  said  colonies  also  may  hold  out 
and  enjoy  the  privileges  granted  them  by  their  respective  charters. 

And  lastly,  we  humbly  report,  as  our  opinion,  that  the  state  of  the  cases  of  the 
colonies  of  Connecticut  and  Rhode  Island,  with  the  said  Province,  appears  to  be  so 
far  similar,  that  they  may  safely  and  fitly  join  together,  and  correspond  in  the 
])rosecution  thereof,  so  far  as  to  procure  an  order  from  the  crown  to  have  the  said 
Province  south  line  rightly  settled ;  and  that  the  necessary  expenses  arising  thcre- 
uu,  V)c  paid  equally  between  the  said  colonics. 

Agreed  to,  by        ROGER  WOLCOTT,  JR.,     STEPHEN  HOPKINS, 
PHINEAS  LYMAN,  THOMAS  ARNOLD. 

Hartford,  April  1,  1752." 

And  lliis  Assembly  liaviuo;  Uikeii  llic  said  report  into  coii- 
sideruliun, — 


1752.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  349 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
same  be,  and  it  is  hereby  accepted. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  gentlemen  ap- 
pointed a  committee  by  the  colony,  respecting  the  northern 
boundary  line,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  continued  for  that 'pur- 
pose. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Mr.  Restcom  Sanford,  be,  and 
he  is  hereby  appointed  to  perambulate  that  part  of  the  colony 
line  which  runs  between  Little  Compton  and  Dartmouth,  at  the 
charge  of  Little  Compton. 

Whereas,  a  great  number  of  gentlemen  and  others,  inhabit- 
ants of  the  county  of  Kings  county,  preferred  a  petition  to  the 
General  Assembly,  held  at  South  Kingstown,  in  February 
last,  and  among  other  things  set  forth,  that  the  court  house 
and  jail  on  Tower  Hill,  in  said  South  Kingstown,  being  in  a 
remote  corner  of  the  county,  expose  the  inhabitants  to  great 
inconveniences  ;  and  both  are  so  far  gone  to  decay,  that  it  will 
take  a  great  deal  of  money  to  put  them  in  tolerable  repair . 
that  they  can  never  be  made  good,  being  miserably  built  at 
first ;  that  it  will  be  a  continual  charge  to  keep  them  fit  for 
use,  so  that  the  most  prudent  way  will  be,  to  have  them  pulled 
down,  and  others  erected  in  their  steads,  at  a  place  called 
Little  Rest  Hill,  in  South  Kingstown,  being  near  the  center  of 
the  county,  Avhere  Col.  Elisha  Reynolds  and  others,  offering  to 
give  lands,  and  build  a  court  house  and  jail  at  their  own  cost 
and  charge. 

On  the  other  hand,  a  remonstrance  was  filed  by  several  gen- 
tlemen and  others,  in  answer  to  the  said  petition,  offered  to  re- 
pair the  court  house  and  jail,  on  Tower  Hill,  at  their  own 
charge. 

Both  which  papers  were  taken  into  consideration,  at  that 
time,  and  the  Assembly  ordered  the  several  towns  of  that 
county  to  be  served  with  copies,  wdiich  was  done  accordingly ; 
and  report  being  now  made  by  the  clerks  of  the  several 
towns, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that   the  said  petition  herein  first  named,  be,  and  the 


350  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1752. 

siimo  is  hereby  granted ;  provided  Col.  Elisha  Eeynolds,  Mr. 
William  Potter  and  INIajor  Latham  Clarke,  give  bond  to  the 
general  treasurer,  in  the  sum  of  £20,000  for  the  performance 
of  all  the  conditions  mentioned  in  their  petition ;  and  for  the 
court  house  being  so  far  finished,  as  to  be  fit  to  hold  court  in 
bv  the  first  Tuesday  of  August  next;  and  the  jail  and  jail 
house,  not  less  than  the  jail  and  house  in  the  county  of  Kent ; 
these  last  to  be  built  and  fit  to  receive  prisoners  before  any 
part  of  the  old  jail  house  and  jail  be  pulled  down  or  removed ; 
and  that  said  court  house,  and  jail  house,  and  jail,  be  completely 
finished  within  one  year  from  the  rising  of  this  Assembly. 
God  save  the  King. 

The  Lords  Commissioners,  &c.,  to  the  Governor  and  Companij  of 
Rhode  Island. 

Whitehall,  March  13,  1752. 
Gentlemen  : — In  obedience  to  His  Majesty's  command,  sijjnitied  to  us  by  his  or- 
der in  council,  of  the  11th  instant,  containing  regulations  with  respect  to  His  Maj- 
esty's colonies  and  plantations  in  America,  and  the  conduct  of  governors  and  other 
ollieers  there,  we  herewith  transmit  you  a  copy  of  said  order,  that  you  may  govern 
yourselves  accordingly. 

So  we  bid  you  heartily  fcvrewell,  and  are 

Your  loving  friends  and  humble  servants, 
DUNK  HALIFAX,  ■      J.  PITT, 

FRAN:  FANE,  J.  GRENVILLE, 

JAMES  OSWALD,  DUPPLIN, 

CHARLES  TOWNSHEND,  ANDREW  STONE. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

&ecrctar>/  Iloklcrncsse  to  Gol^ernor  Greene. 

Whitehall,  March  30th,  1752. 
Sir:  — I  have  His  Majesty's  command,  to  transmit  to  you,  the  copy  of  an  order  in 
council,  calculated  for  the  future  regulation  and  government  of  His  Majesty's 
American  colonies;  and  likewise  send  you  enclosed,  the  copy  of  a  letter  which  the 
King  has  directed  me  to  write  to  the  lords  commissioners  of  trade  and  plantations, 
explaining  the  method  in  which  it  is  his  royal  pleasure  their  lordships  should  put 
in  execution  the  said  order  of  council;  and  you  will  accordingly  receive  an  addi- 
tional instruction,  from  the  said  lords  commissioners  for  trade  and  plantations,  di- 
recting you  for  the  future  to  address  your  letters  to  their  lordships  only,  except  in 
such  cases,  as  may  recpiire  His  Majesty's  more  immediate  directions;  and  it  is  the 
King's  pleasure  that  \ou  should,  for  the  future,  conform  yourself  to  the  said  order 
of  council. 


1752.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  351 


But  where,  as  it  may  happen,  that  circumstances  of  a  very  high  and  important 
nature  may  arise,  which  may  require  the  utmost  secrecy,  it  is  the  King's  pleasure 
that  if  any  such  occur,  within  the  district  of  your  government,  you  should  forthwith, 
with  the  utmost  diligence  and  exactitude,  transmit  an  account  thereof  to  one  of  His 
Majesty's  princijial  secretaries  of  state  only ;  and  you  are,  in  such  case,  to  follow  all 
orders  and  directions,  which  His  Majesty  shall  think  proper,  to  direct  one  of  nis 
principal  secretaries  of  state  to  transmit  to  you  in  consequence  thereof. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

HOLDEliNESSE. 

To  the  Governor  of  Hhode  Island. 

Order  of  the  King  in  Council. 

At  the  Court,  at  St.  James, 
the  11th  day  of  March,  1752. 
Present, 
The  King's  Most  Excellent  Majesty, 
Lord  President,  Earl  of  Harcourt, 

Lord  Privy  Seal,  Lord  Berkely,  of  Stratton, 

Lord  Chamberlain,  Lord  Cornwallis, 

Duke  of  Atholl,  Mr.  Vice  Chamberlain, 

Duke  of  Newcastle,  Mr.  Chas:,  of  the  Exchequer, 

Earl  of  Holdernesse,  Lord  Chief  Justice  VVilles, 

Earl  of  Jersey,  Sir  John  Bushout, 

Earl  of  Cholmondely,  Sir  John  Ligonier, 

Earl  of  Buckinghamshire,  Sir  George  Lcc. 

His  Majesty,  having  taken  into  his  consideration  the  flourishing  state  and  condi- 
tion of  the  manufactures,  ti-ade  and  commerce  of  these  kingdoms ;  and  also  the  state 
and  condition  of  his  colonies  and  iilantations  in  America,  and  elsewhere,  with  respect 
as  well  to  their  trade  and  commerce,  as  to  their  civil  policy  and  government ;  and 
whereas,  it  doth  appear  to  His  Majesty,  that  the  said  colonies  and  plantations  have 
of  late  years,  been  greatly  improved,  the  wealth  of  his  subjects  much  increased,  and 
the  navigation  of  these  kingdoms  extended  by  the  mutual  intercourse  between 
them  and  the  said  colonies,  and  by  the  trade  and  commerce  arising  therefrom ;  and 
His  Majesty  being  sensible  of  how  great  importance  it  is  to  His  crown  and  govern- 
ment, and  how  much  it  will  contribute  to  the  satisfaction,  convenience  and  ad- 
vantage of  his  subjects,  that  all  due  care  be  taken,  and  proper  and  necessary  regu- 
lations made,  for  the  further  improvement  and  extension  of  the  manufactures  and 
commerce  of  these  kingdoms,  and  for  the  encouragement,  protection  and  security 
of  the  said  colonies  and  plantations, — 

His  Majesty  therefore,  is  graciously  pleased,  with  the  advice  of  His  privy  council, 
to  order,  and  it  is  hereby  ordered,  that  the  lords  commissioners  ibr  trade  and  plan- 
tations, do,  with  all  diligence,  care  and  concern,  apply  themselves  to  a  faithful  and 
vigorous  execution  and  discharge  of  all  the  trusts  and  powers  vested  in  them  by 
their  commission,  under  the  great  seal. 

And  whereas,  nothing  can  more  effectually  tend  to  the  peace,  welfare  and  good 
government  of  the  colonies  and  plantations,  than  the  appointment  of  able,  discreet 


352  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1752. 

and  prudent  persons  to  be  governors,  lieutenant  governors,  and  other  ofliccrs  and 
magistrates ; — 

It  is  therefore  hereby  further  ordered,  that  the  said  lords  commissioners  for  trade 
and  plantations,  do,  from  time  to  time,  as  vacancies  shall  happen  by  deaths  or  re- 
movals, present  unto  His  Slajesty  in  council,  for  bis  approbation,  the  names  of  such 
persons  as  the  said  commissioners,  from  the  best  of  their  judgment  and  information, 
shall  think  duly  qualified  to  be  governors  or  deputy  governors,  or  to  be  of  His 
INIajesty's  council,  or  of  his  counsel  at  law,  or  secretaries  in  the  respective  planta- 
tions ;  and  likewise,  to  present  to  His  Majesty,  for  his  approbation,  the  names  of 
all  other  officers  which  have  been,  or  may  be  found  necessary  for  the  administra- 
tion of  justice,  and  the  execution  of  government  there ;  excepting  only  such  as  are, 
or  may  be  appointed  for  the  direction  and  regulation  of  His  Majesty's  customs  and 
revenues ;  and  such  as  are,  or  may  be  under  the  directions  and  authority  of  the 
lords  commissioners  of  the  admiralty. 

And  when  any  persons  shall  have  been  approved  of  by  His  Majesty  in  council, 
for  any  of  the  above  mentioned  offices,  the  said  lords  commissioners  shall  (unless  His 
jMajesty  shall  otherwise  direct)  prepare  and  make  out  proper  draughts  of  such  com- 
missions, warrants  or  instructions,  as  may  be  thought  necessary  to  be  given  to  such 
officers,  in  order  to  be  laid  before  His  Majesty,  in  council,  for  his  royal  approba- 
tion ;  and  when  any  persons  shall  be  presented  to  His  Majestj',  for  any  of  the  other 
offices  of  an  inferior  nature,  not  judged  necessary  to  be  laid  before  His  Majesty  in 
council,  and  yet  shall  have  otherwise  received  His  Majesty's  approbation,  the  said 
lords  commissioners  shall,  in  those  cases  (unless  His  Majesty  should  otherwise  di- 
rect), prepare  and  make  out  proper  draughts  of  commissions,  or  warrants  necessa- 
ry to  be  given  to  such  officers,  in  order  to  be  laid  before  His  Majesty,  for  his  royal 
approbation  accordingly. 

And  it  is  hereby  further  ordered,  that  the  said  lords  commissioners  for  trade  and 
plantations,  do  execute  and  perform  all  other  things  necessary  or  proper  for  an- 
swering the  intentions  of  their  said  commission. 

And  whereas,  the  governors  of  all  His  Majesty's  colonics  and  plantations,  in 
America,  more  immediately  under  His  Majesty's  government,  are,  in  particular 
cases,  as  well  as  in  general,  directed  by  His  Majesty's  instructions  to  transmit  unto 
His  Majesty,  by  one  of  His  principal  secretaries  of  state,  and  to  the  commissioners 
for  trade  and  ],)lantations,  accounts  from  time  to  time  of  all  their  proceedings,  and 
of  the  condition  of  affairs  within  their  respective  governments. 

And  whcreiis,  it  will  tend  to  the  benefit  of  the  said  colonies,  the  ease  and  conven- 
ience of  His  Majesty's  subjects,  and  the  greater  regularity  and  despatch  of  business, 
if  tin;  correspondence  be  confined  and  pass  through  but  one  channel, — 

It  is  therefore  further  ordered,  that  the  said  lords  commissioners  do  prepare  the 
di-aught  of  an  additional  instruction  to  be  sent  to  the  governors  of  all  His  INIajesty's  said 
colonics  and  plantations  respectively  ;  signifying  His  Majesty's  pleasure,  that  in  all 
cases  wherein,  by  His  Majesty's  instructions,  they  are  directed  to  transmit  any  par- 
ticular or  general  accounts  of  their  proceedings,  or  of  matters  relative  to  their  gov- 
ernments, they  do,  for  the  future,  transmit  the  same  to  the  lords  commissioners  for 
trade  and  plantations  onlij,  in  order  that  they  may  be  laid  before  His  Majesty. 

Provided,  ncvcrthertheless,  that  whenever  any  occurrences  shall  happen  within 
their  respective  governments  of  such  a  nature  and  importance  as  may  require  His 
Majesty's  morn  immediate  directions,  by  one  of  His  Majesty's  principal  secretaries 
of  state  :  ar.d  who  upon  occasions,  and  in  all  affairs,  whereon  they  may  receive  His 


1752.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  353 


Majesty's  orders,  by  one  of  his  principal  scretaries  of  state,  the  said  governors  shall, 
in  all  such  cases,  transmit  to  the  secretary  of  state  only,  an  account  of  all  such  oc- 
currences, and  of  their  proceedings  relative  to  such  orders. 

And  it  is  hereby  further  ordered,  that  a  copy  of  this  order,  be  transmitted  to  the 
said  lords  commissioners  for  trade  and  plantations,  to  be  entered  upon  the  books  of 
the  plantation  ofBce ;  and  that  the  said  commissioners  do  likewise  transmit  copies 
thereof,  to  the  governors  of  His  Majesty's  colonies  and  plantations,  respectively,  to 
the  end  that  all  persons  concerned,  may  govern  themselves  accordingly. 

WM.  SIIARPE. 


l^ecretary  Holdcrnesse  to  the  Board  of  Trade. 

Whitehall,  30th  March,  1752. 

My  Lords: — An  humble  representation  having  been  laid  before  the  King,  setting 
forth  the  present  flourishing  state  of  His  Majesty's  colonies  in  America,  as  well 
with  regard  to  the  number  of  inhabitants,  as  to  the  increase  of  trade  in  those  parts 
of  His  Majesty's  dominions  ;  and  that  it  is  highly  necessary  that  the  greatest  care 
and  attention  should  be  had  to  the  good  government  of,  and  regular  administration 
of  justice  in  the  said  American  colonies.  His  Majesty  was  graciously  pleased  to  re- 
fer the  said  representation  to  a  committtee  of  the  King's  Most  Honorable  Privy 
Council,  directing  them  to  consider  of  the  properest  means  for  obtaining  this  desira- 
ble end  ;  and  the  same  committee  having  made  thereon  their  humble  report  to  the 
King,  His  Majesty  was  pleased  to  direct  an  order  of  council,  a  copy  of  which  is 
herewith  enclosed,  and  to  which  Your  Lordships  will  please  to  conform  yourselves 
hereafter. 

And  whereas,  Your  Lordships  are  hereby  directed  to  prepare  a  draught  of  an 
additional  instruction  to  be  sent  to  the  governors  of  all  His  Majesty's  said  colonies 
and  plantations,  directing  them  to  correspond  for  the  future  with  Your  Loi'dships 
only ;  excepting  in  such  cases,  as  may  require  His  Majesty's  more  immediate  direc- 
tions ;  I  have  His  Majesty's  command  to  signify  to  Your  Lordships,  that  it  is  the 
King's  pleasure  you  should  transmit  to  one  of  His  Majesty's  principal  secretaries  of 
state,  in  order  to  their  being  laid  before  the  King,  all  such  letters  as  shall  for  the 
future  be  addressed  to  you,  from  any  governor,  or  other  person  or  persons  acting 
as  such,  in  any  of  His  Majesty's  colonies  or  plantations,  in  America,  which  may  in 
any  wise  relate  to  his  or  their  conduct  towards  the  governors  or  other  chief  officers, 
of  any  foreign  prince,  power  or  potentate,  whatsoever ;  as  also  such  letters  as  may 
relate  to  the  transactions  of  any  foreign  governor  or  other  officer,  towards  them,  or 
any  of  His  Majesty's  subjects  under  their  direction  and  regulation. 

And  also,  that  Your  Lordships  should,  in  like  manner,  transmit  unto  one  of  His 
Majesty's  principal  secretaries  of  state,  a  draught  of  such  answers,  as  you  shall  pre- 
pare to  be  given  to  any  such  letter  or  letters,  as  shall  fall  within  the  abovemention- 
tioned  description,  in  order  to  its  being  laid  before  His  Majesty,  for  his  royal  ap- 
probation ;  and  Your  Lordships  are  hereby  directed  not  to  transmit  to  any  of  His 
Majesty's  governors,  or  other  person  or  persons  acting  as  such,  any  orders  or  di- 
rections, relating  to  his  or  their  conduct,  so  far  as  it  may  affect  or  be  any  wise  con- 
strued to  affect,  any  foreign  prince,  power  or  potentate,  whatsoever,  until  the  same 
shall  have  received  the  King's  approbation,  signified  to  Your  Lordships  by  one  or 
His  Majesty's  principal  secretaries  of  state. 

VOL.  V.         45 


354  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE  ISLAND  [1752. 

As  to  all  other  matters  of  correspondence,  vrhich  shall  from  henceforward  pass 
between  Your  Lordships  and  the  respective  governors  in  America,  you  will  please 
to  proceed  in  the  usual  manner. 

And  whereas,  Your  Lordships  are  further  directed  by  the  said  order  of  council, 
from  time  to  time,  as  vacancies  shall  happen  by  deaths  or  removals,  to  present  unto 
His  Majesty,  for  his  approbation,  the  name  or  names  of  such  person  or  persons  as 
Y''our  Lordships,  from  the  best  of  your  judgment  and  information,  shall  think  duly 
qualified,  to  be  governors  or  deputy  governors,  or  to  be  of  His  Majesty's  council,  or 
of  his  counsel  at  law,  or  secretaries  in  the  respective  plantations ;  and  likewise  to 
present  to  His  Majesty,  for  his  approbation,  the  names  of  all  other  officers,  which  have 
been,  or  may  be  found  necessary  for  the  administration  of  justice,  and  the  execu- 
tion of  government  there,  excepting  only  such  as  are,  or  may  be  appointed  for  the 
direction  and  regulation  of  His  Majesty's  customs  and  revenues,  and  such  as  are, 
or  may  be  under  the  directions  and  authority  of  the  lords  commissioners  of  the  ad- 
miralty. 

I  have  the  King's  directions,  to  inform  Your  Lordships  of  his  royal  Intention,  as 
to  the  manner  of  your  proceeding  herein,  viz. :  that  in  all  such  cases,  where  the 
names  of  proper  persons  for  any  of  the  offices  above  mentioned,  have  usually  been 
laid  before  His  Majesty  in  council,  Your  Lordships  are  to  follow  the  same  method 
for  the  future. 

And  in  all  other  cases  provided  for  by  this  order  of  council,  Your  Lordships  are 
to  transmit  to  one  of  His  Majesty's  principal  secretaries  of  state,  to  be  by  him  laid 
before  the  King,  for  His  Majesty's  approbation,  the  names  of  such  persons  as  you 
shall  judge  the  most  capable  of  executing  any  such  office  or  trust,  as  specified  in 
the  above  mentioned  order  of  council.     I  am,  my  Lords, 

Your  Lordships'  most  humble  servant, 

HOLDERNESSE. 

To  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  Trade  and  Plantations. 

Coj)>/  of  an  IndrucUon  from  His  late  Majesty^  to  all  his  Governors 

in  America. 

Whereas,  the  governors  of  such  of  our  colonies  and  plantations,  in  America,  as 
are  more  immediately  under  our  government,  are,  in  particular  cases,  as  well  as  in 
general,  directed  and  retjuired  by  our  instructions  to  transmit  unto  us  by  one 
of  our  principal  secretaries  of  state,  and  to  our  commissioners  for  trade  and  planta- 
tions, accounts  from  time  to  time,  of  all  their  proceedings,  and  of  the  condition  of 
affairs  within  their  respective  governments. 

And  whereas,  it  doth  appear  to  us,  that  it  will  tend  to  the  benefit  of  our  said 
colonics  and  i)lantations,  the  ease  and  convenience  of  our  subjects,  and  the  greater 
regularity  and  despatch  of  business,  if  the  correspondence  be  confined  to,  and  pass 
through  but  one  channel ; — 

It  is  therefore  our  express  will  and  pleasure,  that  in  all  cases  wherein,  by  our  in- 
structions, you  are  directed  to  transmit  any  particular  or  general  accounts  of  your 
proceedings,  or  of  matters  relative  to  the  affairs  of  our  province  under  your  gov- 
ernment, you  do  for  the  future,  transmit  the  same  to  our  commissioners  for  tiade 
and  plantations  only,  in  order  that  they  may  be  laid  before  us. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  and  it   is  our   express  will  and  pleasure,  that  whenever 


1752.] 


AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  355 


any  occurrences  shall  happen  within  our  said  province  under  your  government,  of 
such  a  nature  and  importance  as  may  require  our  more  immediate  direction,  by  one 
of  our  principal  secretaries  of  state ;  and  also  upon  all  occasions  and  iu  all  affairs 
whereon  you  may  receive  our  orders  by  one  of  our  principal  secretaries  of  state, 
you  shall,  iu  all  such  cases,  transmit  it  to  our  said  secretary  of  state,  only,  an  ac- 
count of  all  such  occurrences,  and  of  your  proceedings  relative  to  such  orders. 


The  Lords  Commissioners  of  Trade  and  Plantations  to  tlm  Gov- 
ernor and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

Whitehall,  April  28,  1752. 
Gentlemen: — We  herewith  enclose  to  you,  an  instruction  from  their  Excellen- 
cies, the  Lords  Justices,  directing  and  requiring  you  to  cause  a  true  and  authentic 
copy  to  be  made  of  all  the  laws  now  in  force  within  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island, 
and  totransmit  the  said  copy  to  us,  in  order  to  be  laid  before  His  Majesty,  in  his 
privy  council,  to  which  you  will  not  fail  of  paying  a  due  obedience. 
So  we  bid  you  heartily  farewell,  and  are 

Your  very  loving  friends  and  humble  servants, 
DUNK  HALIFAX,  DUPPLIN, 

J.  PITT,  CHARLES  TOWNSHEND. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

Bij  the  Lords  Justices  Granville  P.  Gower,  G.  P.  S,  Marlborough, 

Holdernesse. 

Whitehall,  April  16,  1752. 
Instructions  to  the  Governor  and    Company  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and 
Providence  Plantations,  in  America,  for  the  time  being.     Given  at  Whitehall, 
this  16th  day  of  April,  1752,  in  the  twenty-fifth  year  of  His  Majesty's  reign. 

Whereas,  by  the  charter  granted  by  His  late  Majesty,  King  Charles  the  Second, 
to  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations, 
in  New  England,  in  America,  bearing  date  at  Westmmster,  the  8th  day  of  July,  in 
the  fifteenth  year  of  the  said  King's  reign,  the  said  Governor  and  Company,  are  em- 
powered to  make,  ordain,  constitute  or  repeal  such  laws,  statutes  and  ordinances  as  to 
them  shall  seem  meet  for  the  good  and  welfare  of  the  said  company  ;  provided,  such 
laws,  statutes  and  ordinances  be  not  contrary  and  repugnant,  but  as  near  as  may 
be,  agreeably  to  the  laws  of  this  realm  of  England. 

And  whereas,  appeals  are  frequently  brought  before  His  Majesty,  in  His  privy 
council,  from  the  judgment  and  decrees  made  in  the  several  courts  of  judicature, 
within  the  said  colony,  the  determination  whereof  depends  upon  being  duly  in- 
formed of  the  laws  subsisting  within  the  same  ; — 

It  IS  therefore  His  Majesty's  will  and  pleasure,  and  you  are  hereby  directed  and 
required  to  cause  a  true  and  authentic  copy  to  be  made  of  all  the  laws,  statutes  and 
ordinances  now  in  force  v.-ithin  the  said  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence 
Plantations,  and  to  transmit  the  same,  duly  authenticated,  under  the  public  seal  ot 


356  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1752 

the  said  colony,  to  the  commissioners  for  trade  and  plantations,  as  soon  as  conven- 
iently may  be,  in  order  to  be  laid  before  His  Majesty,  in  his  privy  council. 

G.  P.  G.,        C.  P.  S.  M.,        H. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Netvport,  the  \st  day  in 
June,  1752. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  superior  court  of  judicature 
of  this  colony,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  directed  to  permit  John 
Pearce  and  Thomas  Pearce  to  appeal  to  His  Majesty,  in  coun- 
cil, from  a  judgment  obtained  against  them,  by  John  Rice, 
agreeably  to  the  orders  of  His  said  Majesty,  in  council,  now 
before  this  Assembly  ;  any  law  to  the  contrary  hereof,  notwith- 
standing. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  superior  court 
meet  in  the  county  of  Kent,  on  Tuesday,  the  16th  day  of  this 
instant  June,  for  the  purpose  aforesaid  ;  and  that  the  said  John 
Rice  be  notified  thereof,  and  served  with  a  copy  of  this  act,  to- 
gether with  a  copy  of  said  order  of  His  Majesty,  in  council. 

Whereas,  the  laws  of  this  colony  exempt  sundry  officers  and 
other  persons  of  divers  professions,  from  serving  on  the  jury, 
which  hath  been  found  by  experience,  to  include  too  great  a 
numl)cr  of  the  inhabitants,  and  protect  the  most  sensible  and 
substantial  hoemen  of  the  government  fi'om  so  necessary  a 
duty  ;  by  reason  whereof,  it  often  happens,  that  causes  of  the 
greatest  importance  are  decided  by  men  of  slender  abilities, 
and  little  credit,  to  the  great  detriment  of  public  justice  •  for 
remedy  Avhereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  Assembly,  and  by  the  authority  there- 
oi"  it  is  enacted,  that  no  freeholder   of  this  colony,  whatsoever, 


1752.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  i357 

shall  be  exempted  or  protected  from  serving  as  a  juror  at  any 
time  hereafter,  excepting  such  person  or  persons  as  do,  or 
have  sustained  the  several  posts  or  offices  hereafter  enu- 
merated, viz. : 

The  office  of  governor,  deputy  governor,  assistant,  secretary, 
attorney  general,  general  treasurer,  of  a  judge  of  the  superior 
court  of  judicature,  and  of  the  inferior  court  of  common  pleas, 
who  shall  be  forever  exempted  ;  and  also,  whilst  in  office,  the 
keeper  of  the  grand  committee's  office,  the  clerks  and  sheriffs  of 
each  county,  with  their  general  and  acting  deputies,  and  the 
sergeants  and  officers  attending  upon  the  courts,  and  all  jus- 
tices of  the  peace  in  commission,  saving  that  they  shall  be 
obliged  to  serve  in  case  of  life  and  death,  where  tithe  of  land 
is  concerned,  if  returned  upon  a  venire  ficias,  or  taken  up  as  a 
talesman  ;  and  also,  all  the  attornies  practicing  in  any  of  the 
courts  of  common  pleas,  or  superior  courts  of  judicature  •  and 
also,  all  physicians  that  live  by  their  practice  ;  ministers  of 
congregations  of  every  denomination,  are  hereby  exempted. 

Provided,  that  nothing  this  act  shall  extend,  or  be  construed 
to  extendjto  repeal  any  part  of  an  act,  entitled  "An  act  ex- 
empting the  persons  appointed  to  work  the  engines  in  New- 
port, from  several  duties,"  &c. 

Whereas,  Col.  Daniel  Abbot,  and  others,  represented  that  the 
General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  in  the  year  1711,  ordered  a 
highway  or  road  to  be  laid  out  through  the  lands  of  Provi- 
dence, Wesconoid  and  Warwick,  leading  into  the  center  of 
of  Connecticut,  by  the  way  of  Plainfield ;  and  accordingly 
Nicholas  Lang,  Esq.,  then  high  sheriff  of  the  colony,  cmpan- 
nelled  a  jury  of  twenty-four  good  and  sufficient  men,  who  per- 
formed said  work,  and  that  there  are  still  alive  some  persons 
that  were  present  in  doing  the  same  ;  that  the  said  road  or 
highway,  hath  ever  since  been  improved  as  such ;  that  great 
cost  and  labor  hath  been  bestowed  to  amend  it,  and  several 
sums  of  money  granted  by  the  government,  to  make  bridges 
for  travellers  to  pass  at  all  times  over  the  several  rivers,  with- 
out any  difficulty ;  and  it  is  now  become  a  great  road  ;  not- 
withstanding which,  the  town  of  Cuventiy  have  pa^-sed  a  vote 


358  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1752. 

to  alter  said  highway,  or  road,  and  hiy  it  in  such  a  critical 
place,  that  should  it  take  effect,  it  would  absolutely  ruin  the 
aforesaid  road  or  highway ;  for  there  is  a  long  hill,  near  half  a 
mile,  stony  and  pungy,  and  over  which  the  new  road  must 
pass  ;  and  thereupon  prayed  this  Assembly  to  appoint  a  com- 
mittee of  three  men,  the  most  acquainted  with  said  highway  or 
road,  and  a  surveyor,  to  revise  the  old  bounds,  if  to  be  found, 
and  where  they  are  wanting,  to  make  new ;  to  keep  the  now 
travelled  and  beaten  road  that  has  been  so  much  worked  upon 
and  amended,  and  set  the  breadth,  three  poles  ;  thus  the  bounds 
being  fixed,  will  instruct  the  settlers  by  said  road,  where  to 
build  their  stone  walls,  and  run  other  fences,  &c. ;  upon  con- 
sideration whereof, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Stephen  Hopkins,  Job  Randall  and  Charles  Har- 
ris, Esqs.,  be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  hereby 
constituted  a  committee,  to  revise  the  bounds  of  the  ancient 
highway  or  road,  aforesaid,  at  the  charge  of  the  petitioners ; 
and  make  report  thereof  to  the  General  Assembly. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  draught  of  a  letter,  made 
by  the  committee,  to  be  sent  to  the  agent,  be  accepted  and  ap- 
proved of;  and  Ilis  Honor,  the  Governor,  is  desired  to  order  a 
fair  copy  thereof  made,  and  sign  the  same,  to  be  sent  to  the 
agent  by  the  first  good  opportunity. 

Whereas,  John  Peirce,  of  East  Greenwich,  in  the  county  of 
Kent,  yeoman,  by  petition  set  forth  that  he  was  sued  to  an  in- 
ferior court  of  common  pleas,  held  at  Providence,  in  December 
term,  A.  D.  1751,  by  John  Mawney,  of  said  Providence,  Esq., 
in  an  action  of  the  case  for  suing  him,  the  said  Mawney,  in 
the  county  of  Kent,  for  some  misconduct  in  his  oflice,  as  sheriff 
of  the  county  of  Providence,  whereby  the  said  Peirce  appre- 
hended he  had  sustained  some  injury ;  and  at  said  inferior 
court,  held  at  Providence,  the  said  John  Mawney  recovered 
judgment  in  his  favor,  to  have  and  receive  from  the  said  John 
Peirce,  the  sum  of  i>100  ;  froniAvhich,  both  parties  appealed  to 
1  lie  superior  court  held  there,  in  jNIarch  last  past,  where  th*; 
same  matter  was  again  considered,  and  judgment  there  was 


1752.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  359 

rendered  that  the  said  John  Mawney  should  recover  of  the 
said  John  Peirce  £200 ;  both  which  judgments  the  said  Peirce 
apprehends  are  erroneous  ;  and  more  especially  for  that  the 
same  was  tried  illegally  at  the  superior  court ;  there  being  on 
the  jury  at  both  trials^  one  Grindal  Rawson,  which  the  said 
Peirce  at  the  time  of  trial  was  altogether  ignorant  of;  he 
therefore  prayed  said  judgments  might  be  set  aside,  and  all 
process  thereon  stopped. 

On  consideration  whereof,  and  by  consent  of  both  parties, 
this  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved, 
that  the  judgment  of  the  superior  court  aformentioned,  be,  and 
the  same  is  hereby  annulled  and  declared  void  ;  and  that  the 
said  John  Peirce  have  another  trial  of  said  cause,  at  the  next 
superior  court  of  judicature,  to  be  held  at  Providence,  within 
and  for  the  county  of  Providence. 

God  save  the  King. 

Governor  Greene  to  the  Agent  of  Rhode  Island,  in  London. 

Rhode  Island,  4th  June,  1752. 

Sir  : — This  colony  have  lately  received  a  letter  from  the  lords  commissioners  for 
trade  and  plantations,  enclosing  the  copy  of  an  order  of  the  King,  in  council,  of  the 
11th  of  March  last ;  by  which  the  said  lords  commissioners  are  directed  and  em- 
powered to  present  to  His  Majesty  all  officers  that  have  been,  or  may  be  found  ne- 
cessary, in  any  of  the  plantations ;  a  copy  of  which,  is  herewith  sent  you  ;  and 
though  this  colony  entertain  a  grateful  sense  of  His  Majesty's  just  and  equal  gov- 
ernment, and  from  thence  are  led  to  hope  that  nothing  is  intended  by  the  said  order 
to  the  prejudice  of  the  charter  privileges  of  this  colony;  yet,  as  the  colony  are  ex- 
tremely fond  of  the  valuable  privileges  they  enjoy,  and  finding  the  said  order  run, 
in  terms  so  very  general,  are  in  fear,  that  something  may  be  intended  by  it  to  their 
disadvantage  ;  and  their  fears  are  further  increased,  by  finding  the  said  letter  and 
order  forwarded  to  them  by  Mr.  William  BoUan,  and  not  by  you,  as  is  usual. 

I  am  therefore  directed  by  the  General  Assembly  to  desire  you  to  make  diligent 
inquiry  about  the  design  and  intention  of  the  said  order,  and  if  need  be,  advise  with 
counsel  about  it;  and  if  you  find  it  is  intended  to  operate  in  this  colony,  so  as 
to  take  away,  or  any  way  lessen  pur  charter  privileges,  immediately  to  advise  the 
colony  of  it,  and  use  all  endeavors  in  your  power  to  prevent  any  thing  being  fur- 
ther done  in  consequence  thereof. 

You  will  easily  imagine  how  much  uneasiness  the  very  thoughts  of  losing  our 
liberties,  creates  in  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  and  how  much  dependence  they 
must  necessarily  have  on  you,  who  have  been  so  long  their  agent ;  and  who,  they  look 


360  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1752. 

upon  by  principle,  as  well  as  interest,  so  much  a  friend  to  liberty,  that  on  sueh  an 
occasion,  you  will  exert  yourself  to  the  uttermost. 

Having  no  further  directions  from   the    General  Assembly,  who  rely  wholly  on 
your  prudence,  diligence  and  judgment  in  this  matter,  I  conclude,  and  am — 

Your  true  friend  and  humble  servant, 

WILLIAM  GREENE. 
To  Kichard  Partridge,  Esq. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhitj  held  for  the  Colotiy  of  Bhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  on  the  third 
Monday  in  August,  1752. 

The  lion.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
t}^  thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  every  person  who  shall  drive  a 
loaded  cart  or  trucks  upon  any  part  of  the  pavement  lately 
laid  in  Queen  street,  from  the  colony  house,  to  the  east  side  of 
Thames  street,  in  Newport,  shall  forfeit  and  pay  a  fme  of  £5 
fur  every  offence  ;  to  be  recovered  before  any  two  justices  of 
said  town,  by  the  town  treasurer  ;  which  fine  shall  be  to  and 
for  the  use  of  said  town. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  that  part  of  the  laws  of  the 
colony,  which  have  been  lately  printed,  be  lodged  with 
the  general  treasurer,  to  be  sold  at  thirty  shillings  per 
book. 

Whereas,  INIcssrs.  Robert  Lillibridge,  Stephen  Hichmond  and 
Benjamin  Brown,  were,  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  ses- 
sion in  South  Kingstown,  on  the  last  Tuesday  of  February 
last,  appointed  a  committee  to  lay  out  highways  in  the  town  of 
Wcstcrl}',  &c.,  and  were  directed  to  make  report  of  their  do- 
ings in  the  i)rcmiscs,  &c. ;  which  province  they  undertook,  and 
of  tlieir  proceedings  ri'portcd  as  followeth,  to  wit: 


1752.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  *      861 


Report  of  the  Committee  on  Higliways  in  Westerly. 

Westerly,  March  16,  1752. 
Whereas,  we,  Robert  Lillibridge,  Stephen  Richmond  and  Benjamin  Brown,  be- 
ing appointed  a  committee,  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  last  session,  to  lay 
out  highways  in  Westerly,  agreeably  to  the  petitioners  of  said  Westerly,  and  make 
report  to  the  next  sitting  of  Assembl)'  ;  whereby  we  have,  and  do  report,  conform- 
ably to  said  appointment,  as  follows : 

Firstly,  from  Wood  River,  through  the  north  end  of  Westerly,  to  Exeter,  accord- 
ing to  the  courses  and  distance,  as  follows  :  beginning  at  Wood  River,  adjacent  to 
the  highway  that  leads  from  said  river,  to  the  ferry,  and  thence  west,  eleven  and  a 
half  degress  north,  twelve  chains  and  sixty  links,  to  a  pine  tree  ;  thence  west,  one 
and  a  quarter  degrees  north,  nine  cliains  and  twenty-five  links,  to  a  pine  tree  ; 
thence  north,  fifty-six  degrees  west,  eight  chains  and  ninety-five  links,  to  a  pine 
tree ;  thence  north,  fifty  degrees  west,  twelve  chains  and  fifty-two  links,  to  a  pine 
tree  ;  thence  north,  thirty-six  degrees  west,  thirty  chains,  to  a  stake  and  stones, 
north,  forty-three  and  three  quarters  degrees  west,  twenty-five  chains  and  fourteen 
links,  to  a  stake  and  stones  ;  thence  north,  sixty-eight  and  a  quarter  degrees  west, 
three  chains  and  eighty  links,  to  a  heap  of  stones  ;  thence  west,  eighteen  de"-rees 
south,  thirteen  chains  and  seventy-five  links  to  a  stake,  sixteen  foot  off  of  the  south- 
west corner  of  Benjamin  Barber's  house  ;  thence  north,  fifty-seven  degrees  west, 
fourteen  chains  and  ninety  links,  to  a  rock  ;  thence  west,  eight  and  a  half  degrees 
south,  thirty- three  chains,  to  a  white  oak  bush  ;  thence  west,  seven  and  a  quarter 
degrees  north,  thirty  chains,  to  a  high  rock  ;  thence  north,  fifty-eight  degrees  west, 
twenty-six  chains,  to  a  dry  tree  ;  thence  north,  seventy-one  and  a  quarter  degrees 
west,  six  chains  and  seventy  links,  to  a  white  oak  tree  ;  thence  west,  eight  and  a 
halt  degrees  north,  three  chains  and  eighty-five  links,  to  a  stake  ;  thence  north, 
forty-six  and  three  quarters  degrees  west,  two  chains  and  eighty-seven  links,  to  a 
black  oak  tree  ;  thence  north,  sixty  degrees  west,  four  chains  and  sixty-two  links, 
to  a  heap  of  stones  ;  thence  north,  seventy-two  and  three  quarters  degrees  west, 
twenty-one  chains  and  sixty-two  links,  to  a  black  oak  tree  ;  thence  west,  thirteen 
and  one  half  degrees  north,  two  chains  and  seventy-nine  links,  to  a  rock,  north, 
sixty-two  and  one  half  degrees  west,  twelve  chains  and  fortv-nine  links,  to  a  stake  . 
thence  north,  thirty-five  and  one  quarter  degrees  west,  thirty -one  chains  and  eighty 
links,  to  a  stake ;  thence  north,  forty-six  and  a  half  degrees  west,  thirteen  chains 
and  forty-two  links,  to  a  pine  tree  ;  thence  north,  thirty-one  and  one  quarter  de- 
grees west,  twenty  chains,  to  a  stake  and  stones  about  it;  and  thence  the  same 
course  to  Exeter  line,  &c. ;  all  which  courses  and  distances,  is  of  the  northward 
side  of  the  highways  ;  which  highway  is  four  rods  wide,  &c. 

And  here  are  the  courses  and  distances  of  the  second  highway,  as  follows  : 
Beginning  at  a  stake  and  stones  about  it,  on  the  westward  side  of  the  abovesaid  high- 
way, it  being  at  the  most  northerVimost  turn  in  the  aforesaid  highway  ;  from  thence 
south,  thirty-one  and  a  half  degrees  west,  sixty-one  chains,  to  a  black  oak  tree  ;  thence 
south,  ten  degrees  east,  twelve  chains  and  seventy-five  links;  thence  south,  six  chains, 
twelve  degrees  east,  twenty-eight  chains  and  twenty-five  links,  to  a  black  oak  tree; 
thence  south,  twenty-seven  degrees  east,  twenty-seven  chains  an. I  fifty  links  ;  thence 
south,  six  chains,  &c.,  to  a  stake  ;  thence  south,  thirty-seven  degrees  west,  twenty- 
seven  chains  atid   fif^y  links,  &c. ;  thence  west,  nine   chains  and  ninety  links   to  a 

VOL.  V.         46 


362     '  UEC(JRl).S    nF    the    COLONi'    OF    KHODE    ISLAND  [1752. 

wliitc  oak  tree;  tbciicc  south,  lifty-five  and  a  half  degrees  west,  fourteen  ehains  and 
sevei)ty-fivo  link?,  to  an  oak  tree  ;  thence  south,  thirty-two  and  a  half  degrees  west, 
three  chains  and  fifty  links,  to  a  chestnut  tree  ;  thence  twenty-four  and  a  half  de- 
grees west,  four  cliaiiis  and  forty-one  links  to  a  walnut  tree  ;  thence  south,  thirty- 
eight  and  a  half  degrees  west,  one  chain  and  sixty -eight  links,  to  a  white  oak  tree  ; 
thence  west,  thirteen  and  three  quarters  degrees  south,  seven  chains  and  fitty-seven 
links,  to  a  white  oak  tree  ;  thence  west,  one  and  one  quarter  degrees  south,  three 
chains  and  seventy-five  links,  &c. ;  thence  north,  seventy-one  degrees  west,  three 
chains ;  and  thence  north,  fifty -seven  and  a  half  degrees  west,  three  chains  and 
forty-three  links,  to  a  black  oak  tree ;  thence  west,  six  degrees  north,  three  chains 
and  ninety-four  links ;  thence  south,  thirty-seven  degrees  west,  two  chains  and 
twenty-three  links,  to  a  white  oak  tree  ;  thence  south,  sixty-three  degrees  west,  one 
chain  and  nine  links,  to  a  black  oak  tree  ;  thence  south,  thirty-one  and  one  half  de- 
trrees  west,  five  chains  and  twenty-two  links,  to  a  black  oak  tree  ;  thence  south, 
seventeen  degrees  west,  three  chains,  and  eighty-one  links ;  and  thence  south, 
sixty-tour  and  a  half  degrees  west,  three  chains  and  forty-seven  links,  to  a  black 
iiak  tree  ;  thence  west,  ten  and  a  quarter  degrees  south,  three  chains  and  ninety 
links,  to  a  black  oak  tree ;  thence  west,  thirteen  and  a  half  degrees  north,  eight 
chains  and  three  links,  &c. ;  thence  the  same  course,  four  chains  and  thirty-five 
^inks,  to  '.a  dry  pine  tree  ;  thence  west,  six  degrees  north,  nine  chains,  to  a  pine 
tree  ;  thence  west,  seventeen  and  a  half  degrees  south,  three  chains  and  eighteen 
links,  to  a  rock  ;  thence  west,  fourteen  degrees  north,  two  chains  and  eighty-seven 
links  ;  thence  west,  four  degrees  north,  one  chain  and  sixteen  links,  to  two  chest- 
nut trees ;  thence  south,  sixty-two  degrees  west,  one  chain  and  eighty  links  ;  thence 
south,  sixty-six  degrees  west,  three  chains  and  twenty-five  links,  to  a  rock ;  thence 
south,  thirty-two  and  one  quarter  degrees  west,  eight  chains  to  a  stake,  through  a 
cedar  swamp  ;  thence  south,  sixty  degrees  west,  three  chains  and  seventy-two 
links,  to  a  chestnut  tree;  thence  south,  fifty-four  degrees  west,  two  chains  and 
thirtv-nine  links,  to  chestnut  tree ;  thence  south,  twenty-four  degrees  west,  two 
chains  and  seventy  links,  to  a  bush ;  thence  south,  twenty-one  and  one  quarter  de- 
grees east,  two  chains  and  fifty  links, to  a  black  oak  tree;  thence  south,  six  degrees 
east,  one  chain  and  eighty-seven  links,  to  a  heap  of  stones  ;  thence  south,  fifty- 
seven  and  a  half  degrees  west,  three  chains  and  fifty-five  links,  to  a  white  oak  tree  ; 
thencp  south,  three  and  a  half  degrees  west,  two  chains  and  seventy-five  links,  to  a 
forked  chestnut  tree  ;  thence  south,  forty-six  and  a  half  degrees  east,  two  chains 
and  forty-one  links,  to  a  black  oak  tree ;  thence  south,  forty-seven  and  a  half  de- 
grees east,  five  chains,  to  a  high  rock  ;  thence  south,  fifty  degrees  east,  six  chains 
and  ninety-three  links,  to  a  white  oak  tree ;  thence  south,  nine  and  a  half  de- 
grees east,  two  chains  and  twenty-five  links ;  thence  south,  thirty-nine  degrees 
west,  one  chain  and  fifty  links,  to  a  black  oak  tree ;  thence  south,  fort^'-one  and  a 
half  degrees  west,  one  chain  and  forty-four  links  ;  thence  south,  eleven  and  three 
([uarlcrs  degrees  east,  one  chain,  and  ninety  links;  thence  south,  fourteen  degrees 
west,  four  chains  and  thirty-four  links  ;  thence  south,  twenty  denfrees  west,  eleven 
chains  and  twenty-five  links,  to  a  rock  ;  thence  south,  eight  and  a  half  degrees  east, 
fourteen  chains  and  ninety-three  links,  to  a  black  oak  tree  ;  thence  south,  twenty- 
nine  and  a  half  degrees  cast,  (bur  chains  and  seventy-one  links;  thence  south, 
twplvo  and  a  half  degrees  east,  sixty-four  chains,  to  a  stake  and  stone  about  it ; 
thence  south,  seven  and  one  quarter  degrees  east,  twenty-five  chains  and  fifty 
links,  to  a  stone  li'.ap  ;  thouce  south,  twenty-seven   deorrecs  west,  seven  chains  and 


1752.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  3G3 


eighty-one  links,  to  a  white  oak  tree ;  thence    south,  forty-six   degrees  west,  four 
chains  and  twenty-five  links,  to  a  black  oak  tree  ;  thence  south,  forty -six  and  a  lial^ 
degrees  west,  two  chains  and  eighty-eight  links,  to  a  black  oak  tree  i  thence  south, 
sixteen  and  a  halt  degrees  west,  three  chains   and   sixty-four  links  ;  thence  south, 
fourteen  degrees  west,  ten  chains,  to  two  sapling  oaks  ;  thence  south,  nineteen  and 
a  half  degrees  west,  three  chains,  and  twenty-five  links,  to  a  black  oak  tree  i  thence 
south,  thirty-seven  and  a  half  degrees  west,  three  chains  and  fifty  seven  links,  to  the 
corner  of  Samuel  Hill's  land,  all  which   courses   and    distances   being  ou  the  north 
and  west  side  of  said  highway,  and  is  four  rods  wide,  and  the  remaining  part   three 
rods  wide  ;  continuing  on  the  same  side  of  the  highway,  &c. ;  thence  south,  two  and 
and  three  quarters  degrees  west,  nine  chains   and   ninety-five  links,  to  a  black  oak 
tree  ;  thence  south,  eighteen   and   a   half  degrees   east,  four  chains  and  forty-four 
links,  to  a  black  oak  tree  ;  thence  south,  fifteen  and  a  half  degrees  west,  seven  chains 
and  fifty  links,  to  a  rock ;  thence  south,  nine  and  a  half  degrees  west,  three  chains 
and  twelve  links,  to  a  white  oak  tree  ;  thence  south,  two   and   three   quarters   de- 
grees west,  ten  chains  and  fifteen   links,  to   a  bush  ;  thence  south,  fifteen  degrees 
west,  two  chains  and  fifty  links,  to  a  white  oak  tree  ;  thence  south,  fourteen  and  one 
quarter  degrees  west,  one   chain  and   eighty-eight  links,  a  little  east  of  a  spring  ; 
thence   south,   twenty-four   and   a   half  degrees  west,  five    chains   and  fourteen 
links ;  thence  south,  twenty-one  degrees  west,  two  chains,  and   sixty-one    links,  to 
two  black  oaks ;  thence  south,  two  and  three  quarters  degrees  west,  six  chains  and 
seventy-one  links,  to  an  oak  tree  ;  thence  south,  eighteen  and  three  quarter  degrees 
west,  thirteen  chains  and  eighty-six  links ;  thence  south,  thirteen  degrees  west,  sev- 
en chains  and  fifty  links,  to  a  stake  and  stones  about  it ;  thence  south,  eighteen  and 
three  quarters  degrees  west,  eight  chains,  to  a  dry  tree;  thence  south,  half  a  degree  east, 
twenty-eight  chains  and  eleven  links,  to  a  stake  and  stones  ;  thence  south,  six  and 
a  quarter  degrees  west,  six   chains   and   forty-four   links,  to   a   stake   and  stones  ^ 
thence  south,  nine  and  three   quarters   degrees  west,  thirteen  chains  and  seventy- 
five  links,  the   same   course,  thirteen  chains  and  sixty-six  links,  to  a  stake ;  thence 
south,   sixty-five   degrees  west,  seven   chains  and   twenty-five   links,  to   a   stake ; 
thence  south,  ten   degrees  east,  nineteen   chains   and  six  links,  to  a  stake ;  thence 
south,  thirty  degrees  east,  one  chain    to   a   stake  ;  thence  south,  sixty  degrees  east, 
and  sixty-four  links,  to  a  stake  ;  thence   south,  thirty-one  degrees  east,  three  chains 
and  seventy-one  links,  to   a   black   oak   tree ;  thence  south,  six  and  a  half  degrees 
east,  nine  chains   and   forty-six   links,  to  do. ;  thence   south,  fourteen  degrees  east, 
seven  chains   and  eighty-seven   links,  to  a  white  oak  tree  ;  thence  south,  eighteen 
degrees  east,  one   chain   and   seventy-eight  links,  to  a  stake  ;  thence  south,  fifteen 
degrees  west,  two  chains  and  sixty-seven  links,  to  a  stake ;  thence  south,  thirty- 
three  and   a  half  degrees  west,  seven  chains   and   seventy  links,  to   a   black  oak 
bush ;  thence  west,  one  quarter   of  a  degree   north,  ten   chains  and  fifty  links,  to 
Capt.  Maxson's   corner ;  thence  south,  nineteen   and   a  half  degrees   east,  three 
chains  and  fifty-five   links,  to  a  stake  ;  thence  south,  thirtj'-five  degrees  west,  four 
chains  and  twenty-nine  links,  to   a  rock  and  stones  on  it ;  thence  south,  thirty  de- 
grees west,  twelve  chains  and  twenty-five  links,  to  a  stake  and  stones  ;  thence  south, 
two  and   a  half  degrees   east,  and  five  chains;  thence  south,  twenty-two  degree* 
west,  five  chains  and   sixty-four    links,  to   an  apple  tree ;  thence  soutli,  thirty-one 
degrees  west,  four  chains  to  a  stone,  and  thirteen  links,  to  the  south  of  Uapt.  Max- 
son's  door,  &c. ;  thence  south,  forty-two  degrees  west,  one  chain   and  seventy-three 
links,  to  a  gate  post :  tlieni.-e   south,  thirty-one   degrees  west,  three  chains  and  nine 


364  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1752. 

links,  to  a  stake ;  tlience  south,  sixty-three  and  a  half  degrees  west,  five  chains  and 
fifty-two  links,  to  a   stake  and   stones;  thencej  south,r-seventy-four  degrees  west, 
seven  chains,  to   a  heap   of  stones ;  thence   south,^twenty-two  ;degrees_west,  one 
chain  and  fifty  links,  to  the   same  course,  seven  chains,  to  a  chestnut  tree;  thence 
south,  twentv-five  degrees  west,  ten   chains  and   fifty-six  links,  to  a  stake  ;  thence 
south,  fifty-two  and  a  half  degrees  west,  two   chains   and   ninety-three   links,  to  a 
white  oak  tree  ;  thence   south,  fifty  and   a  half  degrees  west,  six  chains  and  forty- 
two  links,  &c. ;  south,  fifty-one  and  one  quarter  degrees  west,  sixty-seven  chains  and 
eighty- ein-ht  links,  to  a  stake  ;  thence  west,  sixteen  dogrees'seuth,  three  chains  and 
eifhtv-six  links,  to  a  cherry  tree  ;  thence  south,  thirty-nine]and[a  half  degrees  west, 
two  chains  and  sixty-one  links,  to  a  cherry  tree;  thence  south,  twenty-six  and  a  half 
decrees  west,  two   chains,  and   seventy-five   links,  to   a   stake   and  stones ;  thence 
south,  five  decrees  west,  four  chains    and  thirty-eight  links,  to  a  stake  and  stones  ; 
thence  south,  seventeen  degrees  west,  four  chains,  to   a    stake   and  stones ;  thence 
south,    twenty-six    and    a    half  degrees    west,    six  chains'^and  fifty-nine  links,   to 
Esquire  Randall's  land  ;  tlience  south,  twenty-eight  and  a  half  degrees  west,  seven 
chains  and  fifteen  links,  to  a  white  oak  tree ;  thence  south,  thirty-six  degrees  west, 
three  chains  and   nine   links,  to   a   birch  tree ;  thence  south,  twenty-nine  degrees 
west,  one  chain  and  eighteen   links,  to   a   stake  ;  thence  south,  thirty-two  degrees 
wfcst,  two   chains   and   ninety  links,  to  a  black  oak  tree  ;  thence  south,  fifteen  de- 
crees west,  three  chains,  to  a  stake  ;  thence  south,  nine  and  three  quarters  degrees 
west, -ten  chains  and  seventy-two  links,  to  a  stake  ;  thence  south,  seventeen  and  a  half 
decrees  west,  four  chains  and  thirty-four  links,  to  a  stake ;  thence  south,  fifteen  and 
a  half  degrees  west,  nine    chains  and    thirty -four    links,  to  a    stake;  thence  south, 
twenty-four  degrees  west,  two  chains    and    eighty  links,  to  a  stake ;  thence  south, 
thirty-eight  degrees  west,  eight   chains   and    fifteen    links,  to   a    stake  and  stones  ; 
thence  south,  twenty-six    and    a   half  degrees  west,  twelve   chains  and  ninety-five 
links,  to  a  stake  and  stones ;  thence  south,  twenty-nine  degrees  west,  eight  chains, 
the  same  course,  eight   chains   and    twenty-five  links  more  ;  thence  south,  twenty- 
seven  degrees  west,  six   chains   and   eighty-eight  links,  to  a  stake ;  thence  south, 
fifty-two  degrees  west,  and  five  chains  and  seventy-five  links,  to  a  white  oak  tree  • 
thence  south,  sixty-four  degrees  west,  five  chains,  to   a  stake;  thence  south,  sixty- 
one  degrees  west,  two  chains  and  twenty-nine  links,  to[a  stake  ;  thence  west,  thir- 
teen   degrees   south,  sixty-nine   links,  to   a   rock ;  thence  west,  eighteen  degrees 
north,  three    chains,  to  a  stake,  by  the  river  ;  thence  south,  twelve  degrees  west, 
over  the  river,  to  the  west  side  of  the  bridge,  by  Crandall's  Mill. 

The  following  is  the  quantity  of  land  taken  up  in  the  said  highways,  and  prized 
to  the  proprietors,  that  we  could  not  agree  with,  &c. ;  and  in  the  following  manner 
the  proprietors'  names  are  subscribed  to  the  right  hand  of  his  quantity  of  land,  and 
value  thereto. 

[Here  follows  a  list  of  the  several  jiarcels  of  land,  with  the  value  affixed  thereto.] 

£    5.  d. 

Second  highways  total 349  2  10 

First  "  "      50  4  09 

£399  7  07 


1752.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  365 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly  held  for  the  Color}?/  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the 
last  Wednesday  in  October,  1752. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

[The  following  Public  Laws,  passed  during  the  year  1752,  are  printed  at 
length  in  the  volume  of  public  laws,  published  in  the  year  17G7,  unless  repealed 
previous  to  that  time.] 

An  Act  empowering  the  freemen  of  the  town  of  Providence  to  take  up  a  conven- 
ient piece  of  land  for  building  a  pest  house.     (February.) 

An  Act  in  addition  to  an  act,  entitled  "An  act  to  prevent  the  spreading  of  the 
small  pox,  and  other  contagious  diseases,  in  this  colony."     (February.) 

An  Act  to  prevent  the  small  pox  [from  being]  brought  into  the  colony  by  strangers 
and  travellers  coming  from  infected  districts.     (May.) 

An  Act  in  addition  to  an  act,  regulating  and  establishing  a  just  and  equal  method 
of  gauging,  in  and  throughout  the  colony.     (May.) 

An  Act  regulating  the  proceedings  in  cases  of  bastardy.     (June.) 

An  Act  enabling  the  justices  of  the  inferior  courts  of  common  pleas  to  hold  special 
courts  on  certain  occasions.     (June.) 

An  Act  exempting  sundry  persons  from  making  oath  or  affirmation,  notwithstand- 
ing the  general  laws  of  the  colony,  made  about  sueing  out  executions.     (June.) 

An  additional  Act  for  the  establishing  and  regulating  of  fees.     (August.) 

An  Act  for  stating  and  better  regulating  the  several  ferries  in  this  colony. 
(August.) 

An  Act  for  raising  money  by  way  of  lottery,  to  reimburse  what  money  was  ad- 
vanced by  Obadiah  Brown,  David  Whipple,  John  Dexter  and  Paul  Tew,  in 
building  a  bridge  over  Pawtucket  Piiver,  and  for  completing  said  bridge. 
(August.) 

An  Act  to  prevent  detaining  fines  from  the  proper  offices  to  which  they  belong. 
(August.) 

An  Act  for  regulating  appeals  from  judgments  obtained  upon  notes  of  hand,  in  any 
of  the  inferior  courts  in  this  colony.     (October.) 

An  Act  to  empower  the  town  councils  of  the  respective  towns  in  the  colony  to  ex- 
change highways.     (October.) 

An  Act  in  addition  to  an  act,  entitled  "  An  act  directing  the  method  of  receiving 
petitions  into,  and  acting  thereon,  in  the  General  Assembly."     (October.) 


)66  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1753. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Jissemhl//,  held  for  the  Colon?/  of  Bhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the  last  Tues- 
day in  February,  1752-53. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple.  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Whereas,  a  number  of  gentlemen  and  others,  inhabitants  of 
the  county  of  Kent,  have  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that 
in  consequence  of  an  act  made  and  passed  at  their  session,  in 
June,  A.  D.  1750,  whereby  E.  Greenwich,  Warwick,  W.  Green- 
wich and  Coventry  were  made  a  distinct  county,  provided  the 
inhabitants  of  said  towns  would,  by  free  contribution,  erect  and 
build  a  court  house  in  East  Greenwich,  near  the  bigness  of  the 
court  house  in  Providence,  fit  to  hold  a  court  in,  by  the  last 
day  of  October,  then  next  ensuing ;  they  have,  with  others, 
erected  and  built  said  house,  agreeably  to  said  act,  which  was 
signified  to  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  Provi- 
dence, October,  A.  D.  1750  ;  and  that  said  house  is  unfinished 
within,  which  renders  it  uncomfortable  in  the  winter ;  in  the 
coldest  part  of  which  season,  one  court  is  held  at  said  court 
house ;  and  that  the  inhabitants  of  said  county,  though  they 
have  checrlully  contributed  towards  the  building  said  house, 
find  they  are  not  able  to  complete  it,  although  it  is  absolutely 
necessar}^  to  be  done  ;  and  therefore  have  prayed  this  Assem- 
bly that  a  lottery  may  be  granted  them,  as  the  easiest  method 
to  raise  money  sufficient  for  finishing  said  court  house ;  and 
now,  this  Assembly,  taking  the  premises  into  considera- 
tion,— 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  there 
be  a  lottery  set  up.  for  finishing  the  court  house,  in  the  county 


1753.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  367 

of  Kent,  aforesaid  ;  and  for  erecting  a  fence  around  the  jail,  in 
said  East  Greenwich. 

A.n  Act  for  naturalizing  Stephen  Decatur,  now  residing  at  New- 
port, in  this  colony,  late  a  subject  of  the  French  king. 
Whereas,  the  said  Stephen  Decatur,  hath  represented  unto 
this  Assembly,  that  he  has  for  some  time  resided  in  Newport, 
aforesaid  ;  and  sailed  from  the  said  place  in  the  employ  of 
several  merchants  •  and  has  also  married  a  wife  in  said  Newport, 
and  is  willing  to  become  a  subject  of  His  Brittanic  Majesty ; 
and  therefore  prayed  this  Assembly,  that  an  act  of  naturaliza- 
tion might  be  passed,  rendering  him  a  subject  of  His  said 
Majesty,  as  fully  and  amply  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  as  if 
he  were  born  so  ;  on  consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty of  the  same  it  is  enacted,  that  the  said  Stephen  Decatur  be, 
and  he  is  hereby  naturalized,  and  for  ever  hereafter  shall  be 
adjudged  and  taken  to  all  intents  and  purposes  to  be  natural- 
ized ;  and  is  rendered  and  made  equal  in  all  respects  to  a  free 
born  subject  of  this  colony ;  provided,  he  take  the  state  oath, 
and  all  other  oaths  by  law  required. 
God  save  the  King. 

Petiiiou  of  the   Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island  to  the 

liing. 

To  the  King's  Most  Excellent  Majesty  : 

The  petition  of  your  loyal  subjects,  the  Governor  and  Company  of  the  colony  o{ 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  I'lantations,  in  New  England,  in  America. 
Most  humbly  showeth  ; — 

That  Your  Majesty's  royal  predecessor,  King  Charles  the  First,  in  the  fourth 
year  of  his  reign,  granted  a  charter  to  the  colony  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  in  New 
England,  and  bounded  the  said  colony  on  the  south,  by  a  certain  place  or  point, 
which  was  three  English  miles  south  of  the  southerly  part  of  a  certain  fresh  river 
there,  commonly  known  by  the  name  of  Charles  River  ;  and  by  a  line  commencing 
at  the  said  place  or  point,  and  running  due  west,  through  the  continent. 

That  King  Charles  the  Second,  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  his  reign,  granted  a  char- 
ter to  the  said  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  and  bounded 
them  northerly  on  the  south  line  of  the  said  colony  of  the  Masssachusetts  Bay. 

That  the  country  through  which  the  dividing  line  between  the  said  two  colonies 
would  pass,  not  being  then  inliabited,  no  attempts  appear    to    have   been  made  by 


368  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1753. 

the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  to  have  the  said  line  settled,  until  the  year  1710,  when 
commissioners  were  appointed  by  both  said  colonies  for  that  purpose  ;  who  being 
met,  the  Massachusetts  commissioners  informed  those  of  Rhode  Island,  that  the 
place  or  point,  for  their  south  line  to  commence  at,  had  been  rightly  found  out  and 
ascertained  lon^  before,  by  Nathaniel  AVoodward  and  Solomon  Saffery,  skillful  ar- 
tists, by  them  appointed  for  that  end,  in  the  year  16'12  ;  and  showed  a  plat  or  map, 
of  their  doings  (as  they  pretended),  in  which  Charles  River  was  deciphered,  and  a 
mark  made  for  a  stake  standing  three  miles  due  south,  from  its  most  southern  part  • 
and  the  Rhode  Island  commissioners  being  wholly  unacquainted  in  that  part  of  the 
country,  and  giving  credit  to  the  Massachusetts  commissioners,  were  induced,  in 
the  month  of  October,  in  the  year  1718,  to  agree  that  the  stake  set  up  by  Na- 
thaniel Woodward  and  Solomon  SafTery,  in  the  year  1642,  upon  Wrentham  Plain^ 
be  the  station,  or  commencement  to  begin  the  line,  which  shall  divide  between  the 
two  governments. 

That  in  the  year  1719,  persons  were  appointed  by  both  said  colonies,  called  rid- 
ino-  commissioners,  to  run  and  mark  out  the  said  dividing  line  ;  who,  instead  of  be- 
(rinninfT  at  a  place  three  miles,  and  no  more,  from  the  southern  part  of  Charles 
River,  agreeably  to  the  Massachusetts  charter  and  the  true  intent  of  the  agreemmli 
aforesaid,  were  shown  a  place  where  the  Massachusetts  commissioners  affirmed  the 
stake  set  up  by  Nathaniel  \Voodward  and  Solomon  Saffery,  had  formerly  stood  ; 
and  the  Rhode  Island  commissioners,  not  carefully  examining  into  the  truth,  were 
prevailed  upon  to  begin  at  the  place  so  shown  to  them  ;  and  did  from  thence  run 
and  mark  out  a  line,  which  hath,  from  that  time,  been  the  dividing  line  between 
the  said  colonics. 

That  on  the  geography  of  that  part  of  the  country  being  better  known,  the  col- 
ony of  Rhode  Island,  suspecting  there  was  an  error  in  running  the  line  aforesaid, 
caused  an  accurate  survey  to  be  made  of  all  the  southern  parts  of  the  said  Charles 
River,  and  the  distance  to  be  exactly  measured  between  the  most  southern  part 
thereof,  and  the  line  aforesaid;  and  find  it  on  the  meridian,  seven  miles  and  fifty- 
four  poles;  by  which  it  appears,  that  by  the  wrong  running  of  said  line,  the  colony 
or  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  do  hold  the  jurisdiction  of  a  tract  of  land 
four  miles  and  fifty-four  poles  in  breadth,  and  about  twenty-two  miles  long,  which 
doth  of  right  belong  to  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island. 

That,  as  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  were  much  imposed  upon,  and  greatly  de- 
ceived, and  injured  by  their  neighbors,  of  the  Massachusetts,  in  running  and  mark- 
in"-  out  the  line,  afore.'^aid,  in  manner,  as  aforesaid  ;  they  humbly  hope  they  shall 
not  be  holden  to  and  concluded  thereby. 

And  therefore  most  humbly  praj',  that  Your  Majesty  would  be  graciously  pleased 
to  order,  that  the  south  line  of  the  colony  or  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay, 
may  be  rightly  run,  and  marked  out,  according  to  the  charter  granted  them,  in 
such  manner  as  in  your  royal  wisdom,  you  shall  think  fit. 

And  your  petitioners,  as  in  duty  bound,  will  ever  pray. 

AVTLLIAM  GREENE, 
For  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

Nesvport,  Rhode  Island,  March  2,  1752-3. 


1753.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  369 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhl?/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Bhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neioport,  the  \st  day 
of  May,  1753. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  John  Tillinghast,  Mr.  Robert  Lawton, 

Mr.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Mr.  William  Richmond, 

Mr.  Jabez  Bowen,  Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 

Mr.  Stephen  Brownell,  Mr.  Jeoffrey  Watson. 

The   Hon.  Thomas   Cranston,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyn- 
don, clerk. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Pihode 
Island  and  Providence  Plaiitations,  at  Netvport,  the  first  Wednes- 
day of  May,  1753. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

DEPUTIES. 

Neivport.  Providence. 

Mr.  Edward  Scott,  Mr.  Jonathan  Randall, 

Mr.  Thomas  Cranston,  Mr.  Elisha  Brown, 

Mr.  Peter  Bours,  Mr.  Daniel  Jenckes. 

Capt.  Job  Bennett,  Jr. 
Capt.  William  Mumford, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Easton. 
VOL.  V.         47 


370 


RECORDS   OF  THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND 


[1753. 


DEPUTIES. 


Portsmouth. 
Mr.  William  Anthony,  Jr., 
Mr.  John  Allen, 
Mr.  Caleb  Hill, 
Mr.  Gideon  Freeborn,  Jr. 

WarivicJc. 
Mr.  John  Peirce, 
Capt.  Randall  Rice, 
Major  John  Rhodes, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Arnold. 

Westerli/. 
Mr.  Joshua  Babcock, 
Mr.  Joshua  Clarke. 

New  Shoreham. 
Mr.  Edmund  Sheffield, 
I\lr.  John  Paine. 

North  Kingstoivn. 
Mr.  Henry  Hall. 

South  Kingstovm. 
Mr.  Jeoffi-y  Haszard, 
Col.  Thomas  Hazard. 

East  Greemmch. 
Mr.  Joseph  Nichols, 
Mr.  John  Fry. 

Jamestoum. 
Mr.  Joseph  Clarke. 
Smithjicld. 
Mr.  John  Aldrich, 
Mr.  Thomas  Owens. 

ScilucUe. 
Capt.  Job  Randall, 
Capt.  Thomas  Relph. 

Gtoccster. 
Col.  Richard  Smith, 
Capt.  Joseph  Windsor. 


Charlesioivn. 
Col.  Christopher  Charaplin, 
Capt.  Joseph  Stanton. 

West  Greenwich. 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Ellis, 
Mr.  Preserved  Hill. 

Coventry. 
Mr.  John  Greene, 
Capt.  John  Ulerton. 

Exeter. 
Capt.  John  Reynolds, 
JNIr.  Nicholas  Gardner. 

Middletown. 
Capt.  John  Barker, 
]\Ir.  Handley  Chipraan. 

Bristol. 
Mr.  Joseph  Russell, 
Capt.  Simon  Davis. 

Tiverton. 
Mr.  Samuel  Durfey, 
Mr.  Edward  Wanton. 
Little  Compton. 
Mr.  William  Hall, 
Mr.  Richard  Greenhill. 

^Yarrcn. 
Capt.  John  Adams, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Miller. 

Cumberland. 
Mr.  Job  Bartlett, 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Whipple. 

Btchmond. 
Capt.  Joseph  Enos,  Jr. 
Mr.  Simeon  Perrv. 


1753.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  371 

The  Hon.  Thomas  Cranston,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 

The  following  officers  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

ASSISTANTS. 

Mr.  John  Tillinghast,  Mr.  Robert  Lawton, 

Mr.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Mr.  Jeremiah  Lippitt, 

.    Mr.  Nicholas  Cooke,  Mr.  William  Richmond, 

Mr.  Jabez  Bowen,  Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 

Mr.  Stephen  Brownell,  Mr.  JeofFrey  Watson. 

SECRETARY.  GENERAL  TREASURER. 

Mr.  Thomas  Ward.  Mr.  Thomas  Richardson. 

ATTORNEY    GENERAL. 

Mr.  Daniel  Updike. 
God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  second  Mon- 
day of  June,  1753. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re 
solved,  that  the  committee  appointed  to  erect  a  new  jail  and 
jail  house   in  Providence,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  empowered 


372  KECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1753. 

to  draw  out  of  the  general  treasury  the  sum  of  £1,000,  to  be 
appropriated  towards  carrying  on  said  building. 
God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhli/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivpori,  the  third  Holi- 
day of  August,  1753. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  James  Sheffield  and  Daniel 
Jenckes,  Esqs.,  with  Mr.  William  Read,  be,  and  they,  or  the 
major  part  of  them,  are  hereby  constituted  a  committee  for 
erecting  another  light  house,  with  stone  or  brick,  at  the  place 
where  that  lately  burnt  down,  stood,  as  soon  as  they  can  con- 
veniently ;  and  that  the  said  committee  make  use  of  all  the 
bricks  at  Fort  George,  or  such  part  of  them  as  they  shall  think 
proper. 

Whereas,  John  JNIartin,  of  Jamestown,  was  brought  before 
this  Assembly  (when  resolved  into  a  grand  committee),  in  con- 
sequence of  a  warrant  issued  against  him,  at  the  last  session  of 
this  Assembly,  for  grossly  and  scandalously  abusing  them ; 
and  it  being  fully  proved  that  he,  the  said  John  Martin,  is 
guilty  of  the  crime  laid  to  his  charge, — 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  John  Martin  shall  be 
forthwith  committed  and  closely  confined  to  His  Majesty's  jail, 
in  Newport,  without  the  use  of  pen,  ink  and  paper ;  and  that 
no  person  but  the  sheriff,  shall,  without  leave  of  this  Assem- 
bly, have  liberty  to  speak  to,  or  confer  with  him,  on  any  occa- 
sion whatever ;  :iiid  there  to  remain  till  further  orders  from 
this  Assembly  ;  and  the  said  John  Martin  was  committed  ac- 
cordingly. 


1753.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  373 

On  the  23d  day  of  August,  John  Martin,  of  Jamestown,  was 
brought  before  this  Assembly,  and  made  and  signed  the 
following  acknowledgment : 

Acknoivledgment  of  John  Martin. 

"  Newport,  August  23,  1753. 
I,  John  Martin,  do  hereby  acknowledge,  that  I  have  grossly 
and  scandalously  slandered  and  abused  this  Honorable  Assem- 
bly, for  which  I  am  heartily  and  sincerely  sorry,  and  very 
humbly  entreat  Your  Honors'  pardon  ;  and  promise  for  the  fu- 
ture, never  to  be  guilty  of  the  like  crime. 

JOHN  MARTIN." 

On  consideration  whereof,  this  Assembly  forgive  the  said 
John  Martin,  and  dismiss  him,  he  paying  costs. 
God  save  the  Kino-. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemblg  held  for  the  Colong  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kings- 
town, the  last  Wednesdag  in  Octoher,  1753. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joseph  Whipple,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  committee  appointed  to  build  a  new  jail  in  the 
county  of  Providence,  draw  out  of  the  general  treasury  the 
sum  of  £1,000  more  than  hath  been  already  granted  towards 
carrying  on  said  work ;  and  that  said  committee  sell  and  dis- 
pose of  the  old  jail  house,  and  lot  of  land  thereunto  belonging, 
to  the  best  advantage,  and  give  a  good  warrantee  deed 
thereof 


374  RECORDS    OP    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1753. 

It  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  Jabez  Bowen,  Daniel  Jenckes 
and  George  Brown,  Esqs.,  together  with  Mr.  Job  Bennett,  Jr., 
be,  and  they  are  hereby  constituted  a  committee,  to  view  the 
new  court  house  and  jail,  in  Kings  county,  and  consider  whe- 
ther those  persons  who  became  bound  to  build  said  court  house 
and  jail,  have  performed  the  condition  of  their  bond  ;  and  that 
thej^  make  report  on  the  premises,  to  this  Assembly,  as  soon  as 
conveniently  they  can. 

The  gentlemen  that  were  appointed  a  committee,  to  audit 
the  accounts  of  Benjamin  Nichols,  Esq.,  presented  this  Assem- 
bly with  the  following  account  and  report : 

Report  of  the  Auditing  Committee. 

Benjamin  Nichols,  Esq.,  treasurer  of  the  grand  committee,  to  tlie  colony,        Dr. 

£       s.  d. 
1753.     To  the  balance  of  the  last  account,  as  j^er  report  of  the  com- 
mittee, dated  April  22d,  1752 397,622  10  -4 

Benjamin  Nichols,  Esq.,  treasurer  of  the  grand  committee,  to  the  colony,         Cr. 

£       s.  d. 
1753.     By  cash  paid  to  John  Tillinghast,  Thomas   Cranston,  James 
Sheffield  and  Peter  Bours,  Esqs.,  a  committee,  appointed 
by  the  General  Assembly,  to  receive  and  burn  the  same,      20,088  03  9 

"      By  cash  paid  to  William  Collins,  of  Connecticut,  by  order  of 

Assembly 14  00  0 

"       By  cash  paid  Jeremiah  Rose,  by  order  of  Assembly 421G0 

"         "      "       "     John  Whipple,  of  Glocester,  by  order  of  Assem- 
bly    82  00  0 

"  By  £3,  new  tenor,  short  in  ten  bonds,  given  to  discharge  a 
mortgage  deed  of  Robert  Wilcox,  of  North  Kingstown, 
dated  June  18th,  1741,  is  in  old  tenor 120  00  0 

"  By  ten  shillings,  new  tenor,  short  in  ten  bonds  given  to  dis- 
charge a  mortgage  deed  of  Jeremiah  Gardner,  of  North 
Kingstown,  dated  June  5th,  1741,  is  in  old  tenor 20  00  0 

"  By  eleven  shillings  and  three  farthings  short  in  ten  bonds 
given  to  dischai-ge  a  mortgage  deed  of  Stephen  Tift,  of 
South  Kingstown,  dated  June  1st,  1741,  is  old  tenor    ...  22  02  8 

"  By  twelve  hliillings  and  four  pence,  new  tenor  short,  in  the  re- 
turn of  South  Kingstown's  bond,  for  their  proportion  of 
the  seventh  bank,  in  old  tenor 2  09  4 

"  By  £37  13*'.,  short  in  ten  bonds,  given  to  discharge  a  mort- 
gage deed  of  Thomas  Gould,  of  Charlestown,  dated  Sep- 
tember 4,  1742;  said  bonds  being  given  for  £12  lis., 
when  tlu y  .should  have  beeu  for  £12  lis.,  new  tenor..  . .  376  10  0 


1753.]  AND    PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  375 

£      s.  d. 
1753.     By  eight  sLillings,  new  tenor,  short  in   ten   bonds,  given  to 
discharge   a  mortgage   deed   of  James  Gongdon,  Jr.,  of 

Charlestown,  dated  June  8th,  1741,  is  in  old  tenor 16  00  0 

"       By  nine  shillings,  new  tenor,  short  in  ten  bonds,  given  to  dis- 
charge a  mortgage   deed   of  John  Titt,  of  Charlestown, 

dated  June  8th,  1741,  is  in  old  tenor 18  00  0 

"       By  balance  iu  the  hands  of  Benjamin  Nichols,  Esq 376,820  08  7 

£397,622  10  4 

"  We,  the  subscribers,  being,  by  the  General  Assembly,  appointed  a  committee, 
to  audit  the  accounts  of  Benjamin  Nichols,  Esq.,  treasurer  of  the  grand  com- 
mittee, and  to  receive  and  burn  the  tenth  money  in  his  hands,  report : 

That  we  have  examined  the  accounts  of  the  aforesaid  Benjamin  Nichols,  Esq.,  a 
statement  of  which,  we  herewith  present,  and  whereby  it  appears,  that  there  is  a 
balance  in  the  hands  of  the  said  Benjamin  Nichols,  Esq.,  of  the  sum  of  £376,820  8s. 
Id.,  in  favor  of  the  colony,  exclusive  of  the  last  bank,  which  is  not  charged  in  this 
account,  as  the  said  Nichols  informs  us  that  there  are  a  considerable  number  of 
mortgages  and  bonds  belonging  to  it,  which  have  not  been  delivered  into  his 
office. 

We  also  report,  that  we  have  burnt  the  money  paid  us  by  said  Nichols,  except 
£792  Is.  1(Z.,  m  the  hands  of  John  Tillinghast ;  £508  18s.  4c/.,  in  the  hands  of 
Thomas  Cranston  ;  £267  18s.  ScZ.,  in  the  hands  of  James  ShefEeld;  and  £80  4s.  8^., 
in  the  hands  of  Peter  Bours,  all  calculated  in  old  tenor  ;  which  being  bills  of  the 
last  emission,  are  deposited  with  them,  to  exchange  for  old  bills  of  credit,  to  burn, 
and  for  which  they  have  lodged  their  receipts,  with  the  said  Benjamin  Nichols, 
Esq.  JOHN  TILLINGHAST,  PETER  BOUHS, 

THOMAS  CKANSTON,  JAMES  SHEFFIELD. 

Newport,  October  29th,  1753." 

And  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  said  report  into  con- 
sideration, and  duly  examined  it, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
same  be,  and  it  is  hereby  accepted. 

Whereas,  Moses  Lopez,  of  Nev^port,  in  the  county  of  New- 
port, merchant,  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  the  man- 
ufacturing of  potash,  in  this  colony,  will  be  of  great  advantage 
to  the  government,  provided,  it  can  be  done  in  a  right  man- 
ner ;  that  it  will  prove  a  good  remittance  to  Great  Britain  in  re- 
turn for  such  goods  as  as  we  have  occasion  of,  from  thence, 
and  will  be  the  means  of  lowering  the  price  of  silver,  gold  and 
European  goods ;  and  by  sending  to  our  mother  country  a 
commodity  which  is  very  much  wanted  there,  will  be  serving 
them  in  a  high  degree,  and  thereby  procure  their  favor,  with 


370  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1753. 

many  other  advantages ;  that  he,  the  said  Moses,  by  the  as- 
sistance of  a  particular  friend,  that  is  not  in  this  country,  hath 
made  himself  master  of  the  true  art  and  mystery  of  making 
potash,  which  is  known  to  very  few  in  the  kingdom ;  that  he 
can  carry  it  on  to  the  great  advantage  of  the  colony,  and  at 
the  same  time  make  a  reasonable  profit  to  himself;  and  upon 
the  whole,  prayed  this  Assembly  to  grant  him  a  patent  for  the 
manufacturing  of  potash  in  this  colony  for  the  term  of  ten 
years,  and  prohibit  all  other  persons  whatsover  from  setting  up 
and  carrying  on  that  trade  and  business  in  this  colony,  except- 
ing such  as  shall  work  under  him,  and  by  his  direction ;  and 
also  to  prohibit  the  carrying  any  ashes  out  of  this  colony  into 
the  neighboring  governments,  on  any  pretence,  whatsoever,  upon 
such  penalties  as  this  Assembly  shall  think  proper  ;  one  half 
to  the  informer,  and  the  other  half  to  the  treasury  of  the  town 
whore  the  offence  shall  be  committed. 

And  as  the  said  Moses  Lopez  will    have  occasion  of  all  the  " 
ashes  made  in   the   colony  more  than  the  inhabitants  will  be 
obliged  to  keep  for  their   own  use,  he  shall  be  willing  to  pay 
them  a  reasonable    price   therefor  ;  and  this  Assembly  having 
taken  the  premises  into  consideration, — 

Do  vote,  resolve  and  enact,  and  it  is  voted,  resolved  and  enact- 
ed that  the  prayer  of  the  said  Moses  be,  and  the  same  is  here- 
by granted  ;  provided,  he  shall  carry  on  the  business,  aforesaid  ; 
and  that  £5  be  the  penalty  for  every  bushel  of  ashes  that  shall 
].)e  transported  into  the  neighboring  governments,  or  any  other 
part  of  the  world. 

Whereas,  John  Cogswell  and  Owen  Sullivant,  alias  John 
Pierson,  are  suspected  of  being  concerned  in  counterfeiting  the 
Ijilis  of  pul)lic  credit,  of  the  last  emission,  made  by  this  colony, 
and  each  of  them  hath  made  his  escape  out  of  the  government, 
by  breaking  jail, — 

This  Assembly  therefore  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  here- 
by voted  and  resolved,  that  the  sum  of  £400  be  allowed  and 
paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  to  any  person  or  persons  that 
shall  apprehend  and  convey  to  His  Majesty's  jail  in  Newport, 
the  said  John  Cocrswell,  and  the  same  sum  shall  be  allowed  and 


1754.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  377 

paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  for  apprehending  the  said 
Owen  SuUivant,  alias  John  Pierson,  and  commit  them  to  His 
Majesty's  jail,  in  Newport. 

Both  houses  resolved  into  a  grand  committee,  on  the  2d  day 
of  November,  when  the  Hon,  Joseph  Whipple,  Esq.,  resigned 
the  office  of  Deputy  Governor  ;  and  thereupon,  the  Hon.  Jona- 
than Nichols,  Esq.,  was  chosen  Deputy  Governor,  in  his  room, 
for  the  remaining  part  of  the  year,  and  engaged  accordingly. 

Nicholas  Easton,  Esq ,  was  chosen  and  engaged  second  as- 
sistant, in  the  room  of  the  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Esq.,  ad- 
vanced as  above. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Mr.  Daniel  Smith,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  fully  em- 
powered, to  grant  forth  warrants  for  collecting  the  rates  order- 
ed to  be  levied  in  the  county  of  Providence,  for  erecting  a  work 
house  in  said  county. 

Whereas,  Jabez  Bowen,  Esq.  and  Mr.  Elisha  Brown  exhibit- 
ed to  this  Assembly,  an  account  by  them  charged  against  the 
government,  for  their  time  and  sundry  expenses,  and  dis- 
bursements, in  repairing  Pawtucket  Bridge ;  which  being  duly 
examined, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  said  account  be,  and  it  is  hereby  allowed  ;  and 
that  £653  Qs.  2d.,  the  balance  thereof,  be  paid  the  said  Jabez 
Bowen  and  Elisha  Brown,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  Francis  Willett,  Esq.,  one  of  the  committee  ap- 
pointed to  run  the  line  between  South  Kingstown  and  Exeter, 
declines  serving  in  that  office, — 

It  is  therefore  voted  and  resolved,  that  Thomas  Phillips,  of 
North  Kingstown,  Esq.,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  appointed  in  the 
room  of  Mr.  Willett,  for  the  purpose,  aforesaid  ;  and  that  the 
said  committee,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  perform  said  busi- 
ness. 

God  save  the  King. 

VOL.  V.         48 


378  RECORDS   OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1754. 


[The  following  Public  Laws,  passed  durfhg  the  year  1753,  are  printed  at  length 
in  the  volume  of  Public  Laws,  published  in  the  year  1767,  unless  repealed  previous 
to  that  time.] 

An  Act  for  regulating  ferries.     (February.) 

An  Act  for  establishing  a  work  house  in  the  county  of  Providence.     (February.) 

An  Act  for  the  more  regular  disposing  of  the   fines   of  delinquent  jurors,  for  their 

non-appearance  at  the  several  courts  in  this  colony.     (February.) 
An  Act  for  repealing  one  clause   of  an   act,  entitled  "  An  act  to  prevent  unlawful 
gaming,"  made  in  the  twenty-third  year  of  His  present  Majesty's  reign.     (May.) 
An  Act  for  the  more  easily  recovering  of  small  debts  ;  and  for  preventing  unneces- 
sary charges  in  law  suits  in  this  colony.     (June.) 
An  Act  for  the  relief  of  Charles  Ninegret,  sachem,  an  infant.     (June.) 
An  Act  for  setting  up  a  lottery  to  raise  a  sum  of  money  in  order  to  complete  the 
court  house  in  the  county  of  Kent,  around  the  prison  yard  ;  and  for  repairing 
the  bridge  in  Scituate,  and  that  called  Hunt's  Bridge.     (June.) 
An  Act  empowering  overseers  of  the  poor  to  bind  out  idle  or  indigent  persons ;  as 

also  obliging  the  overseers  to  serve  when  chosen  to  ofSce.     (August  ) 
An  Act  for  naturalizing  Peter  Miraill,  of  Newport.     (August) 
An  Act  for  the  relief  of  Joseph  Whipple,  of  Newport.     (August.) 
An  Acl  for  reviving  the  superior  court  of  judicature,  in  Kings  county.     (October.) 
An  Act  for  explanation,  and   in   addition   to   the   act   for   regulating   of  fences. 

(October.) 
An  Act  in  addition  to  an  act,  entitled  "  An  act   directing  proceedings  in  actions 
and  suits,  wherein  either  the  recorder  or  sheriff  are  parties."     (October.) 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemUy,  held  for  the  Colon?/  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kingstoum,  the 
last  Monday  of  Fehruar>/,'VibL 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 

With  the  assistants  and  deputies  from  the  several  towns. 

Whereas,  Stephen  Hopkins  and  Daniel  Jenckes,  Esqs.,  Capt. 
John  Cole,  together  with  Messrs.  Ephraim  Bowen  and  Nicholas 
Brown,  by  petition,  represented  unto  this  Assembly  that  a 
number  of  persons  in  Providence,  with  some  in  neighboring 
towns,  being  desirous  as  far  as  in  them  lieth,  to  promote  useful 
knowledge,  have,  for  that  end,  made  a  voluntary  subscription, 


1754.]  AND    PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  379 

and  thereby  have  raised  and  sent  to  England,  a  sum  of  money- 
sufficient  to  purchase  books  to  furnish  a  small  library ;  but 
though  they  have  with  difficulty  proceeded  thus  far,  yet  find 
themselves  unable  to  raise  money  for  building  a  proper  place  to 
keep  the  books  in  when  they  arrive,  and  as  the  council  chambers 
in  the  court  house,  in  Providence,  is  not  put  to  any  use  except 
when  the  General  Assembly  sit  there ;  and  should  this  Assem- 
bly give  the  petitioners'  leave  to  put  their  books  therein,  yet 
would  there  be  sufficient  room  for  the  General  Council  to  sit 
comfortably  there,  and  would  be  so  far  from  being  any  incon- 
venience, that  on  the  other  hand,  it  would  be  a  real  ornament 
to  the  house,  and  afford  an  agreeable  amusement  to  the  mem- 
bers in  their  leisure  hours  ;  whereupon,  the  petitioners,  in  be- 
half of  themselves  and  all  others  concerned  in  the  affixir,  hum- 
bly prayed  this  Assembly  to  give  them  leave,  at  their  own 
proper  cost,  to  erect  shelves  on  the  west  and  north  sides  of  the 
said  council  chamber  for  the  purpose,  aforesaid  ;  and  also,  to 
enable  the  proprietors  of  the  said  books  to  make  such  acts  and 
orders  as  may  be  fit  and  necessary  for  the  proper  regulating 
said  library ;  and  that  they  may  be  good  and  valid  for  those 
ends  ; — 

And  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  matters  and  things 
aforesaid,  into  consideration, — 

Do  vote,  resolve  and  enact,  and  it  is  voted,  resolved  and  en- 
acted, that  the  prayer  of  the  petitioners  be,  and  the  same  is 
hereby  granted. 

AVhereas,  information  hath  been  made  to  this  Assembly,  by 
Mr.  Gideon  Freeborn,  one  of  their  members,  that  Gideon  Wan- 
ton, Esq.,  hath  very  grossly  abused  the  General  Assembly  of 
this  colony, — 

This  Assembly  do  therefore  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted 
and  resolved,  that  a  precept  be  issued  by  the  secretary  to  the 
sheriff  of  the  county  of  Newport,  to  apprehend  the  said  Gideon 
Wanton,  and  bring  him  before  the  General  Assembly,  at  their 
next  session,  the  first  Wednesday  of  May  next,  to  answer  for  the 
abuse  by  him  given,  as  aforesaid,  and  to  do  what  shall  then 
and  there  be  enjoined  him. 


380  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE  ISLAND  [1754. 

Whereas,  James  Rogers,  of  Newport,  shop-keeper,  represent- 
ed unto  this  Assembly,  that  the  making  pearlashes  within  the 
government,  will  be  very  advantageous  to  the  colony,  upon 
several  accounts ;  but  as  it  will  be  attended  with  considerable 
cost  and  trouble  to  the  undertakers,  and  as  the  General  As- 
sembly have  lately  granted  a  patent  to  Mr.  Lopez,  for  the 
sole  making  of  potashes,  he  prayed  that  an  act  may  be  passed 
enabling  him  to  make  pearlashes  among  us,  for  the  term  of 
ten  years  ;  and  that  no  other  person  presume  so  to  do,  under 
such  penalties,  &c. ; — 

And  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  premises  into  consid- 
eration,— 

Do  vote  and  enact,  and  it  is  hereby  voted  and  enacted,  that 
the  said  James  Rogers  shall  have,  and  hereby  is  granted  him 
the  sole  liberty  of  making  pearlashes  within  the  colony,  for 
the  space  of  ten  years ;  and  that  no  other  person  or  persons 
besides  the  said  James  Rogers,  presume  so  to  do ;  neverthe- 
less, no  penalty  shall  be  incurred  by  any  who  shall  hereafter 
presume  to  make  pearlashes  within  this  government. 

God  save  the  King. 

Secretary  Holdernesse  io  the  Governor  and   Com'pamj  of  RJiode 

Island. 

Whitehall,  28th  June,  1753. 
Gentlemen : — I  am  to  acquaint  you,  that  it  is  the  King's  pleasure,  that  the  arms 
and  military  stores,  which  were  made  use  of,  upon  the  intended  expedition  against 
Canada,  and  which  were  returned  by  His  Majesty's  order,  when  the  troops  were 
dismissed  that  service,  and  are  now  lying  at  Rhode  Island,  under  your  care,  should 
be  forthwith  transmitted  to  Governor  Shirley,  at  Massachusetts  Bay,  to  be  ready 
for  such  services  as  His  Majesty  shall  hereafter  be  pleased  to  direct. 

1  am,  gentlemen,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

HOLDERNESSE. 
To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

Governor  Shirley  to  Governor  Greene. 

Boston,  January  13,  1754. 
Sir  :— Some  weeks  ago,  I  had  the  honor  of  a  letter  from  the  Earl  of  Holdernesse, 
one  of  His  Majesty's  principal  secretaries  of  state,  directing  me  to  send  a  quantity 
of  muskets  out  of  those  which  had   been   saved  out  of  the  late  intended  expedition 


1754] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


881 


against  Canada,  to  Halifax,  in  Nova  Scotia,  for  His  Majesty's  service  there  ;  and 
signifying  to  me,  that  he  had  written  to  the  Governors  of  New  Hampshire,  Connec- 
ticut and  Rhode  Island,  directing  them  to  transmit  to  me  what  arms  and  military 
stores  had  been  saved  out  of  their  aforesaid  expedition,  within  their  respective  gov- 
ernments, to  be  lodged  in  Castle  William,  for  His  Majesty's  further  orders. 

As  I  cannot  collect  the  quantity  of  good,  serviceable  muskets,  which  I  am  direct- 
ed to  send  to  Halifax,  within  this  Province,  out  of  those  which  were  saved  out  of 
that  expedition,  I  desire  Your  Ilonor  would  be  pleased  to  let  me  know  by  the  first 
post,  whether  I  am  to  expect  any  muskets  from  your  government,  according  to  the 
Earl  of  Holdernesse's  orders. 

I  am,  with  great  regard,  sir. 

Your  Honor's  most  obedient  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 
To  the  Hon.  Governor  Greene. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhli/,  held  for  the  Colon?/  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  the  first  Wednes- 
day of  May,  1754. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 

The  following  officers  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  John  Gardner,  Deputy  Governor. 


ASSISTANTS. 


Mr.  John  Tillinghast, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Easton, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Cooke, 
Mr.  Jabez  Bowen, 
Mr.  Stephen  Brownell, 


Mr.  Robert  Lawton, 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Lippitt, 
Mr.  William  Richmond, 
Mr.  Daniel  Coggeshall, 
Mr.  JeofFrey  Watson. 


SECRETARY. 

Mr.  Thomas  Ward. 

ATTORNEY    GENERAL. 

Mr.  Daniel  Updike. 


GENERAL  TREASURER. 

Mr.  Thomas  Richardson. 


382 


RECORDS    OP   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND 


[1754. 


DEPUTIES. 


Neivport. 
Mr.  Edward  Scott, 
Mr.  Thomas  Cranston, 
Mr.  Peter  Bours, 
Capt.  Job  Bennett,  Jr. 
;Mr.  James  Sheffield, 
Mr.  William  Bead. 
Providence. 
Mr.  Jonathan  Bandall, 
Mr.  Daniel  Jenckes, 
Mr.  Thomas  Olney, 
Mr.  John  Potter,  Jr. 
Portsmoidh. 
Mr.  William  Anthony,  Jr., 
Mr.  John  Allen, 
Mr.  Thomas  Brownell, 
Mr.  Gideon  Freeborn,  Jr. 

Warwick. 
Mr.  Philip  Greene, 
Capt.  Bandall  Bice, 
Major  John  Bhodes, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Arnold. 

Wcsterli/. 
Major  Joshua  Clarke, 
Capt.  Benjamin  Bandall. 

Neiv  ShoreJiam. 
Capt.  Bobert  Hull, 
]\Ir.  Nathaniel  Littlefield. 

North  Kinrjsioivn. 
Mr.  Henry  Wail, 
Mr.  Beriah  Brown. 

South  Kingstown. 
Mr.  Uenry  Gardner, 
Mr.  Bowdand  Bobinson. 


East  G-reemvich. 
Mr.  William  Spencer, 
Maj.  John  Arnold. 
Jamestown. 
Mr.  Josiah  Arnold,  Jr. 
Mr.  William  Martin. 

Smithficld. 
Mr.  Thomas  Arnold, 
Mr.  Jonathan  Arnold. 

Scituate. 
Capt.  Job  Bandall, 
Capt.  Amos  Hammond. 

Glocester. 
Mr.  Bichard  Steere, 
Col.  Bichard  Smith, 
Charlcstoiun. 
Col.  Christopher  Champlin, 
Mr.  Bobert  Potter. 

West  Greenwich. 
Mr.  Joseph  Nichols, 
Mr.  Preserved  Hall. 

Coventry. 
Mr.  John  Greene, 
Capt.  John  Ellerton. 

Exeter. 
Capt.  John  Beynolds, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Gardner. 

Middletoivn. 
Capt.  John  Barker, 
Mr.  Thomas  Gould. 

Bristol. 
Capt.  Joseph  Bussell, 
Major  Thomas  Greene. 


1754.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  '  383 


DEPUTIES. 

Tiverton.  Cumberland. 

Mr.  Samuel  Durfey,  Mr.  Job  Bartlett, 

Mr.  Thomas  Howland.  Mr.  Jeremiah  Whipple.^ 

Little  Compton.         '  Hichnond. 

Mr.  Nathaniel  Searle,  Mr.  Samuel  Tift, 

Mr.  Joseph  Wood.  Mr.  William  Potter. 

^Yarren. 
Mr.  James  Brown, 
Capt.  Benjamin  Barton. 

The  lion.  Thomas  Cranston,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 

Whereas,  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Newport,  was  ordered 
by  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  February  last,  to 
bring  Gideon  Wanton,  Esq.,  before  this  Assembly,  at  their 
present  session,  to  answer  for  his  abuses  to  said  General  As- 
sembly, but  upon  the  information  of  the  sheriff,  that  the  said 
Gideon  Wanton  is  absent,  so  that  he  cannot  attend  this 
session, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  said  Gideon  Wanton  be  continued  in  the  cus- 
tody of  said  sheriff,  and  be  by  him  brought  before  this  Assem- 
bly, at  their  next  session,  to  answer  for  the  aforesaid  abuses. 

God  save  the  King. 

Governor  DeLancey,  of  New  York,  to  Governor  Greene. 

New  York,  22d  April,  1754. 

Sir  : — In  mj  opening  speech  of  this  session,  I  declared  my  apprehension,  that 
unless  the  colonics  unite  in  measures  for  building  forts  in  the  Indian  country  for 
their  security,  and  the  safety  of  the  women  and  children,  when  the  men  are  abroad, 
and  for  sending  smiths  and  other  proper  persons  to  reside  among  them,  we  shall 
lose  the  little  inlluence  we  still  have  over  them  ;  and  that  though  it  was  reasonable 
the  expense  should  be  borne  by  the  colonies  in  general,  yet  it  might  be  expected  a 
scheme  for  that  purpose  should  take  its  rise  here. 

I  also  recommended  to  the  Assembly,  that  they  would  enable  me  to  build  a  fort 


384  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1754. 

or  forts  on  the  northern  parts  of  this  Province,  until  I  had  used  my  endeavors  to 
bring  the  neighboring  governments  to  join  in  the  expense  of  erecting  as  many 
forts  as  might  be  necessary  to  guard  them  and  us  from  the  incursions  of  the  enemy 
in  that  quarter  ;  upon  which  they  came  to  the  enclosed  resolution  ;  and  is,  I  doubt 
not,  your  agreeing  in  opinion,  that  the  building  forts  in  the  Indian  country,  is  an 
essential  step  towards  securing  them  and  their  allies  in  His  Majesty's  interest,  in 
which  all  the  colonies  are  much  concerned  ;  and  that  the  erecting  other  forts  on  the 
northern  quarter,  towards  the  French,  is  a  necessary  measure  for  our  common  securi- 
ty, you  will,  I  am  persuaded,  use  your  Assembly  to  join  in  this  necessary  expense. 

We  cannot  have  a  more  favorable  opportunity  to  concert  a  scheme  for  this  pur- 
pose, than  at  the  Albany  treaty,  where  I  hope  to  see  commissioners  from  your  gov- 
ernment, instructed  on  these  heads. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

JAMES  DE  LANCET. 

To  His  Excellency,  William  Greene,  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhly,  held  for  the  Colon?/  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  the  second  Hon- 
da// of  June,  1754. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  John  Gardner,  Deputy  Governor. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Jabez  Bowen,  Esq.,  Mr.  Thomas  Howland  and  Col. 
Christopher  Champlin,  he,  and  they  are  hereby  constituted  a 
committee  to  view  the  place  appointed  to  build  the  light-house 
on  Beaver  Tail,  and  consider  how  much  land  is  necessary  for 
that  purpose  ;  and  in  what  manner  the  same  should  be  set  off, 
and  mak(!  report  to  this  Assembly,  as  soon  as  conveniently 
may  be. 

An  Act  appointing  commissioners  on  the  behalf  of  this  govern- 
ment, to  meet  the  commissioners   of  the   other  governments 
in  America,  on  the  14th  instant,  at  Albany,  &c. 
Be  it  enacted  by  the   General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 
])y  tlte  authority  of  the  same  it  is  enacted,  thnt  two  persons  be 
appointed  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  commissioned  by  His 


1754.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  385 

Honor,  the  Governor,  to  meet  the  commissioners  that  may  be 
appointed  by  the  other  governments,  aforesaid,  to  meet  at  Al- 
bany, on  the  14th  day  of  this  instant  June ;  and  that  they  be 
empowered,  in  said  commission,  to  treat  with  the  other  com- 
missioners in  the  best  manner  they  can,  to  take  such  measures 
as  will  be  most  effectual  to  secure  and  maintain  a  lasting 
friendship  with  the  Six  Nations  of  Indians. 

And  that  they  be  further  directed  and  empowered,  in  said 
commission,  to  draw  on  the  general  treasurer  of  this  colony,  for 
such  a  sum  of  money  as  they  shall  think  may  be  a  sufficient 
sum  for  this  colony,  by  way  of  presents  to  the  chiefs  of  the 
Six  Nations,  not  to  exceed  £100. 

And  that  they  be  further  empowered  to  inquire  into  what 
forts  are  built  and  building  within  the  limits  of  His  Majesty's 
dominions,  in  America ;  by  whom  their  strength  and  situa- 
tions. 

And  that  they  be  further  directed  in  said  commission,  to  let 
the  commissioners  on  behalf  of  the  other  governments  know, 
that  this  government  is  willing  and  ready  to  do  any  thing- 
necessary  on  their  part,  so  fjir  as  they  are  able,  to  support  and 
defend  the  Six  Nations  of  Indians  from  any  insults  offered  to 
them  by  the  French,  or  any  of  the  nations  of  Indians  in  that 
part  of  America. 

And  that  Edward  Scott  and  Peter  Bours,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they 
are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  draw  £600,  old  tenor, 
out  of  the  general  treasury,  and  deliver  the  same  to  the  com- 
missioners, in  order  to  defray  their  expenses  at  the  congress ; 
and  in  case  there  should  not  be  £600  in  the  treasury,  then  the 
general  treasurer  is  hereby  empowered  to  hire  the  same  on  ac- 
count, and  in  behalf  of  the  colony. 

From  the  Governor  of  New  York  to  Governor  Greene. 

New  York,  19th  March,  1754. 
Sir :— By  a  letter  from  the  lords  commissioners  for  trade  and  plantations,  direct- 
ed to  His  late  Excellency,  Sir  Danvers  Osborn,  which  came  to  my  hands  since  his 
death,  their  lordships  observing  the  present  wavering    disposition    of  the  Indians, 
think  a  general  interview  by  commissioners  from  the  several  governments,  with  the 

VOL.  V.  49 


386  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1754. 

Six  Nations  of  Indians,  at  this  time,  necessary,  in  order  to  wipe  away  any  ill  im- 
pressions that  may  have  been  made  on  them,  by  the  common  enemy.* 

As  this  measure  is  of  evident  utility,  and  it  cannot  but  have  a  good  effect  upon 
the  Indians,  to  know  the  strength  of  the  British  settlements,  and  to  see  that  they 
are  acting  in  concert. 

I  sfiall  not  need  to  press  you  with  any  arguments  to  bear  your  part  at  this  inter- 
view, by  sending  commissioners,  to  meet  at  Albany,  on  the  14th  of  June  next,  the 
time  appointed  for  that  purpose  ;  I  hope  to  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  commis- 
sioners from  your  government  at  that  time. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

To  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island.  JAMES  DE  LANCEY. 


This  Assembly  do  choose  and  appoint  Stephen  Hopkins, 
Esq.,  first,  and  His  Honor,  the  Deputy  Governor,  to  be  the 
other  commissioner,  to  go  to  Albany,  on  the  part  of  this  colo- 
ny ;  the  latter  of  whom  refusing,  Capt.  Benjamin  Wickham  was 
chosen  in  his  room ;  who  also  refusing,  Martin  Howard,  Jr.,  of 
Newport,  in  the  county  of  Newport,  gentleman,  was  chosen  in 
his  stead. 

Whereas,  a  great  number  of  the  free  inhabitants  of  Provi- 
dence, represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  said  town  is  very 
large,  and  well  peopled,  having  about  six  hundred  free  holders 
therein ;  that  all   their  quarter  meetings  are  held  in  the  com- 


*  [Sir  D'Anvers  Osborne,  was  a  brother-in-law  of  the  Earl  of  Halifax,  and  suc- 
ceeded Clinton,  as  Governor  of  New  York.  He  arrived  on  the  6th  of  October, 
1753,  and  was  received  in  New  York,  with  the  usual  demonstrations  of  respect. 

"  During  the  voyage  across  the  Atlantic,"  says  Bancroft,  "  the  agitated  mind  of 
Osborne,  already  reeling  with  private  grief,  brooded  despondingly  over  the  task  he 
had  assumed.  On  the  10th  of  October,  he  took  the  oaths  of  office,  at  New  York  ; 
and  the  people  who  welcomed  him  with  acclamations,  hooted  his  predecessor.  '  I 
expect  the  like  treatment,'  said  he  to  Clinton, '  before  I  leave  the  government.'  On 
the  same  day,  he  was  startled  with  an  address,  from  the  city  council,  who  declared 
Jhey  would  not  '  brook  any  infringement  of  their  inestimable  liberties,  civil  and  re- 
ligious.' On  the  next,  he  communicated  to  the  council  his  instructions,  which 
required  the  Assembly  '  to  recede  from  all  encroachments  on  the  [royal]  preroga- 
tives, and  to  consider,  without  delay,  of  a  proper  law  for  a  permanent  revenue, 
solid,  definite  and  without  limitation,'  etc.  With  a  distressed  countenance  and 
l)laintive  voice,  he  asked  if  these  instructions  would  be  obeyed.  All  agreed,  that 
the  Assembly  would  never  comply.  He  sighed,  turned  about,  reclined  against  the 
window-frame,  and  exclaimed,  '  Then  why  am  I  come  here  V' 

Being  of  morbid  sensitiveness,  honest,  and  scrupulous  of  his  word,  the  unhappy 
man  spent  tlie  night  in  arranging  his  private  affairs,  and  towards  morning,  hanged 
himself  against  the  fenc.e  in  the  gard.en."— //is^  U.  S.,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  103.— J.  R.  B.] 


1754.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  387 

pact  part  of  the  town,  whither  many  of  them  are  obliged  to 
travel,  some  eight,  nine,  and  others  ten  miles ;  and  that  at 
some  seasons  of  the  year,  travelling  is  difficult,  &c. ;  whereupon, 
they  prayed  said  town  might  be  divided  in  the  manner  and 
form  by  them  set  down  and  described  in  their  petition ;  on 
consideration  whereof ; — 

This  Assembly  do  grant  the  said  petition ;  and  appoint 
Daniel  Jenckes  and  Thomas  Arnold,  Esqs.,  and  Mr.  John  Pot- 
ter, Jr.,  a  committee,  to  draw  an  act  for  that  purpose. 

The  gentlemen  appointed  to  receive  the  stores,  &c.,  at  Fort 
George,  of  Capt.  William  Muniford,  late  commander  of  said 
fort,  and  deliver  them  to  James  Sheffield,  Esq.,  now  captain 
there,  presented  this  Assembly  with  the  following  report, 
&c.,  viz. : 

Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  to  receive  the  stores  from  Fort 

George. 

"We,  the  subscribers,  being  by  the  General  Assembly,  appointed  a  committee 
to  receive  of  Capt.  William  Mumfbrd  all  the  stores  at  Fort  George,  and  to  deliver 
them  to  Capt.  James  Sheffield,  do  report : 

We  have,  (in  the  presence  of  Capt.  William  Mumford)  delivered  to  Capt.  James 
Sheffield,  as  per  his  receipt,  all  the  stores,  agreeably  to  the  list  hereto  annexed  : 

Within  the  battery,  viz. :  twenty-four  cannon  and  twenty-four  carriages,  chiefly 
broken  ;  eight  hundred  and  sixty-eight  cannon  shot. 

Within  the  fort  walls,  viz. :  twelve  cannon  and  twelve  carriages;  forty-three 
handspikes;  one  speaking  trumpet ;  thirteen  worms;  five  spare  wheels ;  thirty-one 
sponge  staffs;  one  flag;  one  grind  stone;  one  iron  crow;  two  wheelbarrows; 
eight  hundred  and  forty-three  cannon  shot ;  eight  iron  pots ;  one  wood  axe  ;  one 
frying  pan  ;  two  pick  axes ;  seventy-one  four  shot ;  eight  ladles ;  twenty-eight 
pistols ;  seventeen  small  arms  ;  twenty-five  linch-stoeks  ;  one  old  drum ;  nine  cart- 
ridge boxes ;  nine  powder  horns ;  eighteen  cartouch  boxes ;  four  half  barrels  of 
grenade  shells;  one  cask  of  pistol  cartridges;  five  formers;  four  cutlasses;  a  small 
parcel  of  pistol  ball ;  one  perspective  glass. 

In  the  state  room,  eleven  chairs  and  one  table. 

Outside  of  the  fort,  one  triangle  gin  ;  one  rowing  boat,  at  the  wharf. 

JOHN  TILLINGHAST, 

Newport,  dated  Juno  10,  1754."  THOMAS  CRANSTON. 

[A  committee  was  afterwards  appointed  annually,  to  receive  and  transfer  the 
stores  at  Fort  George  ;  this  receipt  is  printed  to  show  the  extent  of  the  arms  and 
stores  at  the  fort.     Similar  reports  appear  yearly,  on  the  records,— J.  R.  B.j 


388  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1754. 

"  ForfGeorge,  in  Newport :  received  of  the  abovesaid  committee,  into  my  care, 
all  the  stores,  agreeably  to  the  above  list. 

Witness  my  band,  this  10th  day  of  June,  A.  D.  1754. 

JAMES  SHEFFIELD." 


To  which  report,  the  committee  add  the  following  account, 
to  wit : 

"  Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  Dr. 

1 754,  June  10.     To  our  time,  &c £6  00  0 

JOHN  TILLINGHAST, 
THOMAS  CRANSTON." 

And  now,  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  premises  into 
consideration, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
ioregoing  report  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  accepted ;  and 
that  £6,  the  amount  of  the  committee's  account,  be  allowed, 
and  paid  them,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

An  Act  for  dividing  the  town  of  Providence,  and  incorporating 
the  southern  part  thereof,  into  a  township,  to  be  distinguish- 
ed and  known  by  the  name  of  Cranston. 
Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  and 
by  the  authority  of  the  same  it  is  enacted,  that  all  the  lands  in 
the  town  of  Providence,  lying  to  the  southward  of  a  line  be- 
ginning at  the  head  of  the  cove,  called  and  known  by  the 
name  of  Hawkins's  Cove  ;  from  thence,  a  straight  line,  to  the 
bent  of  Pochasset  Ptiver,  a  little  to  the  northward  of  Charles 
Dyer's ;  and  so  to  continue  up  said  river,  until  it  comes  to  the 
to  the  road  that  leads  from  the  town  of  Providence  to  Plain- 
field  ;  and  thence,  westerly,  up  said  road,  until  it  comes  to  the 
Seven  Mile  line,  that  is  the  dividing  line  between  the  town  of 
Providence  and  Scituate ;  then  southerly,  with  said  Seven 
Mile  line,  until  it  comes  to  the  south-west  corner  of  the  town- 
ship of  Providence,  where  Piovidence  and  Scituate  join  in 
Warwick's  north  lino  ;  thence  easterh-^,  on  the  dividing  line 
Itctween  Providence  and  Warwick,  until  it  meets  the  salt 
water  or  river,  that  leads  up  to  Providence  town  ;  then,  bound- 


1754.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  389 

ing  on  the  salt  water  or  river,  as  the  same  extends  itself  up 
stream,  towards  Providence  town,  until  it  comes  to  the  afore 
mentioned  hound,  at  Hawkins's  Cove. 

And  it  is  further  enacted,  that  all  the  lands  to  the  north- 
ward of  the  afore  mentioned  line,  from  Hawkins's  Cove,  to  the 
bent  at  Charles  Dyers's,  and  so  up  the  river,  to  where  Plain- 
field  road  crosses  said  river ;  and  all  the  lands  to  the  northward 
of  said  Plainfield  road,  until  it  meet  the  aforesaid  Seven  Mile 
line,  and  shall  be,  and  remain  to  the  town  of  Providence  -,  and 
all  the  lands  to  the  southward  of  the  last  mentioned  lines,  to  be 
distinguished  and  known  by  the  name  of  Cranston  ;  and  that 
the  inhabitants  of  said  Cranston,  from  time  to  time,  have  and 
enjoy  the  like  benefits,  liberties,  privileges  and  immunities, 
with  other  towns  in  this  colony,  according  to  charter. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  justices  of  the  peace  living  within  the  aforesaid  town  of 
Cranston,  shall  remain  and  continue  in  their  aforesaid  offices 
until  the  next  general  election ;  and  that  the  first  of  the  said 
justices  of  the  peace,  grant  forth  his  warrant  to  call  the  inhab- 
itants of  said  Cranston  together,  on  Tuesday,  the  25th  day  of 
this  instant  June,  at  some  convenient  place  in  said  town  of 
Cranston,  to  elect  and  appoint  such  town  officers  as  they  shall 
have  occasion  for,  and  the  law  directs  ;  and  to  appoint  the  times 
and  places  of  their  town  meeting,  and  to  choose  and  elect  two 
deputies  to  represent  them  at  the  October  session,  and  so  on, 
as  by  the  charter  is  directed. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
said  town  of  Cranston  shall  send  two  grand  and  two  petit  ju- 
rors to  every  superior  court  of  judicature,  court  of  assize  and 
general  jail  delivery ;  and  two  grand  and  two  petit  jurors  to 
every  inferior  court  of  common  pleas,  and  general  sessions  of 
the  peace,  held  within  the  county  of  Providence. 

And  it  is  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
from  henceforward,  the  town  of  Providence  shall  keep  in  repair 
the  one  half  of  the  aforementioned  highway  or  road,  called 
Plainfield  Road,  from  the  place  where  the  aforesaid  Pochasset 
crosses  the  same,  as  aforesaid,  until  it  comes  to  the  aforemen- 


390  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1754. 

tioncLrdividing  line  of  Scitiiate  and  Providence ;  and  that  tlie 
town  of  Cranston  keep  in  repair  the  other  half  ;  and  that  the 
town  of  Providence  begin  at  the  aforementioned  river  where  it 
crosses  said  road ;  and  so  measure  one  half  of  the  distance  from 
said  river,  up  said  road,  which  half,  Providence  shall  keep  and 
maintain  in  repair ;  and  the  western  half,  the  town  of  Cranston 
shall  keep  and  maintain  in  repair,  for  the  future. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  debts  which  are  now  due  from  the  town  of  Providence 
(such  as  town  debts),  shall  be  first  paid  out  of  the  interest 
money  arising  from  the  interest  of  the  loan  money  taken  by 
the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Providence,  out  of  the  several 
banks  ;  and  that  after  the  aforesaid  town  debts  are  paid,  that 
tlicn  the  interest  of  the  aforesaid  loan  money,  shall  go  to  the 
respective  town  w'hcre  the  lands  are  mortgaged  ;  but  in  case 
there  be  not  interest  money  enough  to  discharge  the  now  debts 
of  the  town  of  Providence,  that  then  the  inhabitants  of  the  town 
of  Cranston  shall  raise  and  pay  their  equal  lot,  by  levying  a 
rate  on  the  inhabitants  of  said  town  of  Cranston  ;  and  that  the 
debts  which  are  now  due  from  the  town  of  Providence,  shall 
be  settled  and  paid  in  proportion  as  the  last  town  rate  was 
levied  on  the  iidiabitants. 

And  bo  it  further  enacted,  that  the  poor  persons  who  are 
now  a  town  charge  to  the  town  of  Providence,  shall  be  equally 
divided  between  the  towns  of  Providence  and  Cranston,  ac- 
cording to  the  levy  of  the  aforesaid  rate. 

And  that  Daniel  Jenckes,  Jonathan  Randall  and  Philip 
( ireene,  Esqs.,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  be  a  committee  to 
draw  the  aforesaid  line,  from  Hawkins's  Cove  to  the  bent  of 
l*ochasset  Paver,  aforesaid ;  and  also  to  settle  and  adjust  the 
debts  now  due  from  the  town  of  Providence,  and  order  what 
part  of  Crauj^ton  shall  pay  of  the  same,  and  what  part  of  the 
jioor  persons  of  the  towns  of  Providence  and  Cranston  shall 
take,  as  tlieir  part;  and  the  report  of  said  committee,  or  any 
two  of  them,  to  be  final,  when  made  to  this  General  As- 
sfMn])ly. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and   it  is  voted  and  re- 


1754.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  391 

solved,  that  William  Burton,  Esq.,  shall  be  deemed,  and  taken 
to  be,  and  act  as  the  first  justice  in  Cranston. 

Whereas,  Gideon  Wanton,  Esq.,  on  the  14th  day  of  this  in- 
stant June,  was  brought  before  this  Assembly,  in  consequence 
of  a  warrant  issued  against  him,  upon  the  information  and  com- 
plaint of  Mr.  Gideon  Freeborne,  one  of  the  members  of  this 
Assembly,  who,  upon  his  engagement,  declared,  that  said 
Gideon  Wanton  had  very  grossly  abused  the  General  Assem- 
bly of  this  colony  ; — 

Whereupon,  this  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is 
voted  and  resolved,  that  the  said  Gideon  Wanton  recognize 
himself  to  the  King's  Majestj^,  in  the  sum  of  £3,000,  for  his 
personal  appearance  at  the  next  superior  court  of  judicature, 
court  of  assize  and  general  jail  delivery,  to  be  held  at  Newport, 
within  and  for  the  county  of  Newport,  on  the  last  Tuesday  of 
August  next,  to  answer  unto  such  things  as  shall  then  and 
there  be  objected  against  him,  respecting  the  premises ;  and 
to  do  and  abide  what  shall  be  enjoined  him  by  said  court ;  and 
to  be  of  good  behaviour  in  the  mean  time  ;  and  that  he  remain 
in  custody  till  he  recognize  as  aforesaid. 

The  gentlemen  that  were  appointed  a  committee  to  view  the 
place  designed  to  build  a  light-house  upon  Beaver  Tail,  pre- 
sented this  Assembly  with  the  following  report,  viz. : 

Report  of  Committee  on  Light  House,  at  Beaver  Tail. 

"Newport,  June  12,  1754. 
We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  a  committee  by  the 
General  Assembly,  to  view  and  make  return  to  this  Assembly, 
what  quantity  of  land  is  necessary  for  the  government  to  pur- 
chase, adjoining  to  the  light  house,  on  Beaver  Tail,  which  is 
ordered  by  the  government  to  be  built,  do  adjudge  that  two 
acres  will  be  necessary ;  that  is,  to  begin  at  the  Point,  and  to 
extend  so  far  northward,  as  to  make  up  said  two  acres,  includ- 
ing all  the  land,  beach  and  upland,  across  said  Neck,  from 
high  water  mark  ;  and  do  also  give  it  as  our  opinion,  that 
there  ought  to  be  a  way  left  on  tlie  east  side  of  said  land,  to 


392  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1754 

extend  from  the  north  part  of  said  land,  down  to  the  Point, 
between  where  the   light  house  is  intended  to  be  built,  and 
the  dwelling  house,  for  all  people  to  pass  and  re-pass ;  as  wit- 
ness our  hands,  the  day  and  year  above  written. 
JABEZ  BOWEN, 
CHRISTOPHER  CHAMPLIN, 
THOMAS  HOWL  AND, 

Committee." 

And  now,  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  said  report  into 
consideration, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
same  Ije,  and  is  hereby  accepted ;  and  that  Messrs.  James 
Sheffield  and  William  Read,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed 
and  fully  empowered,  on  behalf  of  the  colony,  to  agree  for  the 
above  mentioned  land,  with  the  owners  thereof,  and  make  re- 
port to  this  Assembly,  at  their  next  session. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  judges  of  the  several  courts  in  this  colony,  in 
making  up  judgments  where  the  paper  currency  of  this  colony 
is  sued  for,  shall  make  no  allowance  for  depreciation. 

God  save  the  Kinjr. 


Proccf  dings  of  the  General  Asscmhli/,  Jiddfor  the  Colon?/  of  Rhode 
Idand  and  Providence  Planiaiions,  at  Ncwjjori,  the  third  Mon- 
datj  of  Aufjust,  1754. 

The  Hon.  "William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Julni  Gardner,  Deputy  Governor. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  sum  of  £'25,000  be  raised,  by  a  tax,  to  be 
forthwith  assessed  and  levied  on  the  estates  and  polls  of  the 
inliabilaiits  of  this  colony  ;  ;ind  that  the  same  be   applied  to 


1754.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  393 

sink  the  colony's  outstanding  bills  of  public  credit,  and  to  sup- 
ply the  treasury ;  and  that  a  committee  of  both  houses  be  ap- 
pointed to  prepare  a  bill,  and  proportion  the  same. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  sum  of  £5,000  be  raised  by  a  tax,  to  be  forth- 
with assessed  and  levied  on  the  estates  and  polls  of  the  inhab- 
itants of  this  colony  ;  and  that  the  same  be  applied  to  the  re- 
pair of  Fort  George. 

Whereas,  the  duties  laid  on  shipping  have  been  found  insuf- 
ficient to  defray  the  charge  of  lights,  at  Beaver  Tail,  since  the 
light  house  was  burnt  there ; — 

This  Assembly  therefore,  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted 
and  resolved,  that  six  pence  per  ton  be  added  to  every  ton  of 
the  shipping  which  pays  by  the  ton ;  and  that  five  shillings  be 
added  to  the  ten  shillings  which  every  coaster  is  by  law  now 
obliged  to  pay ;  and  that  the  additions  of  the  duties  hereby 
made,  continue  and  remain  until  the  1st  day  of  March  next. 

Whereas,  the  commissioners,  that  on  the  part  of  this  colony 
attended  the  late  congress  at  Albany,  in  the  Province  of  New 
York,  presented  the  following  report, — 

Report  of  the  Rhode  Island  Commissioners  at  ATbamj. 

"  To  the  Honorable  the  General  Assembly  of  His  Majesty's  colony  of  Rhode  Is- 
land, now  sitting : 

We,  the  subscribers,  being,  by  a  vote  of  said  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  June 
last,  appointed  commissioners,  to  represent  this  colony,  at  the  then  approaching 
congress,  at  Albany,  did,  in  consequence  thereof,  receive  from  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  our  commission,  with  the  act  of  Assembly,  relative  thereto,  and  did  ac- 
cordingly set  out  immediately  for  Albany,  where  we  arrived  in  good  season. 

The  friendship  and  alliance  with  the  Six  Nations  of  Indians,  being  renewed  and 
confirmed,  by  a  treaty,  in  which  this  and  all  the  colonies  on  the  continent, 
united,  we,  by  virtue  of  the  act  aforesaid,  made  a  present  to  the  said  Indians,  of 
some  necessaries,  amounting  to  £40,  York  currency  ;  which,  considering  the  lib- 
erality of  His  Majesty  and  the  other  colonies,  in  that  respect,  we  judged  sufficient, 
and  for  which  we  drew  a  set  of  bills  of  exchange  on  the  general  treasurer,  direct- 
ing the  payment  to  Col.  John  Henry  Lydius,  of  Albany,  the  gentleman  who  sup- 
plied us  with  that  sum. 

We  herewith  present  a  copy  of  the  proceedings  at  the  said  congress,*  in  which 

*  The  journal  of  the  convention  is  preserved  among  the  documents  in  the  secretary's 
office.— J.  R.  B. 

VOL.  V.  50 


39-i  EECORDS   OF  THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE  ISLAND  [1754. 

is  contained  a  representation  of  the  state  of  the  English  coloEies  on  this  continent, 
chiefly  with  relation  to  the  French  and  Indians,  drawn  up  and  approved  by  the 
board  of  commissioners  at  said  congress  ;  and  also,  a  plan  of  a  proposed  union  of 
all  the  said  colonies,  which,  from  the  facts  set  forth  in  the  said  representation,  was 
judged  absolutely  necessary  to  be  speedily  effected  ,  it  was  therefore  a  resolution 
of  said  board  that  the  respective  commissioners  should  lay  the  same  before  the  Gen- 
eral Assemblies  of  the  colonies  they  severally  represented,  which  for  our  parts,  we 
accordingly  now  do,  and  submit  the  same,  with  this  our  report,  to  the  consideration 
of  this  Honorable  Assembly.  STEPHEN  HOPKINS, 

MARTIN  HOWAFtD,  JR. 
Newport,  August  20th,  1 754." 

And  now  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  premises  into 
consideration, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
foregoing  report  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  accepted ;  this 
Assembly  nevertheless,  reserving  to  themselves  a  farther  con- 
sideration, whether  they  will  accede  to  the  general  plan  pro- 
posed. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  Daniel  Jenckes  and  Thomas  Ilowland, 
represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  they,  with  sundry  other 
merchants,  were  concerned  in  two  vessels,  that  were  taken  by 
a  Spanish  privateer,  after  the  cessation  of  arms  between 
our  sovereign  and  the  king  of  SjDain,  and  carried  into  the 
island  of  Hispaniola,  and  from  thence  to  St.  Jago  de  Cuba ; 
and  that  they  had  been  at  considerable  expense  in  sending 
Col.  William  Hopkins,  to  inquire  after  the  same,  but  have  not 
hitherto  been  able  to  obtain  a  satisfactory  account  from  that 
gentleman ;  whereupon,  they  prayed,  that  an  act  may  be 
passed,  empowering  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  to  grant  a  com- 
mission for  a  vessel  to  be  fitted  out  at  their  own  proper  cost  and 
charge,  and  sent  to  Leogan,  on  the  said  island  of  Hispaniola,  and 
from  thence,  to  the  aforesaid  port  of  St.  Jago  de  Cuba,  in  order 
to  recover  their  own,  Avith  the  interest  of  the  other  parties 
concerned  ; — 

And  now  this  Assembly,  having  duly  inquired  into,  and 
maturely  considered  the  subject  matters  of  this  petition,  afore- 
said,— 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
prayer  thereof,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  granted  ;    and  His 


1754.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  395 

Honor,  the  Governor,  is  desired  to  make  and  issue  a  commis- 
sion accordingly. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  general  treasurer  be,  and  he  is  hereby  directed 
and  fully  empowered  to  hire  upon  the  colony's  account,  the 
sum  of  £4,000,  for  defraying  the  charge  of  building  the  light 
house. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Daniel  Updike,  James  Honeyman,  Esqs.,  and  Mr. 
Augustus  Johnston,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  have,  and  take 
the  bill  for  the  relief  of  insolvent  debtors,  now  lying  before  this 
Assembly,  and  make  such  amendments  and  alterations  as  they 
shall  think  fit ;  that  then  the  same  be  put  in  print,  and  a  copy 
sentto  each  town  clerk  in  the  colony,  for  the  perusal  of  all  per- 
sons that  shall  incline  to  it ;  and  one  copy  also  to  each  of  the 
members  of  this  Assembly ;  and  that  the  whole  be  done,  per- 
formed and  effected  at  the  charge  of  the  colony. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  assessors  or  rate-makers  of  each  town  in  the 
colony,  take  an  account  of  the  ratable  estates  in  their  respec- 
tive towns,  and  make  return  according  to  law,  unto  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly,  at  their  next  session  ;  and  that  a  copy  of  this 
vote  be  sent  by  the  secretary,  immediately  to  each  town  clerk 
in  the  colony,  to  be  by  him  delivered  to  the  assessors  or  rate- 
makers  of  his  town ;  and  that  every  assessor  or  rate-maker 
who  shall  refuse  or  neglect  to  do  his  duty,  shall  be  subject  to 
the  same  fines  and  penalties  as  are  mentioned  in  an  act  by 
the  General  Assembly,  made  and  passed  at  their  session,  held 
in  Newport,  on  the  second  Tuesday  of  June,  1747,  entitled, 
"  An  act  directing  how  the  value  of  ratable  estates  in  this 
colony  shall  be  known,  and  each  town's  proportion  thereof." 

Whereas,  Jonathan  Nichols,  of  Newport,  in  the  colony,  afore- 
said, Esq.,  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  having  some 
years  ago,  negotiated  at  said  Newport,  with  one  Lawrence 
Cholette,  of  Cape  Francois,  in  the  island  of  Hispaniola,  mer- 
chant, he  trusted  him  to  the  amount  of  £12,000  or  £13,000, 
old  tenor,  after  which  the  said  Cholette,  in  a  very  unjust  man- 


396  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1754. 

uer  absconded,  and  never  satisfied  or  paid  the  money  due,  and 
is  gone  to  Cape  Francois,  aforesaid,  the  usual  place  of  his  resi- 
dence, whither  the  said  Jonathan  is  about  to  send  a  suitable 
person  and  vessel,  in  order  to  prosecute  his  demands  against 
the  said  Lawrence  Cholette,  which  may  be  attended  with  diffi- 
culty, unless  some  protection  be  granted  by  the  colony ;  and 
thereupon  prayed  that  a  commission  may  be  granted  to  such 
person  as  he  shall  employ  for  prosecuting  the  said  Lawrence 
Cholette,  and  recovering  his  just  right ;  and  this  Assembly 
havino-  duly  weighed  the  subject  matter  of  the  petition  afore- 
said,— 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
prayer  thereof  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  accepted. 

God  save  the  King. 

T.  RoUnson  to  Governor  Shirley. 

Whitehall,  21st  June,  1754. 

Sir: — Having  received  your  despatches  of  the  19th  of  April  and  1st  of  May  last, 
with  their  several  enclosures,  and  having  laid  the  same  before  the  King,  I  am  to 
acquaint  you,  that  His  Majesty  extremely  approves  the  resolution  which  has  been 
taken  by  the  Assembly  of  your  Province,  in  consecjueace  of  the  proposal  recom- 
mended by  you,  to  use  their  best  endeavors  to  drive  the  French  from  the  river 
Kennebec. 

And  I  am  at  the  same  time  to  inform  you,  that  His  Majesty  is  graciously  pleased 
to  authorize  and  direct  you  to  proceed  upon  the  plan,  and  to  pursue  the  measures 
which  appear,  by  your  speeches  to  the  Assembly,  and  their  answer  thereto,  to  have 
been  so  well  calculated  for  that  purpose. 

I  am  likewise  to  assure  you,  as  a  mark  of  His  Majesty's  particular  attention  to 
the  welfare  of  his  loyal  subjects  in  New  England,  that  every  thing  recommended 
by  the  said  Assembly,  will  be  fully  considered  ;  and  that  immediate  directions  will 
be  given  for  promoting  the  plan  of  a  general  concert  between  Plis  Majesty's  colo- 
nies, in  order  to  prevent  or  remove  any  encroachments  upon  the  dominions  of 
the  crown  of  Great  Britain. 

It  is  with  the  greatest  pleasure,  that  I  take  this  early  opportunity  of  giving  you 
the  satisfaction  to  know  the  very  llivorable  manner  ia  which  the  account  of  your 
]irudent  and  vigorous  conduct,  as  well  of  the  zeal  and  activity  of  those  under  your 
government,  have  been  received  by  the  King,  which  cannot  fail  to  excite  and  en- 
courage them  in  taking  such  further  steps  as  will  most  cO'ectually  provide  for  their 
own  security,  and  will  give  a  proper  example  to  His  Majesty's  neighboring  colonies- 

I  am,  &c.,  T.  ROBINSON. 

To  (juverniir  Shirley. 


1754.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  397 


Secretary  Holdermsse  to  the    Governor   and  Company  of  Rhode 

Island. 

Whitehall,  28th  August,  1753. 

Gentlemen  : — His  Majesty  having  received  information  of  the  march  of  a  consid- 
erable number  of  Indians,  not  in  alliance  with  the  King,  supported  by  some  regular 
European  troops,  intending,  as  it  is  apprehended,  to  commit  some  hostilities  on 
parts  of  His  Majesty's  dominions,  in  America. 

I  have  the  King's  commands  to  send  you  this  intelligence,  and  to  direct  you  to 
use  your  utmost  diligence,  to  learn  how  far  the  same  may  be  well  grounded,  and  to 
put  you  upon  your  guard,  that  you  may,  at  all  events,  be  in  a  condition  to  resist 
any  hostile  attempts  that  may  be  made  upon  any  parts  of  His  Majesty's  dominions 
within  your  government;  and  to  direct  you,  in  the  King's  name,  that  in  case  the 
subjects  of  any  foreign  prince,  or  state,  should  presume  to  make  any  encroachment 
on  the  limits  of  His  Majesty's  dominions,  or  to  erect  forts  on  His  Majesty's  lards,  or 
commit  any  other  act  of  hostilities  you  are  immediately  to  represent  the  injustice  of 
such  proceeding,  and  to  require  them,  forthwith,  to  desist  from  any  such  unlawful 
undertaking. 

But  if,  notwithstanding  your  requisition,  they  should  still  persist,  you  are  then  to 
draw  forth  the  armed  force  of  the  Province,  and  to  use  your  best  endeavors  to  repel 
force  by  force. 

But,  as  it  is  His  Majesty's  determination  not  to  be  the  aggressor,  I  have  the 
King's  commands  most  strictly  to  enjoin  you  not  to  make  use  of  the  armed  force 
under  your  direction,  excepting  within  the  undoubted  limits  of  His  Majesty's  do- 
minions. 

And  whereas,  it  may  be  greatly  conducive  to  His  Majesty's  service,  that  all  his 
provinces  in  America,  should  be  aiding  and  assisting  each  other,  in  case  of  any 
invasion,  I  have  it  particularly  in  charge  from  His  Majesty,  to  acquaint  you.  that  it 
is  his  royal  will  and  pleasure,  that  you  should  keep  up  an  exact  correspondence  with 
all  His  Majesty's  governors  in  (he  continent ;  and,  in  case  you  shall  be  informed 
by  any  of  them,  of  any  hostile  attempts,  you  are  immediately  to  assemble  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  within  your  government,  and  lay  before  them  the  necessity  of  a  mu- 
tual assistance,  and  engage  them  to  grant  such  supplies  as  the  exigency  of  affairs 
may  require. 

I  have  written  by  this  conveyance  to  all  His  Majesty's  governors,  to  the  same 
purpose. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  yonr  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

HOLDERNESSE. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

T.  Robinson  to  the  Governor  and  Gompawj  of  Rhode  Island. 

Whitehall,  5th  July,  1751. 
Gentlemen  : — Although  you  have  neglected  to  give  any  answer  to  the  Earl  of 
Holdcrnesse's  letter,  of  the  28th  of  August  last,  yet  as  I  cannot  doubt  your  receipt 
bf  that  letter,  wherein  the  King's   orders  were  signified  to  you,  not  only  to  act  vig- 


398  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1754. 

orously  in  defence  of  your  government,  but  to  be  likewise  aiding  and  assisting  His 
Majesty's  other  colonies  in  America,  to  repel  any  hostile  attempts  made  against 
them. 

I  am  now,  by  the  King's  express  command,  to  enforce  to  you,  the  said  directions, 
in  the  strongest  manner  ;  and  to  acquaint  you,  that  His  Majesty  expects  your  imme- 
diate observance  of  them. 

You  will  see,  by  the  enclosed  copy  of  my  letter  to  Governor  Shirley,  in  what 
manner  His  Majesty's  subjects  have  behaved  at  Massachusetts  Bay,  and  that  their 
conduct  has  been  entirely  approved  by  the  King. 

I  am,  gentlemen, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

T.  ROBINSON. 
To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhl//  held  for  the  Colon//  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations^  at  Providence,  the 
last  Wednesda?/  in  October,  1754. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  John  Gardner,  Deputy  Governor. 

An  Act  for  assessing  and  levying  a  tax  of  £35,000. 

Whereas,  this  colony  is  indebted  in  a  large  sum  of  money, 
emitted  by  acts  of  Assembly,  in  bills  of  public  credit,  for  sup- 
plying the  treasury  ;  and  the  time  for  calling  in  said  bills  be- 
ing near  expiring ;  and  whereas,  Fort  George  is  in  a  bad  condi- 
tion, and  wants  some  necessary  repairs ;  for  the  accomplishing 
of  which  good  ends  in  part,  the  last  Assembly  voted  a  tax  of 
£25,000  to  be  assessed,  levied  and  applied  towards  sinking 
tlic  colony's  outstanding  bills  of  public  credit ;  and  a  tax  of 
£5,000,  to  be  applied  to  repair  Fort  George ;  but  as  the  said 
Assembly  did  not  apportion  the  said  taxes  on  the  several 
towns  of  the  colony,  and  as  the  sum  voted  for  repairing  the  fort, 
is  not  suflicicnt  for  that  purpose, — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by 
llic  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  there  be  £35,000,  old 
l(Mior,  raised    by  a   tax,  to   be   forthwith  assessed  and  levied, 


1754.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  399 

agreeably  to  law,  on  the  estates  and  polls  of  the  inhabitants  of 
this  colony,  in  the  following  proportion,  viz. :  on — 


£      s. 

Newport   7,000  00 

Portsmouth 1,750  00 

New  Shoreham 700  00 

Jamestown 9]  1  15 

Middletown 1,043  00 

Tiverton    1,023  15 

Little  Compton    980  00 


£13,408  10 


£     s. 

Providence 2,450  00 

Smithfield 1,925  00 

Scituate 766  10 

Glocester     715  15 

Cumberland .514  10 

Cranston 1,400  00 


£7,771  15 


Westerly 1,820  00 

North  Kingstown.  .1,977  10 
South  Kingstown.  .3,045  00 

Charlestown 525  00 

Exeter 787  10 

Richmond 451  10 


£8,606  10 


Bristol 913  10 

Warren 805  00 


£1,718  10 


Warwick 1,606  10 

East  Greenwich..  .  .1,050  00 

West  Greenwich 484  15 

Coventry 353  10 


£3,494  15 
8,606  10 
7,771  15 

13,408  10 


£35,000  00 

And  that  £]  0,000  thereof,  be  appropriated  towards  repair- 
ing of  Fort  Fort  George,  and  the  remainder  be  applied  to  sink- 
ing the  colony's  outstanding  bills  of  credit,  made  to  supply  the 
treasury. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  assessors  or  rate-makers, 
upon  their  assessing  or  apportioning  the  aforesaid  tax,  return 


400  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1754. 

a  true  bill  or  list  thereof,  to  the  town  clerk  of  the  town  to 
which  they  respectively  belong,  within  fifty  days  after  the  ris- 
ing of  this  Assembly ;  and  the  town  clerk  shall  send  a  copy 
thereof  to  the  general  treasurer  in  ten  days ;  who,  upon  receipt 
thereof,  shall  issue  forth  his  warrants  in  ten  days  to  the  sever- 
al collectors  of  rates,  of  the  respective  towns,  commanding  them 
in  His  Majesty's  name,  to  collect  the  several  sums  to  them  sev- 
erally committed,  in  bills  of  public  credit  of  this  colony,  within 
six  months'  time  after  the  rising  of  this  Assembly ;  and  to  pay 
two-seventh  parts  of  said  sums  to  him,  or  his  successor  in  said 
office,  and  the  remainder  to  the  treasurer  of  the  grand  commit- 
tee's office,  to  be  burnt,  and  discharge  part  of  the  colony's 
debt. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
each  respective  town  shall  pay  all  the  charges  and  fees  that 
shall  arise  in  assessing  and  collecting  their  respective  part  of 
the  aforesaid  tax. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  secretary  send  a 
copy  of  this  act  in  print,  to  each  town  clerk  in  this  colony, 
within  twenty  days  after  the  rising  of  this  Assembly,  to  be  by 
them  immediately  delivered  to  the  assessors  of  each  respective 
town. 

"  We,  the  subscribers,  dissent  from  the  above  proportion  of  the 
above"*  rate,  by  reason  that  the  town  of  Portsmouth  is  over- 
proportioned,  with  the  towns  of  Middletown  and  Tiverton, 
WM.  ANTHONY,  JK,  THOS.  BROWNELL, 

WM.  EARL,  JOHN  ALLEN." 

"I,  the  subscriber,  do  dissent  from  the  above  proportion 
of  tlie  above  rate,  by  reason  of  the  town  of  South  Kingstown  is 
over-proportioned  in  proportion  to  the  other  towns  in  the  coun- 
ty of  Kings  county  ;  as  I  am  knowing  to  the  value  of  the  es- 
tates in  the  other  towns  in  the  county. 

ROWLAND  ROBINSON' 


1754.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  401 

"We,  the  subscribers,  dissent  from  this  proportion  to  the 
town  of  Jamestown,  it  being  too  high.  Number  of  acres  four 
thousand  eight  hundred,  in  said  town. 

JOSIAH  ARNOLD,  JR., 
WM.  MARTIN." 

Whereas,  the  inhabitants  of  the  compact  part  of  the  town  of 
Providence,  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  they  con- 
ceive that  there  is  a  great  necessity  to  have  a  water  engine  of 
a  large  size,  purchased,  to  extinguish  fires,  that  may  casually 
break  out  in  said  town  ;  and  that  the  best  way  to  obtain  one, 
will  be  by  laying  a  tax  on  the  houses,  goods  and  other  things, 
to  be  destroyed  by  fire  ;  on  consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  Assembly,  and  by  the  authority  of  the 
same  it  is  enacted,  that  Obadiah  Brown  and  James  Angel, 
Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  empowered  to  rate  the  housing 
and  all  other  things  within  the  compact  part  of  the  said  town 
of  Providence,  which  are  liable  to  be  destroyed  by  fire,  a  sum 
of  money  sufficient  to  purchase  an  engine  as  is  above  describ- 
ed ;  and  that  the  said  rate  be  levied  so  soon  as  may  be,  and 
the  money  thereby  raised,  immediately  put  into  the  hands  of 
the  said  Obadiah  Brown  and  James  Angel,  for  the  speedy  pur- 
chasing said  engine. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
every  house  keeper,  within  the  space  of  three  months,  be  pro- 
vided with  two  good  leathern  buckets,  under  the  penalty  of 
forfeiting  the  sum  of  £20  ;  one  half  to  the  informer,  and  the 
other  half,  to  and  for  the  use  of  the  poor  of  the  said  town  of 
Providence. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  money  so  raised,  be,  by  said  Brown  and  Angel,  subject  to, 
and  put  under  the  direction  of  the  major  part  of  the  voters 
among  the  inhabitants  of  the  compact  part  of  the  said  town  of 
Providence,  and  appropriated  to  purchase  said  engine,  in  and 
after  such  manner  as  they  shall  think  fit. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  James  Sheffield,  Esq.,  and  Mr.  William  Read,  be, 

VOL,  V.  51 


402  OF   RECORDS   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1754. 

and  they  are  hereby  constituted   a    committee,  to  repair  Fort 
Geoige,  and  purchase  the  materials  therefor. 

The  gentlemen  that  were  appointed  to  audit  the  accounts  of 
the  committee  for  building  the  new  jail-house  and  jail,  in 
Providence,  presented  this  Assembly  with  the  following  re- 
port, to  M-it : 

Report  of  the  Committee  on  the  Providence  Jail,  &c. 

"  We,  the  subscribers,  being  a  committee  to  audit  the  com- 
mittee's accounts,  who  were  appointed  to  build  the  new  jail  in 
Providence,  do  report  as  followeth  : 

£     s.  d. 
There  is  due  to  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  for  the 
bills  charged  against  him,  for  the  work  done 

about  said  jail,  and  stuff,  &c 916  2  4 

To  the  balance  due  to  Mr.  Elisha  Brown,  on  set- 
tlement of  his  account 451  5  4 


£1,367  7  8 
All  which,  is  humbly  submitted  by  your  humble  servants, 

JABEZ  BOWEN, 
DANIEL  JENCKES, 
NICHOLAS  BROWN. 
Providence,  November  3d,  1754." 

.  And  now,  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  premises  into 
consideration, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
said  report  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  accepted. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Josiah  Arnold,  Esq.,  be  requested  to  attend  this 
Assembly,  at  their  next  session,  to  render  a  reason,  if  any  he 
hath,  why  two  acres  of  land,  adjoining  to  the  light  house,  on 
Beaver  Tail,  is  not  set  off  for  the  use  of  the  colony ;  and  that 
the  secretary  send  a  copy  of  this  vote  unto  him. 

God  save  the  Kino;. 


1754.] 


AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  403 


[The  following  Public  Laws,  passed  during  the  year  1754,  are  printed  at 
length  in  the  volume  of  public  laws,  published  in  the  year  1767,  unless  repealed 
previous  to  that  time.] 

An  Act  for  naturalizing  Ami  Decotay,  of  Newport,  merchant,  late  a  subject  of  the 
Kepublic  of  Genoa.     (February.) 

An  Act  for  naturalizing  Jacob  Lund,  of  Newport,  a  native  of  Norway. 
(February.) 

An  Act  in  addition  to  an  act  entitled  "  An  act  against  adultery,  polygamy  and  un- 
lawfully marrying  persons,  and  for  the  relief  of  such  persons  as  are  injured  by  the 
breaking  of  marriage  contracts."     (June.) 

An  Act  empowering  the  sheriSs  to  sell  and  give  deeds  of  land  mortgaged  and  for- 
feited to  the  colony.     (June.) 

An  additional  Act  for  preventing  the  counterfeiting  ©f  bills  of  public  credit 
emitted,  or  that  shall  be  hereafter  emitted  by  any  of  the  governments  in  New 
England,  and  to  prevent  defacing  the  same.     (June.) 

An  Act  to  incorporate  the  Fellowship  Club,  in  Newport.     (June.) 

Governor  Sharpe  of  Maryland,  to  Governor  Greene. 

Annapolis,  Maryland,  November  8th,  1754. 

Sir  : — I  take  the  liberty  to  acquaint  you  that  His  Majesty,  hoping  his  good  and 
loyal  American  subjects  will  unanimously  exert  themselves  to  repel  the  encroach- 
ments that  the  French  are  and  have  been  making  on  his  dominions,  in  this  part  of 
the  continent,  has  been  pleased  to  honor  me  with  a  commission  to  command  all  the 
forces  that  the  several  colonies  may  raise  for  that  purpose,  and  to  entreat  you  to 
endeavor  to  procure  us  such  supplies  either  of  men  or  money,  from  the  Assembly 
of  your  Province  as  the  exigency  of  affairs  does  at  this  time  demand. 

There  is  no  occasion,  I  persuade  myself,  for  me  to  insist  on,  or  even  hint  at  the 
fatal  consequences  that  must  attend  our  conniving  at  the  encroachments  that  the 
French  have  lately  made  on  His  Majesty's  American  dominions,  or  suflTering  them 
to  remain  masters  of  the  forts  which  they  have  built  on  the  frontiers  of  these  prov- 
inces ;  of  this,  you  are  extremely  sensible,  and  I  will  not  doubt  but  your  Assembly, 
when  they  meet,  will  show  a  just  regard  to  your  recommendation  of  the  service  to 
their  consideration  ;  indeed,  without  assistance  from  the  several  governments  on 
t  the  continent,  I  despair  of  answering  in  the  least,  His  Majesty's  expectations 
and  royal  intention  in  honoring  me  with*  such  a  commission,  and  cannot  think  of 
entering  on  action  without  such  succors  as  His  Majesty,  by  one  of  his  principal  sec- 
retaries of  state,  gives  me  room  to  expect  from  his  good  subjects  in  that,  as  well 
as  those  provinces. 

Should  the  gentlemen  of  your  Assembly  show  a  disposition  to  contribute  towards 
the  support  of  the  common  cause,  and  encouragement  of  His  Majesty's  service,  you 
will  be  pleased  to  signify  to  me  in  what  manner  you  judge  they  will  be  most  in- 
clined to  send  us  assistance,  whether  by  money  or  troops. 

I  must  beg  the  favor  of  you  to  inform  me  as  soon  as  possible,  what  I  must  expect. 


404  RECORDS   OP   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

because  the  vast  progress  that  the  enemy  made   last  summer,  makes  it  absolutely 
necessary  for  us  to  act  offensively         *  *  *  very 

early  in  the  spring. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

HOR'O  SHARPE. 
To  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembli/,  held  for  the  Colomj  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the  1st  day 
of  January,  1755. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  John  Gardner,  Deputy  Governor. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Jeremiah  Lippitt,  William  Richmond,  Daniel 
Coggeshall,  Jeoflrey  Watson,  Joshua  Babcock,  Job  Randall, 
Daniel  Jenckes  and  Immanuel  Northup,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby  constituted  a  committee  to  draw  up  a  scheme  for  rais- 
ing a  fund  of  such  a  body  of  troops  as  will  effectually  answer 
the  King's  just  expectations  from  this  government,  signified  in 
the  letter  sent  hither  by  the  Right  Honorable  Sir  Thomas 
Robinson,  one  of  Ilis  Majesty's  principal  secretaries  of 
state. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  enact,  and  it  is  voted  and  enact- 
ed, that  a  fund,  not  exceeding  £4,000,  old  tenor,  be  taken  up 
on  loan,  by  the  general  treasurer,  at  not  exceeding  ten  per 
cent,  interest,  for  the  uses  hereinafter  mentioned ;  and  that  a. 
company  of  one  hundred  meif  (officers  included,  and  to  be  ap- 
pointed by  this  government,)  be  raised  ;  and  that  a  commissa- 
ry be  appointed  to  receive  said  money  from  the  treasurer,  to 
lurnish  the  King's  troops  on  their  arrival,  with  fresh  victuals, 
and  whatever  else  can  be  reasonably  expected  from  this  gov- 
ernment, agreeably  to  His  Majesty's  pleasure,  signified  by  a 
letter  from  Sir  Thomas  Robinson,  of  the  26th  of  October  last ; 
and  that  each  soldier  be  paid  a  bounty  of  £18,  old  tenor,  on 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  405 

his  enlistment,  and   be  entitled,  thenceforward,  to  the  King's 
pay. 

And  that  a  letter  be  draughted  and  sent  to  Governor  Shir- 
ley, by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  or  Deputy  Governor,  contain- 
ing the  substance  of  the  foregoing  resolutions  of  this  Assembly ; 
and  to  acquaint  His  Excellency,  that  this  government  waits 
for  the  arrival  of  His  Majesty's  blank  commissions,  to  be  filled 
up  by  the  Governor  of  this  colony,  with  the  officers'  names  of 
the  company  above  mentioned. 

This  Assembly  having  maturely  considered  the  form  of  a 
letter  to  be  sent  to  His  Excellency,  Governor  Shirley,  do  ap- 
prove thereof 

John  Gardner,  Dejputy  Governor,  to  Governor  Shirley. 

Providence,  January  4th,  1755. 

Sir : — Immediately  on  receipt  of  tlie  Riglit  Plonorable  Sir  Thomas  Robinson's 
letter  of  the  26th  of  October  last,  to  th«  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island 
(beyond  doubt  of  the  same  tenor  with  what  Your  Excellency  has  received).  His 
Honor,  Governor  Greene,  summoned  the  members  of  both  houses,  who  met 
in  General  Assembly,  according  to  appointment ;  and  notwithstanding  Mr.  Greene 
hath,  by  a  bad  state  of  health,  been  rendered  unable  to  attend  and  assist  with  his 
advice,  the  Assembly  have  passed  an  act  to  raise  a  company  of  one  hundred  men, 
including  officers,  and  made  suitable  provision  for  all  other  necessaries,  according 
to  the  directions  of  the  above  mentioned  letter. 

And  this  Assembly  waits  only  for  the  arrival  of  a  set  of  His  Majesty's  blank  com- 
missions, to  be  filled  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  for  the  officers  of  the  company 
so  to  be  raised. 

I  have  the  pleasure  to  assure  Your  Excellency,  that  the  Assembly  are  animated 
with  the  laudable  zeal  of  doing  every  thing  in  the  power  of  the  government  to  answer 
effectually  and  comply  with  His  Majesty's  instructions,  and  have  therefore  adjourn- 
ed to  the  first  Monday  of  February  next. 

This  letter  comes  by  an  express  from  him,  may  it  please  Your  Excellency. 
I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  and  very  humble  servant, 

[JOHN  GARDNER,  Deputy  Governor.] 

To  Governor  Shirley. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  secretary  procure  the  act  of  Parliament,  enti- 
tled "  An  act  to  regulate  and  restrain  paper  bills  of  credit  in 
His  Majesty's  colonies  or  plantations,  of  Rhode  Island  and 
Providence    Plantations.  Connecticut,  the  MassachuseUs  Bay 


406  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

and  New  Hampshire,  in  America ;  and   to  prevent   the  same 
being  legal  tenders  in  payment  of  money  ;"  to  be  re-printed  in 
this  colony,  and  send  one  copy  thereof  to   each  town  clerk  in 
the  government,  for  the  use  of  said  town. 
God  save  the  King. 

Secrciarij  RoUnson  to   the    Governor   and    Company   of  Rhode 

Island. 


Whitehall,  25th  October,  1754. 
Gentlemen  : — His  Majesty  having  been  pleased  to  appoint  James  Pitcher,  Esq., 
to  be  commissary  of  the  musters  of  all  His  Majesty's  forces,  that  are,  or  shall  be 
employed  in  His  Majesty's  colonies  and  provinces  in  North  America,  I  have  His 
Majesty's  orders  to  direct  you,  or,  in  your  absence,  the  Lieutenant  Governor,  or 
such  other  person  that  shall  have  the  chief  care  of  your  government,  to  be  aiding 
and  assisting  to  the  said  James  Pitcher,  Esq.,  in  the  execution  of  this  duty. 
1  am,  gentlemen,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

T.  ROBINSON. 
To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

Secretary  RoUnson   to    the    Governor   and  Company    of  Rhode, 

Island. 

Whitehall,  October  26,  1754. 
Gentlemen  : — Having  informed  you,  in  my  letter  of  July  5th,  that  the  King  Lad 
under  his  royal  consideration,  the  state  of  affairs  in  North  America,  I  am  now  to  ac- 
quaint you,  that,  amongst  other  measures,  that  are  thought  proper  for  the  defence 
of  His  Majesty's  just  rights  and  dominions  in  those  parts,  the  King  has  not  only 
been  pleased  to  order  two  regiments  of  foot,  consisting  of  five  hundred  men 
each,  besides  commissioned  and  non-commissioned  officers,  commanded  by  Sir 
Peter  llalket,*  and  Col.  Dunbar,-j-  to  repair  to  Virginia,  and  to  be  there  augmented 


*  Sir  Peter  Halket,  of  Pitfernan,  Fifesbire,  a  baronet  of  Nova  Scotia,  was  a  son  i 
Sir  Peter  WcJderburne,  of  Gosford,  who  assumed  his  wife's  name.  In  1734,  he  sat  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  for  Dumfcrlinc,  and  was  Lt.  Colonel  of  the  41th,  at  Sir  John  Cope's 
defeat,  in  17  15.  Being  released  on  liis  parole,  by  Charles  Edward,  he  was  ordered  by  Cum- 
liL-rland  to  rejoin  his  regiment,  and  serve  against  the  Jacobites.  With  great  propriety  he 
refused  sueh  dishonorable  duty,  saying,  that  "  His  Royal  Highness  was  m.aster  of  his  com. 
mission,  but  not  of  his  honor."  The  King  approved  of  Sir  Peter's  course,  and  he  retained 
liis  ranlc.  On  the  20th  February,  1751,  he  succeeded  to  the  colonelcy  of  his  regiment.  He 
was  killed  at  the  head  of  his  regiment,  in  the  battle  of  Monongahela,  on  the  9th  July, 
17.m;  and  his  bones  lay  unburied  until  1759,  when  they  were  discovered  by  his  son  and 
decently  interred.— Si/ryc/i^'s  Erpedition  agaliif;t  Fort  Da  Qacsnc,pp.  274,  294. 

t  Col.  Thomas  Dunbau,  had  been  Lt.  Colonel  of  the  18th  Roy.al  Irish;  and  on  the  29th 
April,  175-.',  was  promoted  to  the  ooloneley  of  the  4th  regiment  of  foot.  In  November, 
1755.  he  was  superceded  in  the  eomnuuid  of  this  regiment,  and  sent  into  honorable  retir& 


1755.] 


AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  407 


to  the  number  of  seven  hundred  each,  but  likewise  to  send  orders  to  Gov.  Shir- 
ley and  Sir  Wm.  Pepperell,  to  raise  two  regiments,  whereof  they  are  respectively 
appointed  colonels,  of  one  thousand  men  each ;  and  also  to  sign  commissions  for  a 
number  of  officers  to  serve  in  the  said  two  regiments,  and  who  will  forthwith  repair 
to  North  America,  for  that  purpose. 

Whereas,  there  will  be  wanting  a  considerable  number  of  men  to  make  up  the 
designed  complement  of  the  said  four  regiments,  it  is  His  Majesty's  pleasure,  that 
you  should  be  taking  the  previous  steps  towards  contributing,  as  far  as  you  can,  to 
have  about  three  thousand  men,  in  readiness  to  be  enlisted. 

And  it  is  His  Majesty's  intention,  that  a  general  officer  of  rank  and  capacity  to  be 
appointed  to  command  in  chief  all  the  King's  forces  in  North  America ;  a  deputy  quar- 
ter master  general  and  a  commissary  of  the  muster,  shall  set  out  as  soon  as  conven- 
iently may  be,  in  order  to  prepare  every  thing  for  the  arrival  of  the  forces  above- 
mentioned,  from  Europe,  and  for  the  raising  of  the  others  in  America. 

You  will  receive  from  that  general,  and  the  other  officers  just  mentioned,  a  full 
and  exact  account  of  the  arms,  clothing  and  other  necessaries,  to  be  sent  upon  this 
important  occasion  ;  as  likewise  of  the  ordnance  stores,  and  of  the  officers,  and  at- 
tendants, belonging  thereto ;  all  which,  being  ordered  for  this  service,  are  such 
proofs  of  His  Majesty's  regard  for  the  security  and  welfare  of  his  subjects  in  those 
parts,  as  cannot  fail  to  excite  you  to  exert  yourself  and  those  under  your  care,  to 
take  the  most  vigorous  steps  to  repel  your  common  danger ;  and  to  show  that  the 
King's  orders,  which  were  sent  you  last  year,  by  the  Earl  of  Holdernesse,  and  were 
renewed  to  you  in  my  letter  of  the  5th  of  July,  have  at  last  roused  that  emulation 
and  spirit,  which  every  man  owes,  at  this  time,  to  His  Majesty,  the  public  and 
himself. 

The  King  will  not  therefore  imagine,  that  either  you,  or  the  rest  of  his  govern- 
ors, will  suffer  the  least  neglect  or  delay,  in  the  performance  of  the  present  service, 
now  strongly  recommended  to  you,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  following  points, 
viz.: 

That  you  should  carefully  provide  a  sufficient  quantity  of  fresh  victuals,  at  the 
expense  of  your  government,  to  be  ready  for  the  use  of  the  troops,  at  their 
arrival. 

That  you  should  likewise  furnish  the  officers,  who  may  have  occasion  to  go  from 
place  to  place,  with  all  necessaries  for  travelling  by  land,  in  case  there  are  no 
means  of  going  by  sea. 

And  that  you  should  use  your  utmost  diligence  and  authority,  in  procuring  an 
exact  observance  of  such  orders  as  shall  be  issued  from  time  to  time,  by  the  com- 
mander in  chief,  for  quartering  the  troops,  impressing  carriages  and  providing  all 
necessaries  for  such  forces  as  shall  arrive,  or  be  raised  within  your  government. 

As  the  articles  abovementioned,  are  of  a  local  and  peculiar  nature,  and  arising 
entirely  within  your  government,  it  is  almost  needless  for  me  to  acquaint  you,  that 


ment,  as  lieutenant  governor  of  Gibraltar,  in  consequence  of  his  injudicious  retreat  after 
Braddock's  defeat.  He  became  major  general  on  the  18th  of  January,  1758,  and  a  lieuten- 
ant general,  on  December  18th,  1760,  but  was  never  again  employed  in  active  ser- 
vice. He  died  previous  to  1778. — Note  of  Dr.  O'Callaghan,  in  New  York  Colonial  Docif 
merits.  Vol.  VI.  p.  915. 


408  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

His   Majesty  will  expect  that  the  charge  thereof  be  defrayed  by  his  subjects  be- 
longing to  the  same. 

But  with  regard  to  such  other  articles,  which  are  of  a  more  general  concern,  it 
is  the  King's  pleasure,  that  the  same  should  be  supplied  by  a  common  fund,  to  be 
established  for  the  benefit  of  all  the  colonies  collectively,  in  North  America ;  for 
which  purpose,  you  will  use  your  utmost  endeavors  to  induce  the  Assembly  of  your 
province,  to  raise  forthwith  as  large  a  sum  as  can  be  afforded,  as  their  contribution 
to  this  common  fund,  to  be  employed  provisionally,  for  the  general  service  of  North 
America  (particularly  for  paying  the  charge  of  levying  the  troops),  to  make  up  the 
complement  of  the  regiments  above  mentioned,  until  such  time  as  a  plan  of  general 
union  of  His  Majesty's  northern  colonies,  for  their  common  defence,  can  be  per- 
fected. 

You  will  carefully  confer,  or  correspond,  as  you  shall  have  opportunity,  upon 
every  thing  relative  to  the  present  service,  with  the  said  General  Sir  William  Pep- 
peroll,  and  Governor  Shirley,  or  either  of  them. 

And  as  it  is  the  King's  intention  to  give  all  proper  encouragement  to  such  per- 
sons, who  shall  engage  to  serve  upon  this  occasion,  you  will  acquaint  all  such  per- 
sons, in  the  King's  name,  that  they  will  receive  arms  and  clothing  from  hence  ;  and 
that  they  shall  be  sent  back  (if  desired)  to  their  respective  habitations,  when  the 
service  in  America  is  over. 

As  the  several  governors,  in  all  the  King's  provinces  and  colonies,  m  North 
America,  will  receive,  by  this  conveyance,  a  letter  to  the  same  effect  with  this, 
which  I  now  send  you,  they  will  be  prepared  at  the  same  time,  to  obey  His  Majes- 
ty's command  ;  and  I  am  to  direct  you  to  correspond  with  all,  or  either  of  them, 
occasionally,  as  you  shall  find  it  expedient  for  the  general  service. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

T.  ROBINSON. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

Sccreianj    Eohinson    to    the    Governor    and  Compamj  of  Rhode 

,    Island. 

"Whitehall,  November  4th,  1 754. 
Gontli^mon  ; — This  letter  will   be    put   into    your  hands,  by  Sir  John  St.  Clair, 
whom  the  King  has  been  pleased  to  appoint  deputy  quarter  master  general  of  his 
forces  in  North  America  ;  and  has  ordered  him  to  repair  forthwith  to  Virginia,  to 
make  the  necessary  preparations  for  the  reception  of  the  troops. 

It  is  therefore  the  King's  pleasure,  that  you  shall  be  aiding  and  assisting  to  Sir 
John  St.  Clair,  in  the  execution  of  this  duty,  and  shall  give  him  the  best  advice  you 
can,  upon  all  occasions,  relating  to  the  King's  service  ;  particularly  with  regard  to 
those  points  mentioned  to  you  in  my  letter  of  the  2Gth  [October  last]  past,  whereof 
I  have  given  a  copy  to  Sir  John  St.  Clair,  and  from  whom  you  will  receive  a  du- 
plicate of  the  same. 

I  am,  gentleman,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

T.  ROBINSON. 
To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  409 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the  first  Mon- 
day in  Felniary^  1755. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  John  Gardner,  Deputy  Governor. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  captain  of  Fort  George,  enlist,  as  soon  as  he 
shall  think  it  necessary,  to  the  number  of  fifty  men,  for  a  com- 
pany, to  meet  at  said  fort,  as  often  as  the  captain  shall  think 
proper,  to  practice  exercising  the  cannon  ;  and  to  repair  to 
said  fort  on  all  occasions  to  defend  the  same,  without  any  ex- 
pense to  the  government,  and  be  excused  from  all  other  milita- 
ry duties. 

The  gentlemen  that  were  appointed  to  make  the  draught  of 
an  answer  to  His  Excellency,  Governor  Shirley's  letter,  and  to 
take  into  consideration  what  further  is  necessary  to  be  done  by 
this  Assembly,  in  respect  to  raising  a  number  of  troops  for  His 
Majesty's  service,  made  report,  which  was  read  and  accepted. 

Deputy  Governor  Gardner  to  Governor  Shirley. 

Providence,  February  8th,  1755. 

Sir  :— Your  Excellency's  letter  to  Governor  Greene,  came  to  my  hands,  and  was 
immediately  laid  before  our  General  Assembly  then  sitting,  who  taking  it  under 
consideration,  Lave  directed  me  to  assure  Your  Excellency, — 

That  they  are  determined,  with  the  utmost  alacrity  to  perform  every  thing  His 
Majesty  hath  been  pleased  to  command,  and  caused  to  be  signified  to  them  by  Sir 
Thomas  Robinson,  his  secretary  of  state,  in  his  letter  to  this  colony. 

That  in  order  thereto,  at  their  former  meeting,  they  ordered  one  hundred  men 
to  be  raised,  of  which,  they  then  gave  Your  Excellency  notice  ;  and  they  have  now 
done  all  that  can  be  necessary  to  render  their  former  resolution  effectual,  so  as  to 
have  their  men  ready  at  any  time  His  Majesty  shall  direct,  and  inform  them  by  any 
channel  whatsoever  his  pleasure,  concerning  their  destination. 

That  the  colony,  in  obedience  to  His  Majesty's  commands,  have  ordered  those 
men  to  be  raised,  and  every  thing  else  to  be  done  in  conformity  thereto,  as  far  as 

VOL.  V.         52 


410  RECORDS    OF   TILE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

tlipy  are  able  to  unJerstand  them;  and  as  it  is  only  for  want  of  the  knowledge  ia 
■what  manner  His  Majesty  intended  the  men  raised  by  this  colony  shall  be  used, 
the  General  Assembly's  fully  acceding  at  this  time,  to  Your  Excellency's  offer,  con- 
tained in  your  letter. 

That  therefore  they  have  only  ordered  all  things  to  be  in  readiness,  and  only 
wait  for  such  orders  or  instructions  as  may  justify  them  in  the  disposition  of  the 
men  they  raise  ;  and  Your  Excellency  may  rest  fully  assured,  that  if  the  men  raised 
by  this  colony  are  destined  by  His  Majesty  to  make  part  of  Your  Excellency's,  Sir 
William  Pepperell's  or  the  Irish  regiments,  and  that  blank  commissions  will  not  be 
sent  to  the  Governor  of  this  colony,  to  be  filled  up  here,  for  their  oflicers,  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  will  thankfully  accept  of  Your  Excellency's  offer ;  and  will  have 
their  men  ready  by  such  time  and  in  such  manner,  as  you  shall  direct ;  esteeming 
it  a  great  favor,  that  the  men  by  them  raised  may  not  only  be  under  Your  Excel- 
lency's care  and  protection  as  their  colonel,  but  more  immediately  as  their  captain, 
also. 

The  General  Assembly  hope  for  Your  Excellency's  favorable  interpretation  of 
their  doing  herein  ;  and  that  nothing  may  be  looked  upon  as  dilatory  or  evasive  in 
them  ;  and  that  you  will  excuse  them  for  waiting  His  Majesty's  directions  before 
they  give  you  a  direct  answer. 

They  also  return  you  thanks  for  your  kind   offer,  and  will  always  think  them- 
selves happy  in  being  favored  with  your  friendly  influence. 
I  am,  with  great  esteem  and  respect. 

Your  Excellency's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

JOHN  GARDNER,  Deputy  Governor. 

P.  S.     The  certificates  and  beating  orders  are  retained  for  the  present. 

Whereupon,  Lc  it  enacted  by  this  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  a  committee  of  five  or  more 
suitable  persons,  be  appointed,  to  be  called  a  committee  of  war, 
Avith  full  power  and  authority  during  the  recess  of  the  General 
Assembly,  to  give  out  orders  to  such  officers  as  may  be  ap- 
jtointed  by  the  Assembly,  for  that  purpose,  to  enlist  and  raise 
the  hundred  men  already  ordered,  at  any  time  as  soon  as  orders 
are  received  from  the  crown,  through  any  channel,  for  our  so 
doing  ;  and  how  they  are  to  be  destined. 

And  1)0  it  further  enacted,  that  for  those  purposes,  the  said 
committee  of  war  shall  have,  and  hereby  is  granted  them  power 
to  draw  out  of  the  general  treasury  from  time  to  time,  such 
.sums  of  money  as  may  be  necessary  for  paying  the  bounty 
given  by  the  Assembly,  to  those  who  shall  enlist,  and  the 
charges  of  enlisting,  billeting  and  transporting  such  soldiers, 
and  all  otlier  expenses  necessarily  attending  the  afitiir. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  said  committee   of  war 


1755.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  411 

have  power  to  order  and  direct  in  what  manner,  and  what 
place  or  places  the  men  shall  be  subsisted  when  raised,  and  to 
give  orders  for  transporting  and  sending  away  the  company 
when  raised,  to  the  place,  and  in  such  manner  as  His  Majesty 
may  direct  the  same  to  be  done  ;  and  that  they  have  full 
power  and  authority  to  act,  transact,  and  do  all  and  every 
thing  necessary  and  expedient  to  be  done  for  effectually  carry- 
ing into  execution  all  such  commands  as  this  colony  have 
already  had,  or  hereafter  may  receive  from  His  Majesty ;  and 
that  they  be  at  all  times  accountable  to  the  General  Assembly 
for  their  doings. 

And  that  the  General  Assembly,  before  they  rise,  appoint 
one  lieutenant  and  one  ensign  for  the  said  company ;  and  also 
make  provision,  that  the  general  treasury  be  sufficiently  sup- 
plied with  money  for  all,  and  every  of  the  purposes,  aforesaid. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
thirteen  men  more  be  added  to  the  one  hundred  already  or- 
dered. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  John  Tillinghast,  Nicholas  Cook,  Stephen  Hopkins 
and  Daniel  Jenckes,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part  of 
them,  are  hereby  constituted  a  committee  ta  draught  a  letter 
immediately,  to  be  signed  by  Plis  Honor,  the  Governor,  in  an- 
swer to  the  letter  of  the  Right  Honorable  Sir  Thomas  Robin- 
son, sent  to  this  colony ;  and  that  therein  a  prayer  be  made  to 
His  Majesty,  for  a  suitable  number  of  cannon,  for  Fort  George ; 
and  that  a  plan  of  said  fort  be  sent  with  the  said  letter ;  and 
the  secretary  is  hereby  directed  to  send  to  said  committee  a  copy 
of  such  letters  and"  other  papers,  as  they  shall  have  occasion 
for ;  and  that  a  copy  of  said  letter  be  laid  before  the  General 
Assembly,  at  their  next  session  ;  and  that  the  same  committee, 
or  the  major  part  of  them,  also  draught  a  letter,  to  be  signed 
by  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  to  be  sent  to  the  agent,  directing 
him  to  use  his  best  endeavors  to  obtain  said  cannon,  and  lay 
that  also  before  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  next  session. 

God  save  the  Kino;. 


412  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 


Governor  Shirley  to  Governor  Greene. 

Boston,  February  5th,  1755. 
Sir  :— A  month  ago,  I  received  a  letter  from  the  Honorable  John  Gardner,  Esq., 
Deputy  Governor  of  your  colony,  acquainting  me,  that  the  Assembly  there  "  had 
passed  an  act  to  raise  a  company  of  an  hundred  men,  including  officers,  and  made 
suitable  provision  for  all  other  necessaries,  agreeably  to  the  directions  of  the  Kight 
Honorable  Sir  Thomas  Robinson's  letter,  of  the  2^\h.  October  last ;  and  that  the 
Assembly  only  waited  for  the  arrival  of  blank  commissions,  to  be  filled_^by  Your 
Honor." 

I  had  the  honor  of  a  letter  from  Sir  Thomas  Robinson,  of  the  same  tenor  and 
date  with  that  above  mentioned,  as  Governor  Gardner  observes  he  imagines  I  had. 
It  is  a  circular  one,  written  to  the  Governors  of  the  several  colonies  concerned. 

I  acknowledged  the  receipt  of  Mr.  Gardner's  letter,  by  Mr.  Chace,  a  few  days 
after  I  received  it,  in  one  to  himself,  and  am  now  to  answer  it  more  fully  to  Tour 
Honor. 

The  purport  of  His  Majesty's  orders,  signified  to  the  several  Governors,  by  Sir 
Thomas  Robinson's  letter,  is  (among  other  things)  that  they  should  recommend  it  to 
their  respective  Assemblies  to  furnish  fresh  provisions  for  the  troops  that  should  ar- 
rive in  their  colonies ;  and  to  raise  among  them  three  thousand  men,  and  a  sum  of 
money  towards  paying  their  respective  quotas  of  the  levy  money. 

Those  three  thousand  men  are  (as  it  seems  clear  to  me)  intended  to  complete 
mine,  and  Sir  William  Pepperell's  regiments,  now  raising  in  America,  which  are  to 
consist  of  one  thousand  privates  each,  besides  non-commissioned  officers,  sergeants, 
corporals  and  drums,  which  will  amount  to  one  hundred  more,  for  each  regiment ; 
and  that  the  remaining  eight  hundred  men  are  to  complete  the  two  Irish  regi- 
ments, designed  for  Virginia,  from  five  hundred  to  seven  hundred  and  fifty 
privates  each ;  as  also  to  fill  up  the  number  of  those  which  may  be  lost  in  the 
passage. 

As  to  the  two  Irish  regiments,  they  being  old  corps,  were  both  full  officered  before 
they  left  Europe  ;  and  Your  Honor  must  have  observed  from  the  public  prints, 
that  five  of  the  captaincies  both  in  mine  and  Sir  William  Pepperell's  regiments, 
besides  the  three  field  oflicers'  companies  in  each,  were  filled  up  by  His  Majesty, 
soon  after  the  revival  of  the  regiments ;  as  were  all  the  lieutenancies,  except  four ; 
and  cnsigncies,  except  four  or  five ;  so  that  it  seems  to  be  most  evident,  that  it  was 
not  Ills  Majesty's  intent  that  the  Governors  should  have  the  appointment  of  the 
olHcers  [ot  the  force]  raised  within  their  respective  colonies. 

Neither  Sir  William  Pepperell  nor  myself  can  be  certain  what  commissions  will 
be  sent  blank,  to  be  filled  up  by  ourselves,  until  the  arrival  of  our  lieutenant  colo- 
nels ;  we  can't  possibly  have  but  a  very  few  ;  and  Your  Honor  is  sensible  that  it 
may  be  expected  some  at  least  of  those  should  be  distributed  among  the  half-pay  of- 
ficers of  our  late  regiments,  now  here  and  unprovided  for. 

I  should  be  extremely  glad,  if  it  was  in  my  power,  to  oblige  Your  Honor's  As- 
sembly with  blank  commissions,  for  a  set  of  officers,  to  be  filled  up  by  Your  Honor, 
for  the  company  to  be  raised  by  them  in  your  colony  ;  and  as  that  is  not  in  my 
power,  if  it  would  be  acceptable  to  the  Assembly,  that  I  should  be  their  captain,  I 
will  take  them  for  my  own  company,  and  will  fill  up  a  lieutenant's  and  ensi<;n's 
commissions  for  it,  upon  my  receiving  my  blanks,  with  such  persons  as  Your  Honor 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS,  413 

shall  be  pleased  to  appoint];  and  I  shall  moreover  esteem  the  company's  being 
raised  by  the  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  under  these  terms,  to  be  a 
great  honor  done  me,  which  I  shall  acknowledge  upon  any  occasion  in  my  power, 
of  serving  them. 

If  what  I  propose,  is  not  agreeable.  Your  Honor  and  the  Assembly  may  have  the 
men  drafted  either  into  Sir  William  Pepperell's  and  mine,  or  the  two  Virginia 
regiments,  as  the  King's  service  may  require,  which  ever  is  chosen. 

The  ready  compliance  which  the  Assembly  has  paid  to  His  Majesty's  orders  con- 
tained in  Sir  Thomas  Kobinson's  letter,  according  to  their  act,  will  be,  doubtless, 
extremely  acceptable  to  His  Majesty. 

If  what  I  propose  to  Your  Honor,  is  agreeable,  I  should  be  glad  if  the  Assembly 
would  increase  the  number  of  the  men  to  one  hundred  and  ten,  exclusive  of  com- 
missioned officers  ;  out  of  which,  four  may  be  enlisted  as  sergeants,  four  for  cor- 
porals, and  two  for  drums,  as  Your  Honor  shall  order. 

I  have  likewise  sent  one  hundred  and  ten  blank  enlistments,  and  one  hundred 
and  ten  certificates,  the  form   of  beating  orders,  some  articles  of  war,  and  instruc- 
tions for  the  officers,  whether  commissioned   or   non-commissioned,  whom   Your 
Honor  shall  think  fit  to  choose  to  proceed  to  enlisting  the  men. 
1  am,  with  very  great  respect,  sir, 

Your  Honor's  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  the  Hon.  William  Greene,  Esq.,  Governor  of  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island. 

P.  S.     I  have  ordered  the  bearer  to  wait  for  Your  Honor's  answer. 


Governor  Shirley  io  Governor  Greene. 

Boston,  February  17,  1755. 

Sir  : — The  designs  of  the  French  (in  which  they  have  so  far  already  succeeded), 
for  invading  His  Majesty's  just  rights,  in  these  northern  parts  of  America,  contrary 
to  the  most  solemn  treaties,  require  that  these  governments,  as  well  for  their  own 
safety  as  in  faithfulness  to  His  Majesty,  without  delay  to  use  all  means  in  their 
power  to  frustrate  these  perfidious  and  pernicious  practices. 

Among  other  measures,  necessary  to  be  taken,  especially  at  this  critical  conjunc- 
ture (the  present  aspect  of  afTairs  threatening  a  speedy  rupture),  nothing  we  can 
do,  seems  likely  to  tend  more,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  to  defeat  the  schemes  of  the 
French,  to  swallow  up  all  His  Majesty's  dominions  on  the  continent  of  America, 
than  that  the  governments  should  agree  in  the'  most  effectual  means  for  stopping  all 
supplies  of  provision  and  warlike  stores  being  sent  out  of  any  of  these  colonies, 
without  the  enclosed  precaution  against  their  being  carried  to  the  French. 

The  General  Assembly  of  this  Province,  has  passed  an  order  for  that  end  (a  copy 
of  which  I  now  enclose)  ;  and  have  desired  me  to  soli'.'it  the  Governors  of  the  rest 
of  His  Majesty's  colonies  to  join  with  us  in  this  necessary  expedient  lor  our  com- 
mon safety. 

Your  Honor  will  observe  that  the  time  for  the  continuance  of  this  prohibition,  is 
restrained  to  three  months ;  but  if  the  other  governments  should  join  with  us,  I 
make  no  doubt  of  bringing  my  Assembly  to  extend  it  furtlier. 

It  would  give  me  great  pleasure   to   have  Your   Honor's  concurrence  with  me 


414  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

in  sentiments  concerning  what  appears  to  me  so  salutary  a  measure  at  this  conjunc- 
ture, lor  the  general  good  of  all  His  Majesty's  colonies  in  North  America. 
I  have  the  Honor  to  be,  with  the  greatest  respect,  sir, 

Your  Honor's  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 
To  the  Hon.  Governor  Greene. 

Governor  Shirley  to  Governor  Greene. 

Boston,  February  17,  1755. 

S;,. : This  (rovernment  has  thought  it  necessary  to  take  up  and  confine  all  the 

subjects  of  the  French  king,  within  this  Province,  apprehending  that  their  only  busi- 
ness here,  is  to  purchase  provisions  and  military  stores,  to  furnish  the  French,  the 
better  to  carrv  on  the  war  against  us,  or  to  gain  intelligence  of  the  consultations  of  the 
Ensilish  oovernments,  and  the  preparations  they  may  be  making  for  their  own  se- 
curity, and  by  ways  unknown  to  us,  to  convey  the  same  to  their  own  governments. 
Therefore,  at  the  desire  of  the  Assembly  of  this  Province,  I  would  earnestly  de- 
sire Your  Honor  to  use  your  utmost  endeavor  that  the  like  precaution  be  immedi- 
ately taken  in  your  government,  to  prevent  the  mischief  which  probably  will  oth- 
erwise ensue.     I  enclose  the  copy  of  the  vote  referred  to. 

I  am,  with  the  greatest  respect,  &c.  &c., 

W.  iSHIllLEY 
To  Governor  Greene. 

Governor  Shirle?/  to  Governor  Greene. 

Boston,  New  England,  February  24th,  1755. 

Sir : — It  would  be  needless  for  me  to  observe  to  you,  how  His  Majesty's  colonies 
upon  this  continent,  are  surrounded  with  the  encroachments  of  the  French  ;  they 
have  long  since  marked  out  for  themselves  a  large  empire  upon  the  back  of  it,  ex- 
tending from  Cape  Breton  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  comprehending  the  country 
between  the  Apalachian  Mountains  and  Pacific  Ocean,  with  the  numerous  power- 
ful tribes  of  Indians  inhabiting  it ;  and  they  are  now  finishing  the  extreme  parts  by 
a  communication  between  Louisbourg  and  Quebec,  across  the  Isthmus  of  Nova  Sco- 
tia and  Bay  of  Funda,  at  one  end,  and  a  junction  of  Canada  with  the  IMississippi, 
by  a  line  efforts,  upon  the  great  lakes  and  rivers,  at  the  other. 

It  is  fallen  to  the  lot  of  the  most  eastern  colonies,  to  be  hemmed  in  by  that  part 
of  their  encroachments,  which  begin  in  Nova  Scotia,  and  end  at  Crown  Point,  * 
*  *  among  wliich,  the  fort  of  Beau  Sejour,  upon  the  isthmus  of  the  peninsular, 
tliat  on  St.  John's  Kiver,  and  Fort  St.  Frederic,  near  Crown  Point,  are  the  prin- 
cipal. 

His  Majesty,  out  of  his  paternal  care  for  the  welfiire  and  security  of  lils  good  sub- 
jects, of  these  colonics,  in  September,  1753,  signified  his  royal  pleasure,  by  the  Right 
Honorable  Earl  of  Iloldernessc's  letter,  dated  the  21st  of  that  month,  to  his  Gov- 
ernors there,  that  they  should,  with  the  armed  force  of  the  mditia  under  their  re- 
spective commands  (if  need  be),  romove  nil  encrnaclnnonts  upon  his  territories, 
within  tlic  limits  of  their  several  guvernments,  and    use    tlicir    best   endeavors  for 


1755.] 


AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  415 


promoting  a  general  union  among  them  for  their  common   defence  against   an 
invader. 

In  July  last,  by  a  letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Sir  Thomas  Robinson,  dated 
the  5th  of  that  month.  His  Majesty  signified  bis  orders  to  me  and  Colonel  Law- 
rence, Lieutenant  Governor,  and  commander  in  chief  of  Nova  Scotia,  that  -we 
^hould  concert  measures  for  attacking  the  French  forts  in  that  Province. 

And  in  December  last,  I  had  the  honor  to  receive  another  letter  from  Sir  Thomas 
Robinson,  dated  the  2Gth  of  October,  wherein  he  acquainted  me,  that  His  Majesty, 
upon  taking  the  state  of  his  colonies  in  North  America,  into  his  royal  consideration, 
was  graciously  pleased,  besides  ordering  two  regiments  of  foot  from  Ireland,  under 
the  command  of  Sir  Peter  Halket  and  Col.  Dunbar,  to  be  sent  to  Virginia,  to  or- 
der me  and  Sir  William  Pepperell  to  raise  each  of  us  a  regiment  of  foot,  consisting 
of  one  thousand  men,  *  *  *  under  our  respective  commands,  for  the  defence 
of  his  colonies  here. 

In  obedience  to  the  first  mentioned  orders.  Colonel  Lawrence  and  I  have  con- 
certed measures  for  dislodging  the  French  from  their  forts,  in  Nova  Scotia,  and 
driving  them  out  of  that  Province  ;  and,  among  other  preparations  for  that  pur- 
pose, I  am  now  raising  a  reinforcement  of  two  thousand  men,  for  His  Majesty's 
regular  troops  there,  to  be  embarked  in  time  to  be  landed  in  the  Bay  of  Funda  by 
the  first  week  of  April ;  which,  I  have  reason  to  think,  I  can  depend  upon  accom- 
plishing. 

In  consequence  of  the  latter,  I  have  made  a  great  progress  in  raising  my  regi- 
ment, and  believe  there  is  no  great  doubt  of  its  being  completed  by  the  latter  end 
of  March. 

Mr.  Dinwiddle,  Governor  of  Virgina,in  his  letter  to  me,  dated  January  the  14th, 
acquainted  me  that  his  government  had  great  dependence  upon  a  strong  diversion's 
being  made  by  Sir  William  Pepperell's  and  my  regiments  this  summer,  at  some 
part  of  Canada,  in  favor  of  the  attempts  of  the  western  colonies,  to  repel  the  French 
upon  the  Ohio  ;  and  such  a  diversion  of  the  French  forces,  must  likewise  greatly 
facilitate  the  enterprise  for  driving  the  French  from  their  encroachments  in  Nova 
Scotia. 

It  is  most  evident,  that  at  the  same  time,  the  expedition  in  Nova  Scotia,  and  the 
schemes  which  principally  employ  the  attention  of  the  French,  and  a  great  part  of 
their  forces  upon  the  Ohio,  afford  a  most  favorable  opportunity  for  the  four  colo- 
nies of  New  England,  and  those  of  New  York  and  the  New  Jerseys,  with  their 
united  strength  to  erect  such  a  fort  near  Crown  Point,  as  may  command  the  French 
fort  there,  and  curb  the  city  of  Montreal  itself. 

These  were  the  motives,  which  induced  me  to  make  the  proposal  of  such  an  at- 
tempt to  the  Assembly  within  my  own  government,  which  is  particularly  set  forth 
in  my  speech  to  them  upon  this  occasion  ;  a  copy  of  which,  together  with  a  copy  of 
the  resolves  of  the  Assembly  consequent  upon  it,  I  enclose  to  Your  Honor. 

In  these  resolves,  Your  Honor  will  find  what  number  of  troops  this  government 
thinks  it  necessary  to  be  raised  in  the  whole  for  the  execution  of  this  attempt,  with 
the  quotas  they  propose  for  the  consideration  of  the  several  colonies  concerned  ; 
and  I  hope  it  will  not  be  thought  that  they  have  under  rated  their  own  quota,  when 
it  is  considered  that  out  of  the  twenty-two  hundred  men,  which  are  raising  for  Sir 
William  Pepperell's  and  my  regiments,  and  two  thousand  now  raising  for  the  expe- 
dition to  Nova  Scotia,  upwards  of  three  thousand  of  them  will  be  taken  out  of  this 
Province ;  which,  with  the  twelve  hundred  proposed    to  be  raised  in  it  for  Crown 


416  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE  ISLAND  [1755. 

Point,  will  amount  to  considerably  more  than  one  eighth  part  of  its  fighting  men; 
and  that  they  wore  at  an  heavy  charge  last  year,  in  carrying  on  an  expedition  upon 
the  river  Kennebec,  and  erecting  Fort  Halifax  there ;  which,  as  it  is  a  great  advance 
towards  securing'  the  principal  pass  into  the  heart  of  Canada,  over  against  their  me- 
tropolis of  Quebec,  and  through  which  river,  the  French  have  the  shortest  passage 
into  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  of  any  river  in  North  America,  must  be  deemed  an  adr 
vantage  to  all  the  eastern  colonies  in  general. 

Your  Honor  will  observe,  that  the  Assembly  hath  desired  me  to  appoint  an  ofE- 
oer  for  the  chief  command  of  the  proposed  expedition.  It  is  essential  to  the  service, 
that  such  an  one  should  be  appointed  ;  and  as  it  seemed  necessary  that  he  should 
be  proposed  at  the  beginning,  and  this  government  is  the  first  mover  in  this  expe- 
dition (as  it  was  likewise  in  that  against  Cape  Breton,  of  which  also  I  appointed 
the  commander  in  chief)  it  is  hoped,  the  other  colonies  *****  will 
have  no  objection  to  it. 

The  "entleman  whom  I  shall  nominate  for  this  command,  will,  I  am  persuaded, 
show  Your  1  lonor  that  the  only  motive  which  will  sway  me  in  this  appointment,  is 
a  strict  rcard  to  His  Majesty's  service,  and  the  interest  of  the  common  cause, 
without  the  least  partiality  to  any  one  of  the  governments  concerned. 

The  gentleman  1  have  thought  of,  upon  this  important  occasion,  is  Col.  William 
Johnson,  of  Mount  Johnson,  in  the  Mohawk  country,  whose  distinguished  charac- 
ter for  the  i^ruat  inlluenee  he  hath  for  several  years  maintained  over  the  Indians  of 
the  Six  Nations,  is  the  circumstance  which  determines  me  in  my  choice,  preferably 
to  anv  rreiitlenian  of  my  own  government,  though  there  are  not  wanting  there,  offi- 
cers of  rank  and  experience,  out  of  whom  I  could  have  nominated  one. 

Your  Honor  is  sensible  that  one  of  the  principal -things  we  have  in  view  in  this 
expedition,  is  to  retain  such  of  those  castles  as  are  not  yet  gone  over  to  the  French, 
in  the  English  interest,  and  to  reclaim  those  which  are  ;  and  it  would  be  of  un- 
speakable advantage  to  us  at  this  conjuncture,  if  we  could  engage  any  of  them  in 
the  proposed  service. 

Colonel  Johnson  raised  and  commanded  a  regiment  of  Indians  in  the  late  in- 
tended expedition  against  Canada;  and  with  regard  to  his  power  to  engage  them 
row,  no  gentleman  can  stand  in  competion  with  him  ;  besides,  his  military  qualifi- 
cations for  this  particular  service,  and  knowledge  of  the  country  and  place,  against 
which  this  expedition  is  destined,  are  very  conspicuous. 

The  tort  intended  to  be  built  in  this  expedition,  is  proposed  to  be  so  situated  as 
to  command  Fort  St.  Frederic,  at  Crown  Point,  to  be  made  defensible  against  the 
strength  which  the  French  can  suddenly  bring  against  it  from  Montreal ;  to  be 
erected  by  the  army  employed ;  and  as  to  the  support,  garrisoning  and  command 
of  it,  that  must  depend  upon  His  Majesty's  pleasure,  which  will  be  soon  known 
concerning  it. 

It  must  be  fresh  in  Your  Honor's  memory,  that  the  reduction  of  the  French  tort, 
at  Crown  Point,  was  looked  upon  as  a  necessary  step  in  the  late  intended  expedi- 
tion against  Canada,  and  how  far  advanced  the  preparations  of  the  colonies  con- 
cerned in  that  scheme  were,  till  I  know  not  by  what  fatal  disunion  of  our  counsels, 
a  most  unhajipy  stop  was  put  to  it. 

One  remarkable  circumstance  occurs  to  me  upon  this  occasion ;  when  the  late 
Sir  Peter  Warren  and  myself  were  endeavoring  to  engage  one  Monsieur  Vau- 
(Ircric,  then  at  Boston,  a  very  intelligent  Frenchman,  as  a  pilot  to  our  forces  up  the 
river   St.  Lawrence,  in   the   aforesaid   late  expedition,  he  smiled,  and   told  us  he 


1755.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  417 


should  not  be  convinced  that  the  English  did  in  good  earnest  design  an  expedition 
against  Canada,  from  these  colonies,  until  he  should  hear  that  Fort  St.  Frederic 
was  attacked. 

But  I  am  persuaded  nothing  more  need  be  urged,  to  Your  Honor,  concerning 
the  great  importance  of  the  proposed  expedition,  except  that  besides  securing  our- 
selves against  future  depredations  of  the  French,  from  their  fort  at  Crown  Point, 
in  a  time  of  war ;  we  shall  wipe  off  the  reproach  of  the  colonies  for  suffering  that 
dangerous  encroachment  upon  His  Majesty's  territories,  to  be  at  first  erected. 

^^  I  should  have  mentioned  to  Your  Honor,  that  the  two  houses  of  the  Assem- 
bly in  this  Province,  have  bound  themselves  by  oath  to  secresy,  both  with  respect 
to  the  expedition  now  preparing  against  the  French  encroachments  in  Nova  Sco- 
tia, and  that  proposed  against  those  at  Crown  Point ;  which  I  thought  proper  to 
observe,  that  Your  Honor  may  use  your  discretion  in  that  point,  with  regard  to  the 
Assembly  within  your  own  government. 

The  same  union  of  sentiments,  and  like  spirit  with  which  the  four  sister  colonies 
of  New  England  acted  in  the  late  expeditions  against  Cape  Breton  and  Canada, 
will,  I  hope,  prevail  in  the  colonies  of  all  of  them  at  this  critical  conjuncture  ;  and 
induce  them  to  join  in  the  proposed  expedition. 

Your  Honor  is  sensible  that  in  order  to  avail  ourselves  of  this  favorable  opportu- 
nity for  such  an  enterprise,  a  speedy  determination  upon  it,  and  the  greater  de- 
spatch in  our  preparations  for  it  is  necessary. 

I  have  commissioned  the  Honorable  Thomas  Hutchinson,  Esq.,  to  wait  on  Your 
Honor,  upon  this  occasion,  and  to  solicit  your  government  to  join  with  my  own  in 
this  necessary  piece  of  service  for  the  protection  of  His  Majesty's  colonies  under 
our  care,  against  the  dangerous  encroachments  of  the  French,  and  hope  he  will 
succeed  in  the  execution  of  their  commission. 

I  am,  with  the  greatest  regard,  sir, 

Your  Honor's  most  obedient  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  the  Honorable  Governor  William  Greene. 

P.  S.  I  thought  it  might  redeem  time  to  send  this  by  the  post,  in  order  to  put 
it  in  Your  Honor's  power  to  convene  the  Assembly  in  your  government  as  soon  as 
possible,  I  made  use  of  that  opportunity.  The  commissioner  will  start  from  hence 
on  Monday  next,  the  3d  of  March.  W.  S. 

Secrdary  Robinson  to  Governor  Greene. 

Whitehall,  January  23,  1755. 
Sir :— The  King,  being  determined  that  nothing  shall  be  wanting  towards  the  sup- 
port of  his  colonies  and  subjects  in  North  America,  has  commanded  me  to  signify  to 
you  His  Majesty's  intention  to  augment  the  regiments  in  British  pay  (viz. :  not  only 
Sir  Peter  Halket's  and  Col.  Dunbar's,  but  likewise  those  which  are  now  employed 
in  Nova  Scotia),  to  the  number  of  one  thousand  men,  each  ;  to  which  end,  you  will 
correspond  with  Major  General  Braddock,  or  the  commander  of  the  King's  forces 
for  the  time  being,  from  whom  you  will  receive  directions  for  the  sending  such  con- 
tributions of  men,  as  shall  be  wanting,  and  to  such  places  where  the  same  shall  be 
quartered,  or  employed  under  his  command. 
VOL.  V.  53 


418  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

As  there  is  probably  a  considerable  number  of  persons,  as  well  among  the  natives 
of  America,  as  among  such  foreigners  who  may  be  arrived  there  from  different 
parts,  particularly  from  Germany,  who  will  be  capable  and  willing  to  bear  arms 
upon  this  occasion,  the  King  does  not  doubt  but  that  you  will  be  able  by  care  and 
diligence,  to  atfcct  this  intended  augmentation,  and  to  defray  the  charge  of  levying 
the  same  from  the  common  fund,  to  be  established  for  the  benefit  of  all  the  colonies, 
collectively,  in  North  America,  pursuant  to  His  Majesty's  directions,  signified  to  you 
by  my  letter  of  the  26th  of  October  last,  for  that  purpose  ;  and  as  an  encourage- 
ment to  all  such  persons,  who  shall  engage  in  this  service,  it  is  the  King's  intention 
(which  you  will  assure  them,  in  His  jMajesty's  name)  that  they  shall  receive  arms 
and  ciotinng,  at  the  King's  expense  ;  and  that  they  will  not  only  be  sent  back  (if 
desired.)  to  their  respective  habitations,  when  the  serviee  in  America  shall  be  com. 
pleted  and  ended,  but  shall  be  entitled,  in  every  respect,  to  the  same  advantages 
with  those  troops  which  may  be  already  raised  in  consequence  of  your  former 
order*  I  am,  ettc,  T.  ROBINSON. 

To  His  Excellency,  Governor  Greene. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhltj,  held  for  ihc  Colomj  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  tlie  Gth  day 
of  March,  1755. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  John  Gardner,  Deputy  Governor. 

An  Act  for  raising  four  companies  in  this  colony,  of  one  hun- 
dred men  each,  officers  included,  to  be  employed  on  a  secret 
expedition,  in  case  other  governments  shall  join  and  carry 
on  the  proposed  enterprise. 
■  "Whereas,  His   INIajesty's   royal  will  and  pleasure,  that  a 
speedy  stop  should  be  put  to    the  encroachments  made  upon 
his  just  rights  in  North  America,  by  the  French,  hath  been  re- 
[)cat»id  unto  this  government ;  who  have  always  been  hereto- 
Ibrc,  and  still  are  desirous    of  exerting  themselves  to  aid  and 
assist  unto  the  utmost  of  their  ability  in  every  purpose  having 
a  tendency  that  way  ;  and  inasmuch  as  there  is  a  scheme  pro- 
posed for  the  governments  of  New  England,  to  attempt,  in  con- 
junction with   other    neighboring   governments,  to  remove  the 


*  New  York  Colonial  Docujiiciits,  Vol.  VI.  p.  934. 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  419 

encroachments  which  the  French  have  made  upon  the  lands 
and  country  of  our  sovereign,  at  or  near  Crown  Point ;  and 
this  it  is  supposed  may  be  effected  by  building  immediately  a 
strong  fort  upon  the  rocky  eminence,  near  the  said  Crown 
Point ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  iVssembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  as  soon  as  this  govern- 
ment shall  receive  advice  from  His  Excellency,  Governor  Shir- 
ley, that  the  other  governments  of  New  England  have  acceded 
to  and  concurred  in  carrying  on  the  above  mentioned  enter- 
prise of  building  such  a  fort,  there  be  forthwith  raised  in  this 
colony,  at  the  government's  expense,  four  hundred  good  and 
able  bodied  men,  including  officers,  to  be  by  the  Assembly  ap- 
pointed, and  commissioned  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor  ;  which 
troops,  when  raised,  shall  join  and  act  in  conjunction  with  those 
of  the  other  governments  in  New  England,  under  the  command 
of  the  general  of  the  whole  army  ;  subject,  nevertheless,  to  the 
control  of  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  gentlemen  hereafter 
named,  be,  and  are  hereby  appointed  officers,  for  enlisting  and 
commanding,  according  to  the  rules  of  military  discipline,  the 
aforesaid  troops  when  raised,  to  wit : 

Christopher  Harris,  colonel. 

Edward  Cole,  captain ;  Samuel  Nichols,  lieutenant ;  and 
Joshua  Bill,  ensign,  of  the  first  company. 

Robert  Sterry,  captain ;  David  Dexter,  lieutenant ;  and 
Thomas  Burket,  ensign,  of  the  second  company. 

Henry  Babcock,  captain ;  Edward  Gray,  lieutenant ;  and 
Ichabod  Babcock,  Jr.,  ensign,  of  the  third  company. 

Abraham  Francis,  captain ;  John  Wardwell,  lieutenant ;  and 
Joseph  Potter,  of  Warwick,  ensign,  of  the  fourth  company. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  following  wages,  in  old 
tenor  bills  of  public  credit,  shall  be  the  pay  and  allowance  per 
month,  of  the  officers  and  troops  to  be  raised : 

The  colonel,  £150 ;  every  captain,  £50 ;  every  lieutenant, 
£-86  ;  every  ensign,  £28. 

The  sergeants,  £20  per  month,  and  £20  bounty,  at  the  time 


420  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

of  enlisting,  if  provided  with  a  good  firelock ;  and  no  more 
than  £15  without ;  that  if  the  arms  brought  by  such  officers 
into  service  in  the  army,  shall  be  damnified  afterwards,  or  lost, 
the  same  shall  be  made  good  by  the  colony,  according  to  the 
value  thereof. 

The  drummers,  £20  per  month ;  and  £15  bounty,  at  the 
time  of  enlisting ;  moreover,  every  sergeant  and  drummer  shall 
receive  of  the  government,  and  have  gratis,  one  good  blanket, 
as  a  further  encouragement,  or  £8  in  lieu  thereof,  if  he  furnish 
himself  with  one. 

Every  common  soldier  £16  per  month,  and  £20  bounty,  if 
furnished  with  a  good  firelock  ;  but  no  more  than  £15,  with- 
out ;  that  if  the  arms  brought  by  any  soldier  into  the  army, 
shall  be  damnified  afterwards,  or  lost,  the  same  shall  be  made 
good  by  the  colony,  according  to  the  value  thereof. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
no  officer  or  soldier  shall  be  liable  to  an  arrest,  or  be  im- 
prisoned, or  stayed  upon  any  execution,  unless  the  same  be 
for  a  debt  or  judgment  for  £200,  old  tenor,  or  upwards ;  that 
some  one  of  the  committee  of  war  inquire  into  the  truth  of 
any  demand  upon  mesne  process,  that  every  person  in  execu- 
tion, shall,  upon  his  enlisting,  be  released ;  provided,  no  one 
judgment  exceeds  the  above  mentioned  sum  of  £200  ;  and  in 
all  and  every  such  case,  the  sheriff  shall  be  indemnified,  and 
the  bail  acquitted  ;  nevertheless,  if  one  plaintift'  have  two  or 
more  demands  or  judgments  against  one  person,  the  whole 
shall  be  deemed  and  taken  to  be  but  one  debt. 

And  for  a  further  encouragement,  it  is  enacted,  that  all  such 
officers  and  soldiers  shall  be  exempted  from  any  and  every  arrest 
or  execution,  for  the  space  or  term  of  one  whole  year  after  the 
expedition  is  ended,  unless  the  same  shall  arise  or  accrue  upon 
a  new  contract,  made  after  the  return  of  such  officer  or  soldier ; 
or  it  1)0  for  a  greater  sum  than  £200,  old  tenor;  and  shall  not, 
iluring  said  term  of  one  year,  be  impressed  for,  or  into  any 
further  military  duty  or  service. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  as  soon  as  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  shall  receive  advice  from  the  Governor  of  the  Massa 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  421 

chusetts,  that  the  other  governments  of  New  England  have  ac- 
ceded to  the  scheme  proposed,  and  not  only  taken  proper  mea- 
sures, but  actually  begun  to  carry  the  same  into  execution,  he 
shall  forthwith  issue  a  proclamation  pursuant  and  conformable 
to  this  act,  and  give  commissions  unto  all  the  ofl&cers,  that  they 
may  be  authorized  and  enabled  to  raise  the  troops  as  soon  as 
possible  ;  and  that  according  to  the  regulation  aforesaid. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  committee  of  war,  for  the 
time  being,  be  authorized,  and  are  hereby  fully  empowered 
and  directed  to  purchase  or  procure  four  hundr-ed  pounds 
weight  of  good  gun  powder,  sixteen  hundred  pounds  weight 
of  lead,  with  a  sufficient  quantity  of  flints,  and  four  hundred 
hatchets  ;  and  also  all  such  provisions,  and  warlike  and  other 
stores,  as  shall  be  necessary  for  the  subsistence  of  the  troops  ; 
and  to  carry  on  the  expedition,  and  render  it  effectual ;  which 
ammunition  and  stores,  when  purchased  or  procured,  they 
shall  cause  to  be  transported  unto  Albany,  as  the  most  proper 
place  for  a  general  rendezvous ;  and  as  to  the  provisions,  this 
Assembly  give  it  as  their  opinion,  that  as  much  as  will  serve 
two  months  will  be  sufficient. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  said  committee  of  war 
be  authorized  and  are  hereby  fully  empowered  to  draw  out  of 
the  general  treasury  all  and  every  such  sum  and  sums  of 
money  as  shall  be  wanting  from  time  to  time,  for  the  purpose 
aforesaid,  together  with  a  sufficiency  for  paying  the  bounty, 
providing  tents,  and  defraying  the  incident  expense  of  enlist- 
ing, billeting,  and  marching  the  troops,  and  all  other  necessary 
charges,  which  their  support  and  subsistence  may  require  dur- 
ing the  service. 

And  that  the  general  treasurer  may  be  speedily  supplied 
with  money  sufficient  for  effecting  the  ends  and  purposes, 
aforesaid, — 

Be  it  further  enacted,  that  there  be  struck  off  and  emitted, 
upon  the  credit  of  this  colony,  the  sum  of  £60,000,  old  tenor, 
if  said  expedition  shall  be  carried  on,  and  that  sum  found 
necessary  therefor ;  and  that  the  committee  to  be  hereafter  ap- 
pointed for    signing    said   bills,  do,  upon   the  first  intelligence 


422  RECORDS   OP   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAOT)  [1755. 

from  the  Governor  of  the  Massachusetts,  that  the  intended 
expedition  will  be  carried  on,  strike  off.  and  sign  and  lodge  in 
the  general  treasury,  at  the  colony's  expense,  one  half  of  the 
sum  aforesaid ;  and  the  remainder  as  occasion  shall  require ; 
that  the  bills  be  struck  off  the  large  plates  last  used  by  the 
colony  ;  the  same  being  first  new  dated,  with  an  addition  of  the 
words,  "  Crown  Point,"  upon  the  back  ;  and  signed  by  three  of 
the  committee  to  be  chosen. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  bills  so  emitted,  shall,  pur- 
suant to  act  of  Parliament,  be  called  in  and  sunk  within  the 
space  and  term  of  two  years,  and  that  by  a  tax  to  be  levied  upon 
the  government ;  that  is  to  say  :  one  half  within  the  space  or 
term  of  a  year ;  and  the  other  half,  within  the  space  or  term 
of  two  years,  from  the  time  of  making  this  act ;  which  tax 
shall  be  made  and  levied  in  the  same  manner  as  that  now  to 
be  levied,  was  assessed  upon  the  inhabitants,  but  by  a  new 
proportion  to  the  towns. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  Daniel  Updike,  Joshua  Bab- 
cock,  Jeremiah  Lippitt  and  Benjamin  Nichols,  Esqs.,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby  appointed  a -committee  for  signing  the  bills  so 
to  be  emitted ;  and  that  any  three  of  them  shall  be  sufficient, 
as  to  number. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  a  commissary  shall  be  chos- 
en and  appointed,  to  attend  the  troops  during  the  intended  ex- 
pedition ;  and  have  <£G0  per  month,  for  wages,  without  any 
allowance  for  commissions  ;  and  Mr.  Christopher  Champlin,  Jr., 
is  hereby  chosen  and  appointed  to  that  office. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  in  case  the  committee  of  war 
shall  not  be  able  to  procure  or  purchase  a  sufficient  number  of 
good  arms,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  issue  a  warrant,  for 
impressing  as  many  as  shall  be  found  wanting  and  necessary. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  if  any  or  either  of  the  offi- 
cers now  chosen,  shall  refuse  the  service,  or  die  before  it  is 
over,  that  the  committee  of  war,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  ap- 
point another  or  others  in  the  room  of  him  or  them,  that  shall 
so  die  or  refuse. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  every  person  who  shall  lose 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  423 

a  limb,  or  be  otherwise  disabled  in  the  service,  during  this  in- 
tended expedition,  so  as  to  be  rendered  incapable  of  procuring 
himself  a  livelihood,  he  shall  be  allowed  and  have  a  pension  of 
£50  a  year,  during  life,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

And  furthermore,  this  Assembly  choose  and  appoint  the 
same  gentlemen  as  were  chosen  and  appointed  last  month,  to 
be  the  committee  of  war ;  and  they  are  hereby  vested  with  all 
and  every  the  power  and  authority  granted  them  at  that  time  ; 
with  this  addition,  that  any  two  shall  make  a  quorum. 

■  And  lastly,  it  is  enacted,  that  the  act  made  and  passed  by 
this  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  January  last,  for  raising  one 
hundred  men  ;  and  another  act  made  and  passed  at  their  ses- 
sion, last  month,  for  making  an  addition  of  thirteen  men  more 
unto  that  hundred,  be  both,  and  each  of  them,  is  hereby  re- 
pealed. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Jer.  Lippitt,  Peter  Bours,  Dan'l  Jenckes  and  Joshua 
Babcock,  Esq.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  constituted  a  commit- 
tee, to  prepare  a  bill,  to  restrain  the  sending  provisions  or  war- 
like stores  to  Cape  Breton  or  any  other  French  port,  or  settlement 
upon  the  continent  of  North  America,  or  islands  near  or  adjacent 
thereunto  ;  and  another,  for  the  taking  up  and  securing  all  the 
subjects  of  the  French  king,  that  shall  be  found  within  this  colo- 
ny ;  or  any  other  person  or  persons,  that  shall  be  suspected  of 
carrying  or  conveying,  or  of  intending  to  carry  or  convey  any 
intelligence  from  this  colony,  unto  the  French,  of  any  proceed- 
ings of  the  English,  in  respect  to  the  controversy  now  subsist- 
ing between  the  two  nations. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  captain  of  Fort  George^  be,  and  he  is  hereby 
directed  and  ordered  to  purchase  for  the  colony's  use,  thirty- 
six  barrels  of  gunpowder,  and  draw  money  out  of  the  general 
treasury  to  pay  for  the  same  ;  and  that  the  captain  do  not  al- 
low or  suffer  any  powder  to  be  fired  away  at  said  Fort,  on  any 
holiday,  or  days  of  public  rejoicing. 

Whereas,  the  committee  appointed  to  make  the  draught  of  a 
letter  to  be  sent  unto  the  Bight  Honorable  Sir  Thomas  Bobin- 


424  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY   OF  RHODE   ISLAND  [1755.  j 

son,  one  of  His  Majesty's  principal  secretaries  of  state,  and  an- 
other to  the  agent,  have  laid  their  performances  before  this  As- 
sembly, who  having  heard  the  same  read, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
committee  of  war,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby  authorized  and  fully  empowered  to  make  such  altera- 
tions in  said  letter,  or  either  of  them,  as  they  shall  think 
proper ;  that  when  they  have  so  done,  the  same  be  presented 
to  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  in  order  to  their  being  by  him 
signed  and  sent  home  by  the  first  opportunity  ;  and  that 
copies  of  said  letters  be  exhibited  to  the  General  Assembly,  at 
their  next  session ;  that  in  the  letter  to  be  sent  to  the  agent^ 
he  be  directed  to  be  upon  his  watch,  and  if  any  thing  shall  be 
moved  in  Parliament  respecting  the  plan  for  an  union  of  His 
Majesty's  northern  colonies,  projected  at  Albany,  which  may 
have  a  tendency  to  infringe  on  our  charter  privileges,  that  he 
use  his  utmost  endeavors  to  get  it  put  off  until  such  time  as 
the  government  is  furnished  with  a  copy,  and  have  opportunity 
of  making  answer  thereunto. 

An  Act  to  restrain  the  sending  of  provisions  and  warlike  stores 

to  Cape  Breton,  or   any  other  French  port  or  settlement,  in 

North  America, 

"Whereas,  there  is,  and  for  some  past  has  been  a  very  perni- 
cious trade  carried  on  from  hence,  and  some  other  of  the  north- 
ern colonies,  to  Louisbourg,  on  the  Island  of  Cape  Breton,  and 
other  French  ports  and  settlements  in  North  America ;  by 
means  whereof,  the  French  have  been  supplied  with  great 
quantities  of  flour  and  other  provisions,  and  thereby  are  ena- 
bled to  support  themselves  the  better  in  their  encroachments 
on  His  Majesty's  territories  on  this  continent;  which  if  not 
timely  prevented,  may  prove  of  a  very  dangerous,  if  not  fatal 
consequence  to  this  and  all  other  His  Majesty's  territories  in 
North  America  ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  collector  of  His 
Majesty's  customs,  for  this  colony,  shall  require  of  every  mas- 


1755.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  425 

ter  of  a  vessel,  at  his  clearing  out,  an  exact  account,  under 
his  hand,  of  all  the  provision  and  warlike  stores,  laden  or  in- 
tended to  be  laden,  on  board  his  vessel  before  sailing ;  which 
account  shall  appear  to  have  been  sworn  to  before  an  assistant, 
or  justice  of  the  peace,  with  an  additional  oath,  that  he  will  not 
lade  or  suffer  to  be  laden  on  board  any  other  provisions  or 
warlike  stores,  after  clearing  out  his  said  vessel- 

And  whensoever  it  shall  appear  to  said  officer  or  his  deputy, 
that  any  vessel  has  on  board,  or  that  there  is  intended  to  be 
laden  on  board  any  vessel,  more  provisions  or  warlike  stores 
than  is  necessary  for  the  victualling  and  defence  of  said  ves- 
sel on  her  proposed  voyage,  the  said  officer  is  hereby  required 
and  fully  empowered  to  demand  and  take  of  the  master  of 
such  vessel,  a  bond,  with  one  or  more  sureties  in  the  penal 
sum  of  £1,000,  with  this  condition  :  that  all  such  provisions 
and  stores  of  war  shall  be  landed  within  His  Majesty's  domin- 
ions, and  no  where  else ;  unless  at  Surranam,  Esquebo,  or  Bar- 
beties. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  whenever  a  certificate  shall 
be  produced  to  the  collector,  or  his  deputy,  from  the  chief  offi- 
cer of  the  customs,  where  such  provisions  and  warlike  stores 
have  been  landed,  agreeably  to  the  true  intent  and  meaning  of 
this  act,  then  such  bond  shall  be  cancelled  and  made  void. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  this  act  shall  be  forthwith 
published  by  the  clerk  of  the  lower  house,  aftd  a  copy  thereof 
sent  to  the  collector,  in  order  for  his  conducting  himself  accord- 
ing to  its  true  intent  and  meaning  ;  and  that  the  same  be,  and 
abide  in  force  until  the  first  Wednesday  in  May  next,  and  no 
longer. 

An  Act  empowering  their  Honors,  the  Governor  and  Deputy 
Governor,  the  assistants  and  judges  of  the  superior  and 
inferior  courts,  and  each  of  them,  to  take  up  and  secure 
Frenchmen,  &c. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  His  Hon- 
or, the  Deputy  Governor,  the  assistants,  the  judges  of  the  supe- 
VOL.  v.         54 


42G  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

rior  court  of  judicature,  and  judges  of  the  inferior  court  of  com- 
mon pleas,  and  each  of  them,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  requested 
and  fully  empowered  by  warrant,  under  his,  their  or  either  of  their 
hands,  to  take  up  and  secure  at  discretion,  all  and  every  the 
subject  and  subjects  of  the  French  king,  that  shall  be  found 
within  this  colony,  or  any  other  person  or  persons  that  are,  or 
shall  be  suspected  of  carrying  or  conveying,  or  of  intending  to 
carry,  or  convey  unto  the  French  any  intelligence  from  this 
colony,  or  any  of  the  proceedings  of  the  English,  in  respect  to 
the  controversy  subsisting  between  the  two  nations ;  and  that 
every  officer  who  shall  have  a  warrant  for  taking  up  any  sub- 
ject of  the  French  king,  or  person  suspected,  as  aforesaid,  is 
heieby  authorized  and  fully  empowered  to  break  locks  and 
bars,  if  occasion  require. 

The  two  foregoing  acts  were  published  in  Newport,  March, 
the  10th  day,  1755,  according  to  order,  by 

JOSIAS  LYNDON,  clerk  of  the  lower  house. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  all  business  lying  before  them  unfinished,  be,  and 
the  same  is  hereby  referred  unto  their  next  session  ;  and  that 
this  Assembly  be  adjourned  unto  the  last  Monday  of  April 
next,  if  called  by  either  of  their  Honors,  the  Governor  or  Dep- 
uty Governor  ;  but  if  not  called  before,  nor  at  said  time,  then 
lliis  Assembly  be,  and  hereby  is  dissolved. 

God  save  the  King. 


1755.] 


AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


427 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhli/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  the  first  Wednes- 
day of  May,  1755. 

The  Hon.  William  Greene,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  John  Gardner,  Deputy  Governor. 

The  following  officers  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged. 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 


ASSISTANTS. 


Mr.  John  Tillinghast, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Easton, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Cooke, 
Mr.  Obadiah  Brown, 
Mr.  Robert  Lawton, 


Mr.  Joseph  Brovvnell,  Jr., 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Lippitt, 
Mr.  William  Richmond, 
Mr.  John  Congdon, 
Col.  Thomas  Hazard. 


SECRETAKY. 

Mr.  Thomas  Ward. 

\  ATTORNEY    GENERAL. 

Mr.  Daniel  Updike. 


GENERAL  TREASURER. 

Mr.  Thomas  Richardson. 


DEPUTIES. 


Neivport, 
Mr.  Edward  Scott, 
Mr.  Thomas  Cranston, 
Mr.  Peter  Bours, 
Capt.  Job  Bennett,  Jr. 
Mr.  James  Sheffield, 
Mr.  William  Read. 


Providence. 
Mr.  Daniel  Jenckes, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Brown, 
Mr.  George  Brown, 
Mr.  Henry  Harris. 


428 


RECORDS  OF  THE  COLONY  OF  RHODE  ISLAND 


[1755. 


DEPUTIES. 


Portsmouth. 
]\Ir.  William  Anthony,  Jr. 
Mr.  John  Allen, 
'yiw  Thomas  Brownell, 
Mr.  William  Earl. 

WarivicJi. 
Mr.  Philip  Greene, 
Mr.  Joseph  Lippitt, 
Mr.  John  Walton,  Jr., 
Mr.  Benjamin  Arnold. 

WcstcrJ//. 
Capt.  Benjamin  Randall. 
Mr.  Ilezekiah  Collins. 

New  Shoreham. 
Mr.  Edward  Sands, 
Mr.  Samuel  Hathbun,  Jr. 

North  Kingstown. 
Col.  Immanuel  Northup, 
Mr.  Beriah  Brown. 

South  Klngstoim. 
IMr.  John  Potter, 
Mr.  Bowland  Robinson. 

East  Greenwich. 
Wx.  William  Spencer, 
iMaj.  John  Arnold. 
Janiestoivn. 
Mr.  Josiah  Arnold,  Jr. 
J^Ir.  William  Martin. 

SniUhJichl 
Mr.  John  Aldrich, 
Mr.  Jonathan  Arnold. 

ScUuate. 
Capt.  Jol)  Randall, 
Capt.  Amos  Hammond. 


Glocester. 
Capt.  John  Smith, 
Mr.  Richard  Steere, 
Chmiestgivn. 
Col.  Christopher  Champlin, 
Capt.  Joseph  Stanton. 

West  Greenwich. 
Mr.  Thomas  Rogers, 
Mr.  Philip  Greene. 

Coventry. 
Mr.  Aaron  Bowen, 
Mr.  Richard  Stafford. 

Exeter. 
Capt.  John  Reynolds, 
Mr.  John  Weight. 
Middletoion. 
Mr.  Thomas  Gould, 
Mr.  Joshua  Coggeshall,  Jr. 

Bristol. 
Capt.  Joseph  Russell, 
Mr.  Theajashub  Bourn. 

Tiverton. 
Mr.  Samuel  Durfey, 
Mr.  Thomas  Howland. 

Little  Compton. 
Mr.  Joseph  Wood, 
Mr.  Moses  Palmer. 

^Varren. 
Mr.  James  Brown, 
Capt.  Benjamin  Barton. 

Cumberland. 
Mr.  Job  Bartlett, 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Whipple. 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.         '  429 


DEPUTIES. 

Richmond,  Cranston. 

Major  Richard  Bayley,  Mr.  Joseph  Harris, 

Mr.  John  Teft.  Mr.  John  Burton. 

The  Hon.  Thomas  Cranston,  speaker,  and  Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 

The  Hon.  Gideon  Wanton,  Benjamin  Nichols,  James  Shef- 
field, Obadiah  Brown,  Samuel  Chace,  James  Arnold,  George 
Brown  and  Nicholas  Easton,  Esqs.,  the  grand  committee,  or 
trustees  of  the  colony,  for  signing  bills  of  public  credit, 
&c. 

And  the  aforenamed  Benjamin  Nichols,  Esq.,  is  chosen  and 
especially  appointed  to  have  and  take  the  care  and  charge  of 
the  colony's  mortgages  and  bonds  for  tenths,  and  to  receive  the 
the  money  due,  and  to  be  due  thereon ;  and  also  to  make  and 
give  proper  acquittances  and  discharges  on  the  mortgages  ;  or 
otherwise,  upon  the  receipt  of  any  of  the  colony's  money ;  and 
in  case  of  non-payment,  to  put  in  suit  the  bonds  and  mortgages 
of  all  those  that  refuse  or  omit  to  make  due  payment. 

Mr.  Edward  Thurston,  general  sealer  of  weights  and  meas- 
ures, throughout  the  government. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  at  their  ses- 
sion, held  at  Providence,  on  Thursday,  the  6th  of  March  last, 
made  an  act  to  restrain  the  sending  of  provisions  and  warlike 
stores  to  Cape  Breton,  or  any  other  French  port  or  settlement, 
in  North  America ;  which  was  to  be,  and  continue  in  force  for 
a  certain  term  of  time,  now  expired ;  and  forasmuch,  as  the 
circumstances  that  occasioned  the  making  that  act,  are  still 
subsisting, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  act  above  mentioned,  and  every 
clause  and  article  thereof,  be,  and  is  hereby  revived,  and  shall 
have  and  take  effect,  and  continue   in  force  until  the  rising  of 


430  RECORDS   OP   THE    COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

the  General  Assembly  at  their  next  session ;  and  that  the  col- 
lector, and  every  one  under  him,  be,  and  is  hereby  forbidden 
to,  and  shall  not  clear  out  any  vessel  or  vessels  to  Cape  Breton, 
on  any  pretence  whatever ;  and  that  this  act  be  forthwith  pro- 
claimed, and  a  copy  thereof  sent  immediately  unto  the  collec- 
tor's office,  by  the  secretary. 

Which  was  done  accordingly,  at  half  an  hour  past  three  o'- 
clock, in  the  afternoon  of  the  9th  of  May,  1755,  by 

THO.  WARD,  Secretary. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  all  the  officers  in  this  colony's  ser- 
vice use  their  utmost  endeavors  to  get  the  four  hundred  men, 
above  mentioned,  raised  and  made  into  four  companies  as  soon 
as  possible,  by  enlisting  in  this  and  the  neighboring  govern- 
ments ;  and  the  committee  of  war  are  hereby  directed  to  use 
their  utmost  endeavors  that  the  deficiency,  if  any,  may  be  sup- 
plied and  made  up,  by  taking  into  the  service  of  this  colony  as 
many  Indians  of  the  Six  Nations,  as  shall  be  found  necessary. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  troops  of  this  government  shall  be  formed  into  and  made 
a  distinct  regiment,  with  the  addition  of  a  lieutenant  colonel 
and  major,  to  be,  by  the  committee  of  war,  chosen  and  appoint- 
ed* out  of  the  present  officers ;  who  shall  be  paid  in  bills  of 
credit,  of  the  old  tenor,  as  followeth : 

The  lieutenant  colonel,  £140  per  month,  including  all  his 
other  wages. 

The  major,  £130  per  month,  including  all  his  other  wages. 

And  the  following  alterations  shall  be  made,  with  regard  to 
the  pay  or  wages  per  month,  of  the  officers ;  who  shall  have,  to 
Avit : 

The  commissary,  £120  ;  every  captain,  £100  5  every  lieu- 
tenant, £60;  every  ensign,  £50;  every  corporal,  £18. 

And  1)0  it  furtlicr  enacted,  that  if  a  sufficient  number  of  arms 
cannot  be  secured  to  supply  all  the  soldiers  for  the  expedition, 


1755.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  431 

the  committee  of  war  is  hereby  empowered  and  directed  to 
make  use  of  any  number  of  the  colony's  arms  now  in  Newport, 
not  exceeding  two  hundred. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  commissary,  who  is 
forthwith  to  repair  unto  Albany,  shall,  during  the  expedition, 
supply  the  officers  and  soldiers  with  all  things  necessary  for 
their  subsistence ;  and  upon  urgent  occasions,  draw  upon  the 
committee  of  war ;  who  are  to  enable  themselves  to  answer 
all  his  draughts  ;  either  by  shipping  West  India  goods,  upon 
the  colony's  account,  to  the  westward,  or  in  any  other  method 
they  shall  judge  most  for  the  interest  of  the  colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  committee  of  war  be,  and 
hereby  is  empowered  to  borrow  or  purchase,  on  the  best  terms 
they  can,  all  the  arms  that  shall  be  necessary ;  and  that  any 
person  who  shall  lend  or  sell  to  the  colony,  a  good  small  arm, 
shall  be  exempted  from  all  military  duty,  for,  and  during  the 
term  of  one  year ;  that  when  the  companies,  aforesaid,  or  any 
one  of  them,  is  filled,  they,  the  committee  of  war,  cause  them  to 
be  transported  unto  Albany  by  water ;  that  they  provide  for  the 
troops  a  good  and  skillful  surgeon,  who  shall  be  paid  £100 
per  month,  and  be  furnished  with  a  chest  of  proper  medicines, 
at  the  colony's  expense ;  and  one  month's  pay  advanced  to 
every  officer  and  soldier,  before  his  departure  ;  and  also  to 
supply  each  soldier  with  what  clothing  they  may  judge  neces- 
sary, to  be  charged  to  said  soldier. 

Moreover,  the  commissary  is  hereby  directed  to  take  care 
that  the  troops  of  this  government  have  as  large  an  allowance 
of  victuals  and  liquor  as  is  made  unto  any  of  the  troops  belong- 
ing unto  the  other  governments ;  and  that  in  case  of  the  pres- 
ent commissary's  death,  the  commissioned  officers  be,  and  are 
hereby  empowered  to  choose  and  appoint  another  in  his 
stead. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  committee  of  war  shall 
have,  and  hereby  is  granted  unto  them,  full  power  and  authori- 
ty, during  the  recess  of  the  General  Assembly,  to  act,  order,  do 
and  transact  all  and  every  matter  and  matters,  thing  and  things 
necessary  and  convenient  to   be  ordered,  done  or  executed,  for 


432  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

efTectually  carrying  into  execution,  the  part  this  gojernment 
has  undertaken  in  this  intended  expedition ;  and  that  as  fully 
and  amply,  to  all  intents  and  purposes  as  the  General  Assem- 
bly itself "^could,  ought,  or  might,  were  it  actually  sitting,  they, 
the  said  committee,  being  always  accountable  unto  the  General 
Assembly  for  their  conduct. 

This  Assembly  choose  and  appoint  the  gentlemen  after 
named,  to  be  committee  men  of  the  towns  set  against  their 
names,  respectively ; — 

Mr.  Solomon  Drown,  for  Providence ;  Messrs.  Joseph  Stan- 
ton and  James  Congdon,  Jr.,  for  Charlestown ;  John  Barker, 
Esq.,  for  jNIiddletown ;  Mr.  Jeremiah  Browne,  for  Little  Comp- 
ton;  Jonathan  Randall,  Esq.,  and  Mr.  Edward  Arnold,  for 
Cranston. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Col.  Godfrey  Mallbone,  with  Messrs.  Thomas 
Wickham  and  Evan  Mallbone,  be,  and  they,  or  any  two  of 
them,  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  treat  with  Josiah 
Arnold,  Esq.,  about  the  land  at  Beaver  Tail,  upon  which  the 
light  house  stands,  in  order  to  purchase  the  same  of  him,  with 
as  much  land  more,  as  tho}^  shall  think  it  necessary,  for  the 
use  of  said  light  house  ;  that  when  they  shall  have  agreed, 
they  take  a  deed  of  him  unto  the  colony,  and  draw  money  out 
of  the  general  treasury,  to  pay  for  what  they  purchase ;  and 
wlien  the  said  Josiah  Arnold  hath  made  and  executed  such  a 
deed,  that  they  move  him  to  take  upon  himself  the  care  and 
charge  of  said  light  house  ;  but  if  he  will  not  sell  and  give  a 
deed  of  said  land  unto  the  colony,  that  the  committee  engage 
one  of  the  best  attorneys  in  this  colony,  to  defend,  at  the  colo- 
ny's expense,  against  the  said  Josiah  Arnold,  in  the  suit  he 
liath  commenced ;  and  that  the  said  committee,  or  any  two  of 
tlicm,  liave,  and  take  care  of  said  light  house  in  the  mean 
time,  and  until  the  end  of  the  General  Assembly's  next 
session. 

God  s:ive  the  Kins;. 


1755.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS:  433 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhli/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  RJiode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  the  second  Jlon- 
day  of  June,  1755. 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Mr.  Speaker  Cranston,  Jas.  Sheffield  and  Benjamin 
Nichols,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee, 
vpith  full  power  to  settle  in  the  best  manner  they  can,  the  contro- 
versy that  hath  so  long  subsisted  between  this  colony  and  Jah- 
leel  Brenton,  Esq.,  and  receive  of  him  what  they  shall  find  due 
to  this  government,  giving  a  full  discharge  in  the  colony's  be- 
half 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Jeremiah  Lippitt,  Daniel  Updike  and  James  Hon- 
eyman,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee, 
to  inquire  whether  this  colony  hath  any  right  unto  part  of  the 
French  schooner,  and  the  cargo  thereof,  lately  forfeited,  and  by 
the  admiralty  court  in  this  colony  condemned. 

An  Act  for  emitting  more  bills  upon  the  credit  of  this  colony, 
for  and  towards  the  carrying  on  the  part  by  this  government 
undertaken  in  the  present  expedition,  for  removing  encroach- 
ments made  by  the  French. 

Whereas,  it  is  very  evident,  that  the  sum  of  £60,000,  in  old 
tenor  bills,  ordered  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session^ 
in  Providence,  the  6th  day  of  March  last,  is  altogether  insuffi- 
cient to  defray  the  expense  necessarily  arising  upon  the  gov- 
ernment, with  respect  to  that  part  which  they  have  undertaken 
in  the  expedition  above  mentioned, — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  for  the  purpose  afore- 
VOL.  V.         55 


434  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

said,  the  sum  of  £40,000,  in  such  bills  as  are  above  mentioned, 
be  struck  off,  that  is  to  say  : 

One  half  from  the  large,  aud  the  remainder,  all  but  £10,000, 
from  the  small  plate,  lately  used  by  this  government ;  that  it 
be  emitted  upon  the  same  foundation,  and  sunk  in  the  same 
manner,  and  at  the  same  periods  of  time  with  the  said  £G0,- 
000  ;  that  the  small  plate  be  new  dated,  with  the  addition  of 
Crown  Point,  upon  the  back,  and  the  bills  signed  by  the  com- 
mittee that  signed  the  said  £60,000  ;  that  £10,000  of  the 
£40,000  be  struck  oft' at  one  time;  and  when  that  shall  be  ex- 
pended, £10,000  more,  and  so  on,  until  the  whole  £40,000  be 
emitted,  if  necessity  require  it. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof,  it  is  enacted,  that  His  Honor,  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, Daniel  Jenckes,  Esq.,  and  the  secretary,  be,  and  they 
are  hereby  constituted  a  committee,  to  represent  this  colony, 
aud  directed  and  fully  empowered,  to  demand,  sue  for  and  take 
into  possession,  this  colony's  part  of  the  French  schooner,  and 
her  cargo,  lately  forfeited  and  condemned  by  the  court  of  vice 
admiralty,  in  this  colony  ;  and  also  the  colony's  part  of  all  and 
every  other  vessel  or  vessels,  cargo  or  cargoes,  that  may  here- 
after be  forfeited. 

This  Assemldy  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  when  the  collectors  of  the  rate  made  by  this  colo- 
ny, return  their  warrants,  and  pay  in  the  money  collected,  if  it 
shall  appear  unto  the  general  treasurer,  that  any  sums  that 
shall  be  in  arrear,  could  not  have  been  collected,  he  shall  grant 
forth  a  new  warrant  or  warrants,  for  collecting  the  same,  re- 
turnable in  one  month. 

Whereas,  tliere  v/as  an  act  made  and  passed  by  the  General 
Assembly,  at  their  session  in  Providence,  upon  the  6th  day  of 
Afarcli,  last,  entitled  "  An  act  to  restrain  the  sending  provi- 
sions and  warlike  stores  to  Cape  Breton,  or  any  other  French 
port,  or  settlement,  in  North  America,  which  was  to  be,  and 
continue  in  force  until  the  first  Wednesday  of  May,  then  next 
ensuing;  which  said  act  was,  by  the  General  Assembly,  at 
their  session  last  month,  revived  and  made  to  take  effect,  and 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  435 

continue  in  force,  with  an  addition  thereunto,  forbidding  the 
collector,  and  every  one  under  him,  to  clear  out  any  vessel  or 
vessels  to  Cape  Breton,  on  any  pretence,  whatever ;  and  that 
the  same  act,  with  the  addition  thereto  made,  as  aforesaid, 
should  be,  and  continue  in  force  until  the  rising  of  this  Assem- 
bly ;  and  forasmuch,  as  the  occasion  of  making  and  continuing 
said  act,  with  the  addition,  aforesaid,  still  subsists, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  act  aforesaid,  with  the  clause 
thereto  added,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  continued  ;  and  shall 
have  and  take  force,  and  be  of  effect  to  all  intents  and  purpos- 
es, until  the  rising  of  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  next 
session. 

And  it  is  further  enacted,  that  this  act  be  forthwith  pub- 
lished by  the  secretary;  who  is  hereby  directed  to  send  a 
copy  unto  the  collector's  office. 

Both  of  which,  were  accordingly  done  on  the  12th  day  of 
this  instant  June,  by  THO.  WARD^  Secretary. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  John  Tillinghast,  Jeremiah  Lippitt,  Philip  Greene, 
Daniel  Jenckes  and  Job  Randall,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  hereby 
are  constituted  a  committee,  to  form  an  act  to  determine  and 
ascertain  in  what  manner  judgments  made,  and  to  be  made  up 
for  sterling  money,  gold,  silver,  or  paper  bills,  of  any  of  the 
neighboring  colonies,  shall  be  satisfied,  in  such  manner  that  the 
creditors  may  receive  equal  in  value  to  what  is  due,  and  no 
more. 

An    Act   for   further    continuing    the    present  committee  of 

war. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  last  session, 
granted  the  committee  of  war  full  power  and  authority, 
during  the  recess  of  the  General  Assembly,  to  act,  order,  do 
and  transact,  all  and  every  matter  and  matters,  thing  and 
things  necessary  and   convenient  to  be  ordered,  done,  or  exe. 


436  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

cutecl,  for  effectually  carrying  into  execution  the  part  this 
government  hath  undertaken  in  the  expedition  intended  to  re- 
move encroachments  made  by  the  French,  upon  the  territories 
of  our  sovereign  ;  and  that  as  fully  and  amply,  to  all  intents 
and  purposes,  as  the  General  Assembly  itself  could,  ought  or 
might,  were  it  actually  sitting ;  which  power  and  authority 
may  seem  to  have  been  abrogated  and  annulled  by  this  pres- 
ent session. 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  same  power  and 
authority  be,  and  hereby  is  further  continued  unto  the  said 
committee  of  war ;  and  they  shall  at  all  times  have  and  enjoy 
the  same,  during  the  recess  of  the  General  Assembly,  so  long 
as  the  present  expedition  shall  continue  ;  they  being  always 
accountable  for  their  conduct  unto  future  General  Assemblies. 
-     God  save  the  King. 

^^ccretar^J    Rohinson    to   the    Governor    and  ComjMny  of  Rhode 

Island. 

Whitehall,  19th  June,  1755. 

Gentlemen  : — Having  received  no  letters  from  you,  since  my  last,  of  the  16th  of 
April,  I  have  only  to  acquaint  you,  that  it  is  the  express  command  of  the  lords  jus- 
tices, that  you  should  not  draw  bills  upon  the  paymaster  general,  or  his  deputy,  or 
upon  any  other  person  ;  and  that  you  should  not  issue  any  warrants  for  money,  for 
tlic  discharge  of  such  expenses  as  have  been,  or  may  be  incurred,  on  account  of  the 
services  or  operations  to  be  performed  by  you,  or  in  any  respect  under  your  direc- 
tion, in  North  America. 

JJut  the  lords  justices  are  pleased  to  direct,  that,  upon  all  such  occasions,  you  shall 
apply  for  such  sums  of  money  as  shall  so  become  necessary,  and  are  not  properly 
chargeable  to  the  account  of  your  government,  to  Major  General  Braddock,  or  to 
the  commander  in  chief  of  His  Majesty's  forces  for  the  time  being,  in  North 
America. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

T.  ROBINSON. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

Secretar//  Powmill  to  the  Governor  and  Compawj  of  Rhode  Island. 

Whitehall,  July  thel5th,  1755. 
Gentlemen  : — It  being  for  His  Majesty's  service,  that  the  lords  commissioners  for 
trade  and  plantations  should  be  fully  informed  of  the  present  state  and  condition  of 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  437 

all  His  Majesty's  colonies  in  North  America,  I  am  directed  by  their  lordships  to 
send  you  the  enclosed  heads  of  inquiry,  and  to  desire  you  will  forthwith  transmit 
very  full  and  particular  answers  thereto ;  and  also  a  collection  of  the  laws  which 
have,  from  time  to  time,  been  passed,  and  are  now  in  force,  within  the  colony  un- 
der your  government. 

I  am,  gentleman,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

JOHN  POWNALL,  Sec'ry. 
To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 


Queries  relating  to  His  Majesty's  Plmiiations  on  the  continent  of 

America. 

1.  What  is  the  situation  of  the  colony  under  your  government,  the  nature  of  the 
government,  the  nature  of  the  country,  soil  and  climate,  the  latitudes  and  longi- 
tudes of  the  most  considerable  places  in  it,  or  the  neighboring  French  or  Spanish 
settlements  ?  Have  those  latitudes  and  longitudes  been  settled  by  good  observa- 
tions, or  only  by  common  computations,  and  from  whence  are  the  longitud'es  com- 
puted ? 

2.  What  are  the  reputed  boundaries,  and  are  any  parts  thereof  disputed,  what 
parts,  and  by  whom  ? 

3.  What  is  the  constitution  of  the  government  V 

4.  What  is  the  trade  of  the  colony,  the  number  of  shipping,  their  tonnage,  and 
the  number  of  sea-faring  men,  with  the  respective  increase  or  diminution  within 
ten  years  past. 

5.  What  quantity  and  sorts  of  British  manufactures  do  the  inhabitants  annually 
take  from  hence  V 

6.  What  trade  has  the  colony  under  your  government  with  any  foreign  planta- 
tions, or  any  part  of  Europe,  besides  Great  Britain  '?  How  is  that  trade  carried 
on  ?  What  commodities  do  the  people  under  your  government  send  to  or  receive 
from  foreign  plantations  ? 

7.  What  methods  are  there  used  te  prevent  illegal  trade,  and  are  the  same 
effectual  ? 

8.  What  is  the  natural  produce  of  the  country,  staple  commodities  and  manu- 
factures ?  and  what  value  thereof  in  sterling  money  may  you  annually  export  ? 

9.  What  mines  are  there  ? 

10.  What  is  the  number  of  inhabitants,  whites  and  blacks  ? 

11.  Are  the  inhabitants  increased  or  decreased  within  the  last  ten  yeai's,  how 
much,  and  for  what  reasons  ? 

1 2.  What  is  the  number  of  the  militia  ? 

13.  What  forts  and  places  of  defence  are  there  within  your  government,  and  in 
what  condition  V 

14.  What  number  of  Indians  have  you,  and  how  are  they  inclined? 

15.  What  is  the  strength  of  the  neighboring  Indians  ? 

16.  What  is  the  strength  of  your  neighboring  Europeans,  French  or 
Spaniards  ? 

17.  What  effect  have  the  French  or  Spanish   settlements  on  the  continent  of 


438  RECORDS    OP   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

America,  upon  His  Majesty's  plantations,  especially  upon  your  colony  ? 

18.  What  is  the  revenue  arising  within  your  government,  and  how  is  it  appro- 
priated ? 

19.  What  are  the  ordinary  and  extraordinary  expenses  of  your  government  ? 

20.  What  are  establishments,  civil  and  military,  within  your  government,  and 
by  what  authority  do  the  officers  hold  their  places  ? 

It  is  desired  that  a  return  may  be  made  to  these  queries  every  six  months,  that 
the  board  may  from  time  to  time  be  apprized  of  any  alterations  that  may  happen  in 
the  circumstances  of  }"our  ijovernment  ? 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemUi/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Ehode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Newport,  on  Monday, 
ihe  Wth  of  August,  1755. 

The  lion.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  three  companies,  of  fifty  men  each,  including  offi- 
cers, he  forthwith  raised,  and  supported  at  the  charge  of  this 
colony,  sent  and  joined  unto  the  companies  already  raised  and 
sent  by  this  government  unto  Albany,  upon  the  expedition 
against  Crown  Point;  and  Jeremiah  Lippitt,  Esq.,  the  at- 
torney general.  George  Brown,  Esq.,  and  the  secretary  be, 
and  they  are  hereby  constituted  a  committee,  to  draw  up  an 
act,  accordingly. 

"  We,  the  subscribers,  dissent  from  the  vote  for  raising  one 
hundred  and  fifty  men,  to  be  added  to  those  already  raised 
for  the  expedition  to  Crown  Point,  for  the  following  reason  : 

Because  we  arc  of  opinion,  that  the  four  hundred  men,  for- 
merly voted,  are  this  colony's  fall  quota ;  and  we  are  unwil- 
ling to  load  our  constituents  with  a  burthen  that  we  think 
exceeds  their  ability  to  bear. 

THOMAS  ROGERS,  EDWARD  SCOTT, 

BENJ.  ARNOLD,  IMMANUEL  NORTHUP, 

WILLIAM  SPENCER,  SA^^IUEL  DURFEE, 

PHILIP  GREENE,  of  West  Greenwich." 


1755.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  439 

Whereas,  James  Sheffield,  Esq.,  captain  of  Fort  George,  ex- 
hibited unto  this  Assembly,  an  account  by  him  charged 
against  the  government,  for  monies  by  him  disbursed  in  pro- 
viding sundry  necessaries  for  the  public  service  at  said  fort ; 
v^^hich  being  duly  examined, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  said  account  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  al- 
lowed ;  and  that  £41  6s.  id.,  the  amount  thereof,  be  paid  unto 
the  said  James  Sheffield,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  this  Assembly  is  informed  by  His  Honor,  the  Lieu- 
tenant Governor  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  that  it  has  been 
reported  that  vessels  have  sailed,  and  that  others  were  fitting 
out  from  this  government,  designed  to  go  among  the  French 
with  provisions  f — 

This  Assembly,  therefore,  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is 
voted  and  resolved,  that  John  Tillinghast,  Immanuel  Northup, 

*  From  Lieut  Governor  .Phijjs,  of  Jfassaekusetts,  to  Governor  Hop- 
kins,  of  Rhode  Island. 

Boston,  August  25,  1755. 

Sir  : — I  am  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  Your  Honor's  letter  of  the  23d  inst. 
I  could  not  avoid  acquainting  you  with  the  information  which  I  had  received,  re- 
lating to  the  transportation  of  provisions  to  the  French  ;  and  as  I  have  no  reason  to 
suppose  but  that  the  gentleman  who  gave  it  was  moved  to  do  it  by  a  concern  for 
the  public  service,  I  think  it  would  not  be  good  policy  to  subject  him  to  the  odium 
or  displeasure  of  any  persons  whatsoever;  for  at  this  critical  juncture,  too  great  en- 
couragement cannot  be  given  for  the  detecting  any  designs  to  supply  the  French. 
The  enclosed  letter,  with  the  state  of  the  town  and  garrison  of  Louisbouro-,  which 
I  have  just  received  from  Admiral  Boscawen,  confirms  me  in  this  opinion,  more 
fully  than  ever. 

I  do  not  apprehend  that  a  charge  against,  or  suspicion  of  any  particular  inhabit- 
ant can  be  construed  as  a  reflection  upon  the  colony  in  general ;  especially,  as  the 
government  have  shown  their  concern  to  prevent  any  such  measures. 

I  have  had  good  reason  to  suspect  persons  within  this  Province,  and  have  been 
obliged  to  make  inquiry  into  their  conduct,  and  lay  them  under  peculiar  resiraints  ; 
and  have  lately  been  informed  that  some  schemes  have  been  on  foot  to  carry  provi- 
sions from  Martha's  Vineyard,  or  some  other  parts  of  this  government,  near  the 
borders  of  yours.  If  any  such  designs  should  come  to  Your  Honor's  knowledge,  I 
doubt  not  you  will  give  me  immediate  information  of  them. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  pbedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

S.  PHIPS. 


440  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

Edward  Scott  and  William  Anthony,  Jr.,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they 
are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  make  strict  inquiry  into 
the  above  mentioned  affair,  and  make  report  to  this  Assembly, 
as  soon  as  may  be. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Obadiah  Brown,  James  Sheffield  and  Joseph  Rus- 
sell, Esqs.,  and  Mr.  Joseph  Lippitt,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  audit  the  accounts  of  the  committee  of 
war,  and  make  report  unto  this  Assembly  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible. 

An  Act  for  raising  and  supporting  three  companies,  of  fifty- 
men,  each,  including  officers,  to  join  the  troops  already 
sent  by  this  government  in  the  expedition  against  Crown 
Point. 

Whereas,  the  defeat  of  the  English  army  at,  or  near  the  Mo- 
naungahela,-^'  may  not  only  inspirit  the  French  and  their  In- 
dian allies,  but  give  them  an  opportunity  and  the  advantage  of 
detaching  such  a  part  of  their  forces  to  the  northward,  as  may 
render  the  success  of  the  expedition  under  Major  General  Shir- 
ley against  Niagara  precarious,  but  frustrate  that  which  this 
colony,  in  conjunction  with  some  other  of  His  Majesty's  gov- 
ernments in  North  America  are  engaged  in,  against  Crown 
Point,  and  thereby  bring  the  English  empire  in  those  parts, 
into  considerable  danger ;  for  preventing  whereof,  as  far  as 
lictli  in  the  power  of  this  colony, — 

13c  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  three  companies,  of  fifty  men, 
each,  including  officers,  be  forthwith  raised  and  supported  at 
the  expense  of  this  colony,  under  the  command  of  such  officers 
as  shall  be  chosen  and  appointed  for  that  purpose,  and  sent  by 
land  unto  Albany,  as  fast  as  the  companies  can  be  filled  up  by 


*  [This  refers  to  the  celebrated  defeat  of  the  English  forces  under  General  Brad- 
dock,  on  the  9th  Jul_y,  1  755,  when  an  attempt  was  made  to  invest  Fort  Du  Quesne, 
(now  Pittsburgh,)  the  stronghold  of  the  French.  Colonel,  afterwards  General 
Washington,  acted  on  this  occasion,  as  aid  to  General  Braddock. — J.  II.  B  ] 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  441 

order  of  His  Honor,  the  Governor ;  and  from  thence,  to  march 
with  the  utmost  expedition,  so  as  to  join  and  be  added  unto 
the  regiment  ah'eady  sent  by  this  government  against  Crown 
Point,  under  the  command  of  Col.  Christopher  Harris,  before 
any  action  is  entered  upon,  if  possible. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that' 
the  officers  to  be  chosen,  shall  have  and  receive  the  same 
wages,  and  enjoy  equal  immunities  and  advantages  with  those 
already  sent ;  and  every  soldier  to  be  raised,  the  same  wages 
bounties  and  immunities  in  every  respect,  as  were  granted  the 
soldiers  of  our  aforesaid  regiment. 

And  as  a  further  encouragement,  and  for  the  more  speedy 
raising  men  to  form  the  three  new  companies,  each  soldier 
shall  have  and  be  allowed,  upon  his  enlisting,  a  bounty  of 
£25,  old  tenor,  more  than  was  allowed  or  granted  unto  the  sol- 
diers first  raised  in  this  colony. 

And  to  the  end  that  there  may  be  a  sufficiency  in  the  gen- 
eral treasury,  for  raising  men,  paying  bounties,  supporting  the 
troops,  and  other  incident  charges, — 

Be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  sum  of  £20,000  be  forth- 
with made  and  struck  off  from  the  plates  which  were  used  at 
the  beginning  of  the  expedition,  and  signed  by  the  committee 
that  signed  those  bills,  and  deposited  with  the  general  treasu-- 
rer,  to  be  taken,  drawn  out  and  used  as  occasion  shall  require. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  bills  so  emitted,  shall, 
pursuant  to  act  of  Parliament,  be  called  in  and  sunk,  within 
the  space  or  term  of  two  years  from  the  passing  this  act,  by  a 
tax  to  be  assessed  and  levied  upon  the  inhabitants  of  this  col- 
ony, in  the  same  manner  as  the  tax  for  sinking  the  £60,000, 
ordered  to  be  made  and  struck  off  by  the  General  Assembly, 
in  Marcb  last. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  sum  of  £5,000,  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the 
general  treasury,  towards  carrying  on  the  building  of  Fort 
George  ;  and  in  case  the  town  of  Newport  shall,  on  their  own 
proper  account,  grant  the  sum  of  £5,000  towards  building  said 

VOL.  V.         56 


442  RECORDS   OP   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

fort,  that  £5,000  more  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general 
treasury  for  the  purpose  aforesaid,  to  be  added  unto  the  first 
mentioned  £5,000. 

An  Act  to  prohibit  provisions,  or  any  intelligence  from  being 

carried  to  Cape  Breton. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  if  any  master  of  a  vessel  or  oth- 
ers, shall  carry  or  convey  any  cattle,  sheep  or  provisions,  or 
warlike  stores  of  any  kind  whatever,  to  the  island  of  Cape 
Breton,  or  any  other  French  port,  or  to  any  part  of  Newfound- 
land ;  or  shall  carry  or  convey  any  intelligence  to  said  island 
of  Cape  Breton,  or  to  the  French  in  any  other  place,  of  the  ex- 
peditions carrying  on  in  America,  against  the  French  and  In- 
dians, on  due  conviction  thereof,  such  offender  or  offenders 
shall  stand  in  the  pillory  for  the  space  of  half  an  hour,  and 
have  his  or  their  ears  cut  off,  and  pay  as  a  fine,  for  the  use  of 
the  colony,  £5,000;  and  shall  be  also  for  ever  after  rendered 
infamous. 

And  to  the  end  that  no  opportunity  may  be  given  to  evil 
minded  persons  to  contract  for,  and  to  export  any  provision  or 
warlike  stores,  contrary  to  the  true  intent  and  meaning  of  this 
act,  all  His  Majesty's  peace  officers  in  general,  are  hereby  em- 
powered and  strictly  required,  to  take  notice  of,  and  examine 
into  the  conduct  of  all  strangers,  and  others  who  they  have  any 
reason  to  believe  are  about  to  do  any  thing  contrary  to  this  act ; 
and  if  it  shall  appear  to  them  needful,  to  secure  any  suspected 
person  till  he  enter  into  recognizance,  with  good  sureties,  to  do 
nothing  contrary  to  this  act ;  or  if  strangers,  and  can  give  no 
good  account  of  themselves  and  business,  forthwith  to  depart 
tliis  colony ;  and  this  act  shall  be  forthwith  publish^,  and  be 
in  force. 

Whereas,  the  act  of  the  General  Assembly,  made  in  March 
last,  entitled  "  An  act  to  restrain  the  sending  provisions  and 
warlike  stores,  to  Cape  Breton,  or  any  other  port  or  settlement 
belonging  to  the  French,  in  North  America,"  and  continued  by 


I 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  443 

several  subsequent  acts,  until  the  rising  of  this  Assembly,  will 
necessarily  expire  without  a  further  continuance  ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  above  mentioned 
act,  and  every  clause  therein  contained,  with  all  such  additions 
as  have  since  at  any  time,  been  thereunto  made,  be,  and  hereby 
is  continued,  and  shall  have  full  force  and  effect,  until  such 
time  as  this  Assembly  shall  otherwise  order. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  no  provisions  of  any  kind 
whatever,  fish  only  excepted,  shall  be  exported  out  of  this  col- 
ony, in  any  ship  or  vessel,  more  than  is  barely  sufficient  for 
victualling  such  ship's  company  for  the  intended  voyage ;  and 
that  if  any  person  or  persons  shall  presume  to  ship  or  put  on 
board  any  ship  or  vessel  a  greater  quantity  of  any  kind  of  pro- 
visions than  is  above  mentioned,  the  offender  or  offenders,  con- 
trary to  the  true  intent  and  meaning  of  this  act,  shall  forfeit 
all  such  provisions,  together  with  the  ship  or  vessel  on  board  of 
which  they  are  put  or  laded ;  and  all  the  other  goods  on  board 
such  ship  or  vessel,  one  half  to  the  use  of  the  colony,  and  the 
other  half  to  him  who  shall  inform  and  sue  for  the  same. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  and  it  is  the  true  intent  and  meaning 
of  this  act,  that  nothing  herein  contained  shall  be  construed  to 
prohibit  the  exporting  from  this  colony  any  cheese,  cattle,  sheep, 
hogs,  or  fowls,  being  alive,  with  grain  sufficient  for  their  support 
on  the  voyage,  to  any  English  port,  Newfoundland  excepted ; 
provided  bond  be  given  agreeably  to  the  above  mentioned  law, 
nor  to  obstruct  the  transporting  provisions  of  any  kind  froJtn  this 
colony  to  Albany,  for  the  use  of  the  colony's  forces,  gone,  or 
or  to  be  sent  on  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point ;  and 
this  act  shall  be  forthwith  published,  and  be  in  force. 

This,  and  the  preceding  act,  were  published  according  to  or- 
der, the  15th  day  of  August,  1755. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Thomas  Cranston,  James  Sheffield  and  Benja- 
min Nichols,  Esqs.,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  be,  and  they 
are  hereby  appointed  and  fully  empowered  to  settle  with  Jah- 
leel  Brenton,  Esq.,  the  controversy  which  hath  so  long  subsist- 


444  KECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

ed  between  the  colony  and  the  said  Jahleel  Brenton,  in  the 
best  manner  they  can,  and  receive  what  shall  appear  due  unto 
the  colony  from  him,  giving  a  full  discharge  in  the  colony's 
behalf 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  following  vessels  shall  be,  and  hereby  are 
stopped  from  going  to  sea,  until  further  orders,  to  wit : 

Sloop  Hannah,  Jonathan  Sheldon,  master,  for  Barbadoes, 
with  one  hundred  and  twenty  sheep,  and  one  hundred  geese. 

Sloop  Penguin,  Job  Snell,  for  Africa,  one  hundred  and  twen- 
ty casks,  containing  flour,  beef,  pork  and  butter. 

Sloop  Leopard,  Edmund  Jacklyn,  for  Barbadoes,  two  casks 
of  rice,  forty  barrels  of  beef  and  pork,  and  twenty  barrels  of 
flour. 

Bark  Maggot,  John  Lance,  for  Barbacloes,  forty  barrels  of 
beef  and  pork,  sixty  sheep  and  seven  firkins  of  butter. 

Sloop  Molly,  William  Earl,  for  Jamaica,  thirty  barrels  of 
flour,  eighty  sheep,  and  five  barrels  of  ham. 

Sloop  Herring,  Mathew  Cozzens,  for  Jamaica,  forty  barrels 
of  flour,  twenty  sheep,  three  tons  of  bread,  five  hundred  weight 
of  cheese,  twenty  casks  of  rice,  and  one  hundred  geese. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  general  treasurer  of  this  colony,  and  the  keep- 
er of  the  office  of  the  grand  committee,  prosecute  all  the  defi- 
cient collectors  of  the  rate  lately  assessed  upon  the  inhabit- 
ants of  this  colony,  in  ten  days  after  this  present  Assembly 
shall  rise,  to  one  or  more  special  Courts,  as  necessity  may  re- 
quire, to  be  held  in  the  respective  counties  where  the  rates  are 
collected;  and  that  all  said  prosecutors  in  behalf  of  the  colony, 
have  all  the  benefits  and  advantages  of  the  law,  that  enables 
the  justices  of  the  inferior  courts  of  common  picas  to  hold  spe- 
cial courts  on  certain  occasions. 

Whereas,  there  are  six  vessels  in  the  harbor  of  Newport, 
cleared  out  for  foreign  parts,  having  provisions  on  board,  as 
appears  by  a  list  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly,  by  the  col- 
lector,— 

This  Assembly  therefore,  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted 


1755.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  445 

and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of  war  be,  and  they  are  here- 
by authorized  and  fully  empowered  to  take  and  detain,  for  the 
use  of  the  government,  so  much  of  those  provisions  as  they 
shall  deem  necessary  to  supply  the  troops  by  this  Assembly 
ordered  to  be  raised,  and  then  give  orders  unto  the  ctiptain  of 
the  fort  to  permit  those  vessels  to  go  to  sea. 

Whereas,  Jean  Joyeux,  Hubert  Castendel  and  John  Gazan, 
subjects  of  the  French  king,  represented  unto  this  Assembly, 
that  they  have,  for  several  years  last  past,  resided  by  times  at 
Newport,  whither  they  came  with  no  other  view  than  to  trade 
with  the  English,  in  a  friendly  manner ;  that  their  last  coming 
was  purely  to  settle  their  affairs,  pay  the  debts  they  had  con- 
tracted, and  then  return  unto  their  respective  habitations ;  but 
that  soon  after  their  arrival,  they  were  confined  to  their  lodg- 
ings, and  remained  so  ever  since,  which  hath  put  it  out  of 
their  power  to  settle  their  affairs ;  that  during  their  confine- 
ment, they  have  preferred  two  petitions  unto  the  committee  of 
war,  begging  leave  to  go  abroad,  but  unto  such  parts  of  the 
town  only  as  their  business  should  necessarily  call  them  ;  that 
the  said  committee  have  not  yet  thought  proper  to  grant  the 
liberty  desired  ;  whereupon,  they  prayed  this  Assembly  to 
grant  them  Avhat  they  requested  of  the  committee  of  war ;  on 
consideration  whereof, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  petitioners  have  twenty  days  after  the  rising 
of  this  Assembly,  allowed  them,  in  order  to  settle  their  ac- 
counts ;  that  they  be,  during  that  time,  under  the  inspection 
of  the  committee  of  war,  and  then  to  depart  this  colony  ;  and 
in  case  they  shall  not  depart  before  nor  at  said  time,  that  they 
be  sent  away  by  the  committee  of  war ;  and  that  all  other  sub- 
jects of  the  French  king,  within  this  colony,  depart  the  same 
within  twenty  days,  or  otherwise  be  sent  away  also  by  the 
committee  of  war. 

And  it  is  also  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  collector 
of  His  Majesty's  customs  in  Newport,  be,  and  hereby  is  direct- 
ed and  empowered  to  oblige  every  master  of  a  vessel  bound  to 


446  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1755. 

sea,  to  cany  away  as  many  of  said  Frenchmen  as  the  commit- 
tee of  war  shall  think  proper,  before  he  clear  such  vessel  out. 

The  gentlemen  that  Avere  appointed  to  in(iuire  into  the 
grounds  of  the  rumor  that  vessels  had  sailed  laden,  and  others 
fitting  oul  from  this  colony,  designed  to  go  among  the  French 
with  provisions,  presented  what  follows,  to  wit: 

"August  13,  1755. 

To  the  House  of  Magistrates.  Gentlemen  : — Whereas,  this 
Assembly  is  informed  by  His  Honor,  the  Lieutenant  Governor 
of  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  that  it  has  been  re- 
ported that  vessels  have  sailed,  and  others  were  fitting  out 
fioui  this  government,  designed  to  go  among  the  French,  with 
provisions ; — 

It  is  therefore  resolved,  that  Immanuel  Northup,  Edward 
Scott  and  William  Anthony,  Jr.,  Esqs.,  together  with  such  oth- 
ers as  shall  be  appointed  by  the  upper  house,  be  a  committee 
to  make  strict  inquiry  into  the  above  mentioned  affair,  and 
make  report  to  this  Assembly  as  soon  as  may  be. 

Voted  and  passed,  per  order,     JOSIAH  LYNDON,  Cl'k." 

Read,  14th  of  August,  in  the  upper  house,  and  concurred, 
with  the  addition  of  John  Tillinghast,  Esq.,  of  this  house. 

By  order,  THOMAS  WARD,  Secretary. 

Report  of  the  Committee. 

We,  the  subscribers,  having  made  strict  inquir_v  into  the  affair  mentioned  in  the 
above  vote,  do  report : 

That  John  Lavigne,  master  of  the  sloop  Kanger,  bound  to  Antigua,  one  of  the 
vessels  that  sailed  in  company  with  the  snow  in  which  the  French  Marquis  em- 
barked, has  made  oath,  tliat  he  had  on  board  only  three  barrels  of  pork,  one  barrel 
of  beef,  one  barrel  of  mutton,  and  three  tierces  of  bread  ;  that  he  intended  to  take 
on  board  twelve  sheep,  and  three  shoats  ;  and  that  he  woiild  not  lade,  or  suffer  to 
be  laden  on  board  said  vessel,  for  the  intended  voyage,  after  clcariug  out,  any 
other  provisions  than  the  above  mentioned,  as  appears  by  a  cerlificate  in  the  col- 
lector's ollicc,  dated  July  12,  A.  D.  1755,  signed  by  Edward  Scott,  justice,  &c. ; 
.-Mid  l\Jr.  John  Collins,  sole  owner  of  said  sloop,  has,  on  engagement  before  us,  de- 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  447 

clared,  that  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge,  there  were  no  more  provisions  on  board, 
than  the  master  had  given  an  account  of. 

That  Job  Easton,  master  of  the  sloop  Bonetta,  cleared  out  for  Antigua,  the 
other  vessel  that  sailed  in  company  with  the  above  mentioned  snow,  has  made  oath, 
that  he  had  no  more  provisions,  nor  would  take  any  more  on  board  said  vessel  than 
are  absolutely  necessary  for  said  voyage,  as  appears  by  a  certificate  in  the  office, 
aforesaid,  dated  July  12,  1755,  signed  by  Joseph  Sylvester,  justice  of  the  peace  ", 
and  Messrs.  Jonathan  Thurston  and  John  Jepson,  owners  of  the  said  sloop,  and  Mr. 
Godfrey  Malbone,  Jr.,  who  chartered  one  half  of  her,  have  made  oath  before  us? 
that  all  the  provisions  on  board  said  sloop,  were  three  barrels  and  one  half  of  pork, 
three  barrels  and  one  half  of  beef,  three  hogsheads  and  seven  barrels  of  bread,  one 
hundred  and  sixty-nine  weight  of  bacon,  six  sheep,  and  one  half  bushel  of  peas. 

That  yimon  Rhodes,  John  Waite,  John  Updike,  and  Jeremiah  Wilcox,  had 
f  leared  out  with  provisions,  being  live  stock,  for  Halifax  ;  all  of  whom  had  given 
bond,  pursuant  to  act  of  Assembly ;  and  that  said  bonds  were  shown  to  us  by  the 
collector,  who  assured  us  that  all  the  masters  of  vessels  cleared  out  in  his  oflice, 
with  moi'e  provisions  than  were  necessary  for  their  victualling  on  the  proposed 
voyage,  had  given  the  like  bonds  ;  and  that  we  are  of  ojjinion,  that  the  report  of  ves- 
sels' having  sailed  from  this  port  with  provisions  designed  for  the  French,  is  abso- 
lutely without  foundation. 

JOHN  TILLINGHAST,  EDWARD  SCOTT, 

IMMANUEL  NORTHUP,  WILLIAM  ANTHONY,  JR. 

Newport,  16th  August,  1755. 

And  now  this  Assembly,  having  duly  examined  and  consid- 
ered the  foregoing  report, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
same  be,  and  is  hereby  accepted. 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  in  case  an  escape  is  made  by  any 
prisoner,  after  bond  given  to  the  sheriff,  and  a  suit  brought  for 
the  benefit  of  the  creditor,  pursuant  to  an  act,  entitled  "  An  act 
for  the  ease  of  prisoners  for  debt ;"  in  all  such  cases,  the  dam- 
ages to  be  made  up  by  the  court  whereunto  such  suit  is 
brought,  shall  be  thirty  per  cent,  upon  the  principal  sum  and 
costs. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  if  any  of  the  commissioned  offi- 
cers by  this  Assembly  appointed  to  go  with  the  three  companies 
ordered  to  be  raised  and  sent  as  an  additional  force  against 
Crown  Point,  shall  die  or  refuse  to  take  his  commission,  the 
committee  of  war  shall,  and  hereby  are  authorized   and  fully 


448  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

empowered  to  appoint  another  or  others  in  his  or  their  stead, 
that  shall  happen  to  die  or  refuse. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  committee  of  war  be,  and  hereby  is  clothed  with,  and  shall 
have,  take  and  exercise,  in  the  recess  of  the  General  Assem- 
bly, all  and  singular  the  power  and  authority  that  was  given 
or  granted  them  by  the  act  passed  at  the  last  session,  for 
their  further  continuance ;  they  being  always  accountable  for 
their  conduct  unto  future  Assemblies. 

God  save  the  King. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Asscmhli/,  held  for  ihe  Colomj  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantaiions,  at  Neivport,  the  Sth  of 
iSejjtonher,  1755. 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  company  of  soldiers  raised  in 
this  colony,  under  the  command  of  Capt.  John  Whiting,  tow- 
ards reinforcing  the  army,  gone  against  Crown  Point,  be  forth- 
with embarked  and  sent  to  Albany,  on  board  the  transport 
taken  up  in  the  government's  service,  for  carrying  provisions, 
&c.,  to  that  place  ;  and  that  they  proceed  from  Albany  to  join 
the  army,  in  the  same  manner  with  the  company  that  marched 
from  Providence  ;  and  that  the  committee  of  war  put  on  board 
said  sloop,  all  such  deserters  as  are,  or  shall  be  taken  up  be- 
fore the  departure  of  said  sloop,  rendering  them  unto  the  care 
of  the  said  captain,  in  order  to  their  being  carried  unto  the  sev- 
eral companies  to  which  they  belong  respectively,  and  deliv- 
ered unto  the  captains  of  the  same. 

Be  it   enacted  by  the  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 


1755.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  449 

thority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  four  companies,  to  consist  of 
fifty  men  each^  including  officers,  be  forthwith  raised  and  sub- 
sisted at  the  charge  of  the  colony,  to  be  added  unto  those  al- 
ready raised  and  ordered  to  be  raised  for  the  expedition  against 
Crown  Point ;  and  that  when  said  companies  are  raised,  they 
be  sent  and  joined  unto  the  regiment  of  this  government,  under 
the  command  of  Col.  Christopher  Harris  ;  and  that  an  act  be 
drawn  up  accordingly,  by  a  committee  to  be  appointed  by  both 
houses. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Jeremiah  Lippitt,  William  Richmond,  Daniel 
Jenckes  and  Daniel  Updike,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  prepare  a  bill  for  raising  four  compa- 
nies towards  a  reinforcement  of  the  army  gone  against  Crown 
Point,  agreeably  to  the  vote  of  this  Assembly  made  and  passed 
for  that  purpose. 

An  Act  for  raising  two  hundred  men  to  reinforce  the  English 

army  gone  against  Crown  Point. 

Whereas,  by  advices  lately  received  from  Major  General 
Johnson,  commander  in  chief  of  the  provincial  forces  employed 
in  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point,  it  appears  that  the 
French  are  in  a  condition  to  bring  a  much  greater  number  of 
men  to  oppose  that  enterprise,  than  the  colonies  had  at  that 
time  raised  for  carrying  it  on,  which  makes  it  absolutely  ne- 
cessary that  large  reinforcements  be  speedily  sent  unto  our 
army ;  and  as  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  and  the 
colony  of  Connecticut,  have  already  ordered  very  large  num- 
bers of  men  to  be  immediately  raised  and  employed  in  that 
service ;  and  this  colony  is  willing  also  to  contribute  in  propor- 
tion to  their  ability,  towards  so  necessary  a  measure, — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  two  hundred  men  be 
forthwith  raised  in  this  colony,  to  be  disposed  into  four  compa- 
nies of  fifty  men  each,  including  officers ;  and  as  soon  as  the 
said  companies  are  respectively  full,  the  committee  of  war  im- 
mediately cause  them  to  move  forward  and  join  the  regiment  al- 

voL.  V.         57 


450  KECOEDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE  ISLAND  [1755. 

ready  raised,  and  now  in  the  service,  under  the  command  of 
Col.  Christopher  Harris. 

And  be  it  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  the  sol- 
diers so  to  be  raised,  shall,  upon  their  enlistment,  receive  each 
man  a  bounty  of  £40,  and  a  good  blanket,  gratis  ;  or,  in  lieu 
thereof,  £8,  if  he  furnish  himself  with  one ;  and  the  officers 
shall  have  and  receive  the  following  monthly  wages,  viz. : 

Every  captain,  £100 ;  every  lieutenant,  £60  ;  every  en- 
sign, £50 ;  every  sergeant  and  drummer,  £20 ;  every  corporal, 
£18  ;  and  each  common  soldier,  £16 ;  all  which  wages  and  boun- 
ties, shall  be  paid  and  given  in  old  tenor  bills  of  public  credit ; 
moreover,  every  officer  and  soldier  shall  have  one  month's  pay 
advanced  to  him  before  he  marches,  and  enjoy  the  same  immuni- 
ties and  advantages  which  the  soldiers  already  raised  in  this 
colony  are  allowed  by  the  former  acts. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
officers  shall  be  forthwith  chosen  to  command  the  said  four 
companies ;  and  in  case  any  of  them  when  chosen,  shall  refuse 
to  take  his  office,  or  neglect  to  enter  upon  the  duty  of  enlist- 
ino-  men  forthwith,  or  shall  die,  that  the  committee  of  war  shall 
appoint  another  or  others  in  his  or  their  stead ;  and  all  and 
every  of  said  officers  shall  be  commissioned  by  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  in  the  same  manner  and  form  as  the  former  officers 
were ;  and  shall  use  their  best  endeavors  to  enlist  as  many 
able  bodied  men  as  possible  in  any  part  of  the  colony,  for  the 
making  up  their  respective  companies,  until  the  22d  day  of 
this  instant  September,  when  they  shall  make  a  proper  and  ex- 
act return  of  their  enlistment  unto  the  committee  of  war ;  and 
if  it  shall  happen  that  the  companies  are  not  filled  up  at  said 
time,  the  committee  of  w^ar  shall  forthwith  cause  the  number  of 
men  wanted  to  be  immediately  impressed,  according  to  the 
following  proportion  as  near  as  may  be,  viz. : 

The  regiment  of  the  county  of  Newport,  seventy. 

The  regiment  of  the  county  of  Providence,  fifty-five. 

The  regiment  of  the  county  of  Kings  county,  forty-eight. 

The  regiment  of  the  county  of  Kent,  twenty-seven. 

Nevertheless,  of  the   twentv  men  already  enlisted,  sixteen 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  451 

shall  be  assigned  to  the  county  of  Kings  county,  and  four  to 
the  county  of  Kent,  as  part  of  their  proportion  ;  and  when  re- 
turn is  made  of  the  number  of  men  necessary  to  complete  the 
said  four  companies,  the  committee  of  war,  or  any  two  of  them, 
shall  forthwith  give  orders  to  the  respective  field  officers  of  the 
regiments  aforesaid,  to  cause  an  impress  to  be  made  immedi- 
ately, as  near  as  may  be  in  equal  proportion,  according  to  the 
number  of  soldiers  in  the  several  trained  bands  in  their  respec- 
tive regiments ;  and  this  proportion  shall  be  settled  by  the 
field  officers  in  each  regiment,  according  to  the  muster  rolls  of 
the  several  companies,  which  they  shall  cause  to  be  laid  before 
them,  and  sworn  unto  by  the  clerks ;  and  thereupon,  the  prin- 
cipal field  officer,  in  each  regiment,  shall  issue  warrants,  direct- 
ed to  the  several  captains  in  his  regiment,  requiring  them 
forthwith  to  cause  to  be  impressed  the  number  of  able  bodied 
men  respectively  deficient,  as  aforesaid ;  and  requiring  all  the 
other  officers  and  soldiers  in  his  regiment,  to  be  aiding  and 
assisting  therein  ;  and  officers  that  shall  refuse  or  omit  to  per- 
form the  duties  hereby  enjoined,  shall  incur  the  following  for- 
feitures, to  be  recovered  in  bills  of  credit,  of  the  old  tenor,  by 
bill,  plaint,  or  information,  in  any  court  of  record,  within  this 
colony,  viz. : 

Every  field  officer,  £500  ;  every  captain,  lieutenant  and  en- 
sign, £200  ;  and  every  sergeant  and  corporal,  £100 ;  and  im- 
mediately after  the  number  deficient  is  impressed,  return  shall 
be  made  unto  the  committee  of  war. 

And  every  man  impressed,  as  aforesaid,  shall  be  obliged  to 
attend  the  King's  service,  in  the  said  expedition,  upon  the 
penalty  of  £100,  old  tenor,  to  be  recovered  as  aforesaid;  or 
shall  find  a  good  able  bodied  man  to  attend  the  service  in  his 
stead  ;  and  every  man  impressed,  as  aforesaid,  shall  afterwards 
have  liberty  to  enlist  as  a  volunteer ;  all  which  forfeitures  and 
penalties  made  and  recovered,  as  aforesaid,  shall  be  disposed  of 
to  the  colony's  use  ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  forth- 
with issue  warrants,  requiring  the  field  officers  to  conform 
themselves  unto  this  act. 

And  be  it  further  enacted   by  the   authority  aforesaid,  that 


452  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE  ISLAND  [1755. 

all  enlisting  officers  shall,  upon  the  day  appointed  for  making 
return  of  their  enlistments,  report  the  number  of  small  arms 
wanted,  unto  the  committee  of  war,  who  shall  hire  or  give  or- 
ders for  impressing  them,  according  to  their  discretion. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  in  case  there  shall  be  at  the 
time  of  marching,  any  deficiency  in  the  number  of  soldiers,  by 
sickness,  death  or  desertion,  the  committee  of  war  shall  cause 
it  to  be  supplied  in  manner  aforesaid,  according  to  their  discre- 
tion ;  and  shall  have  power,  if  any  be  not  duly  qualified  for  the 
service  when  impressed,  to  grant  him  or  them,  a  release,  and 
cause  another  or  others  to  be  taken  in  his  or  their  stead. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
all  who  have  deserted  from  the  army  shall  be  forgiven,  in  case 
they  surrender  themselves  unto  the  committee  of  war,  and 
again  return  to  their  duty  before  the  troops  by  this  act  order- 
ed to  be  raised,  shall  move  forward ;  and  hereof,  the  committee 
of  war  shall  forthwith  set  up  public  advertisements. 

And  to  the  end  that  there  may  be  a  sufficiency  in  the  gen- 
eral treasury  for  raising  said  men,  paying  the  bounties  and 
defraying  other  incident  charges, — 

Be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  sum  of  £Q  0,000^  old  tenor, 
be  forthwith  struck  off  from  the  plates  before  used  in  this  ex- 
pedition, and  signed  by  the  committee  that  signed  the  former 
bills,  and  lodged  in  the  treasurer's  office,  to  be  drawn  out  by 
the  committee  of  war,  and  used  as  occasion  may  require. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  bills  so  emitted,  shall, 
pursuant  to  act  of  Parliament,  be  called  in  and  sunk  within 
the  space  of  two  years  from  the  passing  this  act,  by  a  tax,  to 
be  assessed  and  levied  upon  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  money  last  made  for  carrying  on  this 
expedition,  is  to  be  called  in  and  sunk. 

An  Act  to  prevent  the  desertion  of  the  forces  raised  and  to  be 
raised  in  this  colony,  for  the  expedition  against  Crown 
Point. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  all  magistrates,  justices  of  the 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  453 

peace,  sheriffs  and  their  deputies,  all  constables,  and  other  civil 
officers,  and  all  military  officers,  and  all  other  persons  whatever, 
shall  have  power  and  authority  to  apprehend  any  person  or 
persons  in  the  King's  service,  that  have  or  shall  desert  there- 
from, and  cause  him  or  them  to  be  committed  to  any  of  His 
Majesty's  jails  in  this  colony,  in  order  to  be  sent  by  some  one 
of  the  committee  of  war  unto  the  army,  if  the  same  can  be 
done  ;  but  if  not,  such  deserter  or  deserters  shall  be  imprison- 
ed until  the  return  of  the  forces,  and  then  to  be  tried  and  pun- 
ished for  such  desertion,  by  martial  law ;  and  all  deserters  from 
the  aforesaid  army,  that  were  enlisted  in  the  neighboring  govern- 
ments, shall,  if  found  in  this  colony,  be  apprehended  in  like 
manner,  and  sent  to  the  governments  where,  they  respectively 
belong. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
whoever  shall  receive,  or  entertain  in  his,  her,  or  their  house, 
any  such  deserter,  or  deserters,  or  shall  employ  him  or  them  to 
labor,  or  give,  or  sell  him  or  them  any  victuals,  or  other  sus- 
tenance, or  shall  conceal,  or  neglect  to  apprehend  and  deliver 
him  or  them  to  the  authority,  if  in  his,  her,  or  their  power, 
knowing  such  person  or  persons  to  have  been  guilty  of  deser- 
tion, as  aforesaid,  they  shall,  for  every  such  offence,  forfeit  the 
sum  of  £60,  old  tenor,  unto  and  for  the  use  of  this  colony  ;  to 
be  recovered  in  any  court  of  record,  by  bill,  plaint,  or  infor- 
mation. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  no 
person  or  persons  appearing  in  a  common  character,  shall  be 
permitted  to  travel  within  this  colony,  save  in  the  county 
where  such  traveller  or  travellers  actually  dwell,  without  a 
pass,  under  the  hand  of  a  justice  of  the  peace  or  some  superior 
officer,  in  this  or  the  neighboring  governments. 

And  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  is  desired  to  correspond  with 
the  governors  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  and  Connecticut,  and 
agree  with  them  upon  some  method  of  procuring  constant  in- 
telligence from  the  army  gone  against  Crown  Point. 

Both  houses  being  resolved  into  a  grand  committee,  the  fol- 


454  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1755. 

lowing  officers  were  chosen  to  command  the  four  companies 
now  ordered  to  be  raised,  as  a  further  reinforcement  of  the 
army,  now  gone  against  Crown  Point,  under  the  command  of 
Major  General  Johnson,  to  wit : 

Daniel  Bosworth,  captain  ;  Christopher  Hargil,  lieutenant ; 
and  William  Nichols  ensign  of  the  first  (which  will  be  the 
eighth)  company  in  the  service  of  this  colony,  for  the  expedi- 
tion, aforesaid. 

John  Potter,  Jr.,  captain ;  William  Richmond,  Jr.,  lieuten- 
ant ;  and  James  Tew,  Jr.,  ensign,  of  the  second  (which  will  be 
the  ninth)  company,  and  is  to  be  raised  part  in  the  county  of 
Newport,  and  part  in  the  county  of  Kent. 

Ptobert  Hopkins,  captain  :  Ebenezer  Cahoone,  lieutenant ; 
and  Giles  Russel,  ensign  of  the  third  (which  will  be  the  tenth) 
company. 

Barzillai  Richmond,  captain  ;  Ebenezer  Jenckes,  lieutenant ; 
and  Nathaniel  Peck,  ensign,  of  the  fourth  (which  will  be  the 
eleventh)  company,  and  is  to  be  raised  in  the  county  of  Provi- 
dence. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  general  treasurer  forthwith  raise  £5,000  of  the 
colony's  money,  which  he  has  let  to  Jeoffrey  Watson,  Esq.,  and 
deliver  the  same  unto  the  committee  appointed  to  re-build  Fort 
George,  agreeably  to  the  act  of  the  last  Assembly. 

Whereas,  Joseph  Scott,  Esq.,  sheriff  of  the  county  of  New- 
port, exhibited  unto  this  Assembly,  an  account  by  him  charged 
against  the  government,  for  his  time,  expenses  and  horse  hire 
in  apprehending  Peleg  Barker,  of  Tiverton,  searching  his 
house  for  counterfeit  bills,  and  bringing  him  to  Newport,  in 
order  to  an  examination  ;  and  for  money  disbursed,  in  paying 
two  men  for  their  time  and  horse  hire,  to  aid  him  in  that  mat- 
tor  ;  and  for  his  time,  horse  hire  and  expenses  in  two  journeys 
to  Mendon,  to  apprehend  people  that  had  been  concerned  in 
counterfeiting  bills  of  credit  emitted  by  this  colony,  for  money 
paid  unto  officers  and  sundry  other  persons  that  assisted  him 
therein  ;  lor  searching  after,  and  finding  the  plates,  and  for  his 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  455 

expenses  in  putting  up  the  pillory  for,  and  taking  it  down, 
after  cutting  the  ears  of  Joshua  Reed,  and  treating  his  aid, 
&c. ;  which  being  duly  examined, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  said  account  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  al- 
lowed ;  and  that  £125  Qs.,  the  amount  thereof,  be  paid  the 
said  Joseph  Scott,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Whereas,  Capt.  Job  Bennett,  Jr.,  exhibited  unto  this  Assem- 
bly, an  account  by  him  charged  against  the  government,  for 
his  time,  horse  hire  and  expenses,  when  after  persons  suspect- 
ed to  have  been  concerned  in  counterfeiting  the  Crown  Point 
<£16  bills,  emitted  by  this  colony ;  and  in  apprehending  Jo- 
seph Monroe  and  Joshua  Reed,  for  money  advanced  to  sun- 
dry officers  who  assisted  him  in  that  business ;  and  for  money 
advanced,  to  have  the  pillory  put  up  for,  and  taken  down,  after 
cropping  Monroe,  Ide  and  Win,  and  treating  his  aid  ;  which 
being  duly  examined, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  said  account  be,  and  the  same  is  h(!reby  al- 
lowed ;  and  that  £52  7s.,  the  amount  thereof,  be  paid  the  said 
Job  Bennett,  Jr.,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  every  master  of  a  vessel 
that  may  befired  at  by  Fort  George,  shall  pay  £5,  in  old  tenor 
bills  of  credit,  for  every  shot,  to  be  applied  unto  the  use  of  the 
colony ;  and  upon  neglect  or  refusal  to  pay  the  same,  shall  be 
subject  to  a  prosecution  from  the  captain  of  the  fort,  for  the 
time  being,  agreeably  to  the  set  forms  now  used  in  the  courts 
of  law,  in  this  colony. 

God  save  the  King. 

Governor  /Shirk?/  to  Major  General  Johnson. 

Camp  at  Oswego,  Sept.  19th,  1755. 
Sir  : — Three  day?  ago,  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Stevenson,  of  Albany,  en- 
closing a  copy  of  the  general  letter,  which  you  have  sent  to  Lieutenant  Governor 
Phipps,  and  the  governors   of  the  other  colonies,  which  have  raised  forces  for  the 
expedition  against  Crown  Point,  giving  an  account  of  two  actions,  which  happened 


456  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

on  the  10th  instant,  between  tlie  army  under  your  command,  and  the  French;  ia 
the  first  of  which,  a  detachment  of  one  thousand  English,  commanded  by  Col. 
Williams,  and  a  party  of  two  hundred  Indians  of  the  Six  Nations,  were  defeated, 
with  a  considerable  loss  on  their  side  ;  in  the  second,  the  French,  &c.,  their  Indians 
attacked  the  main  body  of  your  army  in  their  camp,  at  Lake  George,  and  were  re- 
pulsed with  a  considerable  one  on  theirs. 

Mr.  Stevenson  informs  me,  that  upon  finding  I  had  no  letter  directed  to  me 
among  the  packets,  which  came  from  your  camp,  and  discovering  the  words  upon 
the  seal  side  of  that  directed  to  Governor  Phips,  "  Please  to  despatch  a  copy  of  this 
letter  to  General  Shirley,  my  time  and  circumstances  won't  permit  my  writing  to 
him  immediately,"  he  opened  it,  and  took  a  copy  of  it,  to  be  sent  forthwith  to  me  ; 
and  as  the  events  contained  in  it,  so  nearly  concern  His  Majesty's  service,  under  my 
immediate  command,  as  well  as  his  other  service  upon  this  contment,  under  my  di- 
rection, I  can't  avoid  expressing  my  surprise  at  your  omission  to  acquaint  me  with 
them  directly  from  yourself;  which,  let  your  hurry  and  circumstances  be  what  they 
would,  you  might  at  least  have  done  by  ordering  your  secretary  or  any  clerk,  to 
transcribe  a  copy  of  your  letter  to  the  governors,  to  be  sent  me  from  Albany,  in- 
stead of  desiring  Lieut.  Governor  Phips  to  send  me  one  from  Boston. 

What  could  be  your  reason  for  postponing  my  being  acquainted  with  these  mat- 
ters, which  I  ought  to  have  known  as  soon  as  possible,  to  so  distant  a  time,  as  my 
hearing  from  Mr.  Phips  must  have  been,  seems  difficult  to  say. 

However  that  may  be,  my  duty  to  His  Majesty  requires  me  to  take  the  first  op- 
portunity of  transmitting  you  my  sentiments  upon  the  present  state  of  the  service, 
which  I  have  put  under  your  immediate  direction. 

Upon  the  statement  of  your  letter  to  the  several  governors,  sir,  it  appears  to 
me  that  the  late  defeat  of  the  French  forces  and  their  Indians  in  the  engagement  at 
your  camp,  hath  given  you  a  favorable  opportunity  of  proceeding,  as  soon  as  the 
expected  reinforcements  from  New  England  shall  join  you  at  Ticonderoga  ;  which 
post,  since  you  have  taken  the  route  to  Crown  Point,  that  you  have  done,  it  is  of 
the  utmost  consequence  to  the  success  of  the  expedition  under  your  command,  to 
make  yourself  master  of  as  soon  as  possible. 

By  the  account  given  in  the  copy  of  the  minutes  of  your  council  of  war,  enclosed 
to  me  in  your  letter  of  the  1st  instant,  of  the  strength  of  your  army  a  few  days  be- 
fore the  late  actions,  and  in  your  letter  to  the  governors,  of  the  loss  you  have  sus- 
tained in  both  engagements,  the  number  of  your  remaining  troops  must,  upon  the 
arrival  of  your  reinforcement  from  New  England,  exceed  four  thousand  ;  and  that 
of  your  Indians,  be  upwards  of  two  hundred. 

From  the  account  given  you  by  the  French  general,  your  prisoner,  of  the 
strength  of  his  army,  in  the  beginning  of  the  first  action,  it  consisted  of  two  hundred 
grenadiers,  eight  hundred  Canadians  and  seven  hundred  Indians,  of  different  na- 
tions ;  and  from  the  account  given  you  by  his  aid-de-camp  of  the  loss  of  the  French 
and  the  Indians,  in  both  actions,  and  the  pursuit  which  ensued,  they  lost  in  the 
whole  one  thousand  men,  and  the  major  part  of  their  chief  officers,  together  with 
Mont;ieur  Pierre,  the  ofiicer  who  had  the  chief  command  and  greatest  influence 
over  the  Indians  ;  so  that  according  to  their  accounts,  which  seem  most  to  be  de- 
jiended  upon,  the  French  had  not  above  seven  hundred  men  left  of  their  whole 
army,  which  attacked  your  camp. 

In  these  actions,  sir,  you  have  experienced  the  good  behaviour  of  your  officers 
and  troops,  who    nuist    be  now    flushed  with    their    late  victory  ;  the    French,  on 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  457 

the  other  hand,  must  be  greatly  disconcerted  by  the  late  defeat  of  their  army,  and 
loss  of  their  general,  and  so  many  of  their  principal  officers  ;  and  the  French  In- 
dians, in  particular  (which  consists  of  different  nations),  by  the  loss  of  Monsieur 
St.  Pierre,  who  seems  to  have  been  a  necessary  officer  for  keeping  them  together. 

You  had  before  acquainted  me,  in  your  letter  of  the  1st  instant,  from  your  camp, 
at  Lake  George,  that  "  some  Indians,  you  *  *  *  ggut  out  *  « 
*  *  on  the  scout,  told  you,  they  had  discovered  a  party  of  French  and  In- 
dians, at  Ticonderoga  ;  but  that  no  works  were  thrown  up  then  ;  and  that  you  was 
impatient  to  get  a  number  of  batteaux  up,  and  put  in  order  ;  when  you  proposed  to 
proceed  with  a  part  of  the  troops,  and  endeavor  to  take  post  at  Ticonderoga." 

I  hope,  sir,  if  that  is  not  yet  done,  that  you  still  propose  doing  it,  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible ;  the  necessity  of  driving  the  enemy  from  that  pass,  still  continues ;  the  longer 
time  is  given  them  to  fortify  it,  the  more  difficult  it  will  be  to  dislodge  them,  and 
the  more  you  will  lose  the  advantage,  which  their  defeat,  and  your  own  victory 
have  given  you  to  effect  it. 

You  say  in  your  letter  to  the  governors,  "  Your  men  have  suffered  so  much  fa- 
tigue for  three  days  past,  and  are  constantly  standing  upon  the  arms  by  day,  half 
the  whole  upon  guard  every  night,  and  the  rest  lay  down  armed  and  accoutred, 
that  both  officers  and  men  are  almost  worn  out ;  that  the  enemy  may  rally,  and  you 
judge  they  have  considerable  reinforcements  near  at  hand ;  so  that  you  think  it 
necessary  to  be  on  your  guard,  and  be  watchful  to  maintam  the  advantage,  you 
have  gained." 

To  make  the  most  of  the  advantage  you  have  gained,  it  seems  clear,  sir,  that  you 
should  make  use  of  the  opportunity  it  hath  given  you,  of  proceeding  upon  your  ex- 
pedition, whilst  the  spirits  of  your  army  are  elated  with  success,  and  those  of  the 
enemy  lowered  by  the  loss  of  the  greatest  part  of  theirs. 

As  to  your  apprehensions,  that  the  enemy  might  rally,  and  that  they  had  con- 
siderable reinforcements  near  at  hand ;  it  is  mentioned  in  your  letter,  that  your 
men  and  Indians  pursued  the  French  soon  after  their  repulse,  slaughtered  great 
numbers,  and  took  several  prisoners,  among  whom,  was  the  French  general,  him- 
self; so  that  their  army  was  entirely  routed,  and  yours  master  of  the  field  ;  rally- 
ing the  second  day  after  so  general  a  rout  as  this,  is,  I  believe,  unknown  in  the 
case  even  of  great  armies  ;  and  that  the  small  remains  of  the  French  army  should 
return  the  next  day  to  the  attack  of  your  camp,  where  they  had  so  lately  felt  the 
effects  of  your  cannon  against  their  musketry,  seems  not  much  to  be  apprehended ; 
it  is  more  probable,  that  the  slaughter  they  had  suffered  in  the  pursuit,  with  their 
loss  of  most  of  their  chief  officers,  will  in  the  end  occasion,  if  not  a  total  dissipation 
of  the  Indians,  yet  at  least  a  great  desertion  among  them,  and  of  the  Canadians, 
too. 

Upon  what  foundation  you  judge  that  the  French  army  had  considerable  rein- 
forcements near  at  hand,  is  not  mentioned  in  your  letter  ;  it  seems  more  likely,  that 
they  sent  all  the  forces  they  could  spare,  from  Ticonderoga  and  Crown  Point 
(where  you  say  so  many  of  the  regular  troops  were  posted)  to  attack  your  camp  ;  es- 
pecially as  they  were  to  do  it  only  with  musketry. 

You  say,  further,  in  your  letter  to  the  governors,  "that  from  the  papers  of  Mon- 
sieur Dieshau,  the  French  general,  you  find,  he  brought  under  his  command  in  the 
men  of  war  lately  arrived  at  Quebec,  three  thousand  one  hundred  and  seventy-one 
VOL.  V.  58 


458  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE  ISLAND  [1755. 

regular  troops,  who  are  partly  in  garrisons  at   Crown  Point,  and  encamped  at  Ti- 
conderoga,  and  other  advantageous  passes  between  your  camp  and  Crown  Point. 

That  you  expect  very  shortly,  another  and  more  formidable  attack  ;  and  that  the 
enemy  will  then  come  with  artillery ;  that  Col.  Williams  had  the  ground  cleared  for 
building  a  stockaded  fort ;  and  that  your  men  are  so  harrassed,  and  obliged  to  be 
so  constantly  upon  watchful  duty,  that  you  think  it  would  be  both  unreasonable, 
and,  as  you  fear,  in  vain  to  set  them  at  work  upon  the  designed  fort. 

That  you  design  to  order  the  New  Hampshire  regiment  up  to  your  camp,  to  re- 
inforce you  ;  and  that  you  hoped  some  of  the  designed  reinforcements  would  be 
with  you  in  a  few  days  ;  and  that  when  those  fresh  troops  arrived,  *  *  * 
you  should  immediately  set  about  building  a  fort." 

I  hope  you  will,  before  now,  have  received  my  letter  of  the  12th  instant,  in  which 
I  sent  you  an  account  from  Admiral  Boscawen's  letter  to  the  late  General  Brad- 
dock,  of  the  number  of  troops  which  were  sent  from  France  this  summer,  to  North 
America,  and  what  part  of  them  arrived  in  Canada  ;  which  will  show  you  that  there 
mnst  be  some  mistake  in  the  above  account  extracted  by  you  from  Monsieur  Die- 
shau's  papers,  of  the  number  of  those  which  arrived  with  him  at  Quebec. 

It  is  clear  from  this  account,  that  the  whole  number  sent  from  France,  was,  as 
M.  Dieshau's  papers  make  them  to  be,  about  three  thousand  ;  and  by  other  un- 
doubted accounts,  as  well  as  the  admiral's,  that  of  these,  he  took  eight  companies 
in  the  Alcide  and  Lys  men  of  war  ;  and  that  eleven  hundred  are  in  garrison  at 
Louisbourg. 

Now  supposing  that  the  remainder  arrived  at  Quebec,  without  any  loss  in  their 
passage  (which  is  not  very  likely),  the  most  that  got  to  Quebec,  must  be  sixteen 
hundred  and  seventy-one ;  five  hundred  at  least  of  which,  I  have  intelligence  from 
Indians,  who  came  here  from  Cadaraqui,  at  different  times  within  these  five  weeks, 
and  a  party  of  Indians  and  Albany  men,  whom  I  sent  there  since  that  time,  are 
now  encamped  close  to  that  fort ;  and  a  number  of  them  were  killed  (according  to 
your  own  account,)  in  the  late  attack  upon  your  camp  and  the  pursuit  which  en- 
sued ;  so  that  the  remainder,  supposing  them  to  be  now,  as  you  say,  partly  in  gar- 
rison at  Crown  Point,  and  encamped  at  Ticonderoga,  and  other  advantageous 
passes  between  your  camp  and  Crown  Point,  can't  amount  to  near  the  number 
which  you  seem  to  think  are  there. 

I  can't  therefore  but  think  you  may  spare  from  the  fort  at  the  Carrying  Place, 
and  from  your  camp  at  Lake  George,  a  body  of  troops  more  than  sufficient  to  drive 
the  French  from  Ticonderoga,  and  possess  yourself  of  that  pass  ;  and  hope  you  will 
lose  no  time  in  doing  it. 

If  Crown  Point  is  inaccessible  to  the  army  now  with  you,  through  the  route  you 
have  taken  to  it,  it  will  probably  be  more  so  to  double  the  number  of  troops  the 
next  year,  and  must  be  come  at  through  another  route  ;  in  which  case,  the  fort  you 
design  to  build  at  the  end  of  the  lake,  will  be  of  little  or  no  utility  for  carrying  on 
another  expedition,  and  but  of  very  little,  even  for  the  defence  of  the  country  between 
Lake  George,  late  St.  Sacrament,  and  Hudson's  River,  whilst  two  roads  lie  open  for 
the  French  to  make  incursions  into  it,  viz. :  through  Wood  Creek  and  the  South 
Bay ;  the  latter  of  which,  they  have  lately  made  use  of,  to  come  at  both  your 
camps. 

As  to  your  expectation  of  a  more  formidable  attack  very  shortly  from  the  enemy, 
and  that  they  will  tlien  come  with  artillery  ;  I  suppose  that  artillery  must  be  brought 
from  Crown  Pointor  Ticonderoga  ;  and  if  the  French  should  imagiue  that  vou  design 


1755.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  459 


to  attempt  nothing  further  this  campaign,  than  building  the  stockaded  fort,  you  pro- 
pose, I  think  it  probable  enough  that  they  make  you  a  visit  at  your  camp  with 
cannon  ;  in  which  case,  I  doubt  your  fort,  when  built,  would  not  stand  long. 

But  I  believe  the  thoughts  of  the  French  are  at  present  taken  up  in  securing 
themselves  against  a  visit  from  you  at  Crown  Point ;  which  I  hope  may  be  still 
made  them  this  year,  with  success  ;  and  that  to  enable  jou  the  better  to  do  it,  the 
colonies  may  send  you  a  second  reinforcement  in  time. 

I  am  sorry  to  hear  that  you  received  a  wound  in  the  late  engagement,  and  hope 
that  the  ball  is  by  this  time  extracted  from  your  thigh,  and  your  wound  is  in  a  fair 
way  of  healing  ;  I  congratulate  you  upon  your  success,  hitherto,  and  wish  it  may  be 
increased  in  the  remaining  operations  of  the  campaign  ;  and  am. 

Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  Major  General  Johnson. 

Governor  Shirley  to  Major  General  Johnson. 

Camp  at  Oswego,  September  24th,  1755. 

Sir  : — Yesterday  afternoon,  I  received  your  letter,  dated  9th  instant,  being  a 
copy  of  that  to  the  several  governors  of  the  several  colonies  concerned  in  the  expe- 
dition under  your  command ;  and  the  same  with  what  Mr.  Stevenson  transcribed 
from  your  letter  to  Governor  Phips,  and  sent  me  seven  days  ago,  as  you  will  per- 
ceive by  mine  to  you  of  the  19th  instant. 

In  your  last,  I  received  enclosed,  a  copy  of  the  orders  and  instructions  for  the 
regular  troops  sent  to  Cadaraqui,  which  are  a  confirmation  of  the  intelligence  I  sent 
you  in  my  last,  viz. :  that  five  hundred  of  the  regular  troops,  which  came  from 
France,  with  Mr.  Diesbau,  are  encamped  at  the  fort  there.  It  appears,  also,  by 
those  instructions,  that  there  were  at  least  one  hundred  and  sixty-six  Canadians 
sent  with  them  on  the  1st  and  2d  of  August  last ;  and  that  a  number  of  Indians  are 
there,  likewise. 

By  the  express,  which  delivered  me  your  letter,  I  received  one  dated  the  10th 
instant,  from  Capt.  Ayre,  your  engineer,  informing  me  of  the  strength  of  the  fort 
built  at  the  Carrying  Place  ;  *  *  *  "  that  with  a  garrison  of  three  or 
four  hundred  men,  would  be  able  to  resist  an  attack  of  fifteen  hundred,  if  no  can- 
non were  brought  against  it ;  and  that  in  his  opinion,  it  is  very  necessary  that  a 
strong  and  regular  work  should  be  erected  at  Lake  George,  to  keep  possession  of 
that  country,  so  far ;  that  if  the  French  can  seize  and  take  the  before  mentioned 
work  at  the  Carrying  Place,  he  fears  it  would  be  attended  with  bad  consequences ; 
as  it  would  cut  off  your  retreat  and  communication  with  Albany,  and  totally  stop 
your  reinforcements  and  provisions,  from  joining  you,  if  another  road  cannot  be 
found,  which  he  believes  is  not  easy  to  be  met  with  ;  that  he  thinks  what  induced 
the  French,  or  may  induce  them  hereafter  to  attack  you  at  Lake  George,  is  fearing 
that  you  would  not  attempt  to  go  any  further,  and  so  were  resolved  to  call  you  off, 
before  you  returned  ;  and  seems  to  infer  from  thence  that  the  enemy  must  be  so 
formidable,  as  to  make  it  unadvisable  for  you  to  proceed  further  ;  and  concludes 
with  extolling  the  gallantry  and  resolution  of  the  French  troops  in  their  late  attack 
of  you." 

I  agree,  sir,  in  sentiments  with  your  engineer,  concerning  the  bad' consequences 


460  RECORDS   OP  THE  COLONY   OF  RHODE  ISLAND  [1755. 

of  the  enemy's  taking  the  fort  at  the  Carrying  Place,  and  am  muchj  concerned  at 
the  weakness  of  its  works  ;  especially,  as  both  yourself  and  he,  are  [apprehensive  of 
another  attack  at  Lake  George,  with  cannon. 

If  I  was  in  your  situation,  my  chief  apprehensions  would  be,  that  the  French 
would  make  an  attempt  upon  that  fort  with  cannon,  which  they  might  transport 
thither  as  easily  as  to  Lake  George  ;  and  I  think  you  judged  extremely  right  in 
sending  a  detachment  of  one  thousand  men  to  its  support,  upon  the  first  alarm  of 
the  enemy's  bemg  upon  their  march  towards  it ;  and  for  my  own  part,  I  must  own, 
I  should  have  thought  it  a  better  piece  of  conduct,  in  M.  Dieshau,  if,  after  defeat- 
ing the  party  under  Col.  Williams's  command,  he  had  attacked  the  fort  at  the 
Carrying  Place,  instead  of  your  camp  ;  which,  according  to  your  engineer's  ac- 
count of  it,  might  have  been  more  easily  won,  with  the  force  he  had  with  him,  than 
had  your  camp  been  stormed. 

I  can  by  no  means  adopt  your  engineer's  opinion  of  the  urgent  necessity  of  im- 
mediately erecting  a  strong  regular  fort  at  Lake  George,  for  maintaining  possession 
of  the  country  so  far.  In  my  opinion,  the  most  material  place  for  erecting  the 
strongest  works,  is  at  the  other  end  of  the  Carrying  Place  (at  or  near  where  the 
fort  lately  built,  stands),  which  is  about  seventeen  miles  distant  from  it.  It  seems  to 
me  that  a  regular  strong  fort  there,  would  be  a  much  more  essential  one  for  cover- 
in"  the  country  against  the  attacks  of  the  French,  from  the  river  Champlain, 
through  the  three  several  routes  that  lead  from  thence  to  it,  than  one  at  Lake 
George,  which  would  leave  it  uncovered  in  two  of  those  routes ;  besides,  how  could 
a  fort  at  Lake  George,  be  supported,  when  its  communication  with  Albany  was  cut 
off,  which,  as  your  engineer  rightly  observes,  would  most  probably  be  the  case,  if 
the  French  should  take  our  fort  at  the  Carrying  Place. 

I  would  therefore  recommend  it  to  you  in  the  strongest  manner,  as  an  object 
which  deserves  your  attention,  to  have  the  *  *  »  *  fort  at  the 
Carrying  Place  strengthened  as  much  as  the  circumstances  of  your  army  will  ad- 
mit, consistent  with  your  proceeding  directly  to  Ticonderoga. 

As  to  the  formidable  strength  of  the  enemy,  you  will  have  to  encounter  in  your 
march  thither,  I  have  told  you  my  sentiments  at  large  in  my  last  letter  ;  and  with 
regard  to  the  gallant  behaviour  of  their  troops  in  the  late  actions,  I  must  own,  I  dif- 
fer widely  in  opinion  from  your  engineer  ;  their  retreat  was  a  very  bad  one,  with- 
out conduct  or  resolution ;  they  could  not  otherwise  have  suffered  so  great  a 
slaughter  as  you  say  they  did,  in  the  short  pursuit  made  of  them  by  your  troops  and 
Indians,  which  jumped  over  the  barricade  of  your  camp  after  them. 

The  more  I  think  of  your  situation,  the  more  advisable  I  think  it  will  be  for  you 
to  proceed  to  Ticonderoga ;  as  the  honor  of  His  Majesty's  arms  and  the  interest  of 
the  colonies  seem  to  require  it.  The  consequences,  I  fear,  will  be  bad,  if  you  do 
not ;  and  I  can't  but  hope  that  you  will  see  these  matters  in  the  same  light  which  I 
view  them  in. 

The  weak  condition  which  I  found  this  place  in,  and  our  want  of  dry  provisions, 
have  hitherto  inevitably  hindered  me  from  proceeding  in  the  expedition  under  my 
command ;  but  both  these  obstacles  will,  I  hope,  be  so  far  surmounted  in  three  days, 
as  to  permit  me  to  do  it. 

I  wish  you  a  speedy  recovery  of  your  wound,  and  much  success ;  and  am, 

Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 
To  Major  General  Johnson. 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  461 

P.  S.  Be  pleased  to  communicate  this  to  Capt.  Ayre ;  I  have  not  time  to  •write 
to  him  before  I  sail. 

Governor  Shirley  to  Governor  Hopkins. 

Camp  at  Oswego,  September  25th,  1 755. 

Sir  : — Your  Honor  hath  already  had  an  account  from  Major  General  Johnson,  of 
the  late  actions  at  and  near  his  camp,  at  Lake  George,  late  Lake  Sacrament ;  and 
you  have  my  sentiments  upon  the  situation  of  the  service  under  his  command,  con- 
tained in  the  two  enclosed  copies  of  letters  to  him  from  me,  dated  the  19th  and 
24:th  instant. 

As  I  was  the  first  proposer  of  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point  to  the  several  col- 
onies concerned  in  raising  forces  for  it,  and  have  been  a  principal  promoter  of  its 
being  carried  into  execution,  I  have  it  the  more  at  heart,  that  the  issue  of  it  should 
be  for  Hia  Majesty's  service,  the  honor  of  his  arms,  and  welfare  of  his  colonies ;  all 
which  are  deeply  interested  in  the  succeeding  operations  of  this  campaign  against  the 
French  in  this  expedition,  and  make  it  my  indispensable  duty  to  contribute  my  ut- 
most endeavors  for  having  those  operations  conducted  in  the  best  manner,  to  answer 
those  important  ends. 

The  weak  condition  in  which  I  found  this  place,  and  want  of  dry  provisions,  have 
hitherto  put  it  out  of  my  power  to  proceed  from  hence  upon  the  expedition  under 
my  own  immediate  command ;  but  as  those  obstacles  are  now  in  some  measure  re- 
moved, make  it  advisable  for  me  to  move,  which  I  purpose  to  do  in  three  days,  not- 
withstanding the  lateness  of  the  season,  and  hope  to  return  to  this  place  in  thirty 
days  from  that  time. 

The  settlement  of  every  thing  here  before  I  go,  and  my  preparations  to  embark, 
will  not  permit  me  to  enlarge  now  upon  the  service  of  the  other  expedition,  so  mu^t 
beg  leave  to  refer  Your  Honor  «  *  *  *  to  the  enclosed  copies,  and  to  re- 
commend it  to  the  care  of  the  several  governments  concerned,  from  whom  I  flatter 
myself  General  Johnson  hath  or  will  soon  receive  such  further  reinforcements  as 
may  absolutely  secure  the  success  of  his  attempt  against  the  French  encroachments 
at  Crown  Point  this  year.  I  am,  sir,  with  great  regard,  &c., 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  Governor  Hopkins. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly  held  for  the  Colony  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kings- 
town, the  last  Wednesday  in  October,  1755. 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that   two  commissioners  be  appointed 


462  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

on  the  part  of  this  colony,  to  meet  commissioners  of  the  other 
governments  at  New  York,  in  order  to  consider  the  state  and 
circumstances  of  said  governments,  with  regard  to  the  encroach- 
ments of  the  French,  &c.,  and  that  an  act  be  drawn  up  ac- 
cordingly. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  and 
tlie  attorney  general  be,  and  they  are  hereby  constituted  a 
committee  to  prepare  a  bill  for  appointing  commissioners  on 
the  part. of  this  colony  to  meet  commissioners  of  the  other  gov- 
ernments, to  consider  the  state  of  said  governments,  in  respect 
to  the  encroachments  of  the  French,  and  present  the  same  to 
this  Assembly  as  soon  as  possible. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Nicholas  Cook,  Philip  Greene  and  George  Brown, 
Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  audit 
Daniel  Jenckes  Esq.  and  Mr.  Elisha  Brown,  their  accounts  of 
the  charges  of  finishing  the  new  jail  in  Providence  ;  and  that 
the  said  committee  give  an  order  upon  the  general  treasurer, 
for  such  part  of  the  money  that  shall  appear  to  be  due  to  the 
said  Jenckes  and  Brown,  as  said  committee  shall  think  proper, 
and  make  report  to  this  Assembly  at  their  next  session. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Obadiah  Brown,  James  Sheffield  and  Josiah  Rus- 
sel,  Esqs.,  together  with  Mr.  Joseph  Lippitt,  who  were  appoint- 
ed a  committee  to  audit  the  accounts  of  the  committee  of  war, 
be,  and  they  are  hereby  further  continued  a  committee  for  that 
purpose  ;  and  that  any  two  of  them,  be,  and  are  hereby  au- 
thorized and  fully  empowered  to  audit  the  accounts  of  His 
Honor,  the  Governor  and  Daniel  Jenckes,  Esq.,  and  make  re- 
port unto  this  Assembly  at  their  next  session. 

Whereas,  jSIajor  Ebenezer  Brenton,  and  many  others,  inhab- 
itants of  South  Kingstown  and  parts  adjacent,  preferred  a  pe- 
tition and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  the  fishery  in 
Point  Judith  Pond,  so  called,  which  is  of  vast  importance,  not 
only  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  aforesaid,  and  others  in 
the  vicinity  thereof,  but  also  to  the  town  of  Newport,  and  all 


1755.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  463 

the  western  part  of  this  colony,  is  like  to  be  utterly  destroyed, 
without  a  suitable  provision  to  prevent  people  from  fishing 
with  seines  in  the  breach  and  channel  of  said  pond,  at  all  sea- 
sons ;  by  which  the  course  of  the  fish  is  daily  obstructed,  and 
if  not  speedily  prevented  will  be  totally  turned  some  other 
way,  to  the  great  damage  not  only  of  said  town,  but  of  the 
greater  part  of  this  colony  ;  that  although  there  is  a  law  in 
that  case  made  and  provided,  well  adapted  to  remedy  the  in- 
conveniences aforesaid,  save  that  the  fine  is  not  proportionate 
to  the  damage  that  is  daily  sustained  by  the  breach  thereof  j 
for  that  forty  shillings,  the  fine  now  stated,  will  never  prevent 
the  drawing  a  seine,  where  the  drawers  are  morally  assured  to 
gain  a  sufficient  profit  over  and  above  said  fine,  even  if  it 
should  be  levied  upon  them  ;  and  thereupon  the  petitioners 
prayed  that  the  fine,  in  the  act  above  mentioned,  be  augmented 
to  £50 ;  on  consideration,  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authority 
thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  fine  in  the  act  made  and  passed  by 
the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  Newport,  on  the  sec- 
ond Monday  in  June,  1736,  be,  and  is  hereby  augmented  to 
£50 ;  that  is  to  say,  where  it  relates  to  the  fishery  of  the 
pond,  aforesaid. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authority 
thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  committee  of  war  be,  and  hereby 
is  further  continued,  and  vested  with  all  and  singular  the 
power  and  authority  that  hath  at  any  time  heretofore  been 
granted  them. 

An  Act  appointing  and  empowering  commissioners  in  behalf  of 
this  colony,  to  meet  with  His  Excellency,  Major  General 
Shirley,  commander  in  chief  of  all  His  Majesty's  forces  in 
North  America,  and  the  commissioners  that  may  be  appoint- 
ed by  the  other  northern  colonies. 

Whereas,  the  numerous  encroachments  made  by  the  French 
on  the  undoubted  dominions  of  His  Britannic  Majesty,  our 
most  gracious  sovereign,  in  North  America,  hath  necessitated 
the  colonies  to  rise  in  their  own  defence,  and   endeavor  to  re- 


464  RECORDS    OP   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

move  such  dangerous  neighbors  to  a  greater  distance ;  and  as 
the  disunited  state  of  the  English  colonies,  is  such  as  renders 
it  impracticable  lor  them  to  exert  their  natural  strength  against 
the  common  enemy  in  any  other  manner  than  that  of  a  gen- 
eral meeting  by  representatives,  to  consult  and  provide  means 
for  their  common  defence  and  safety ;  therefore,  and  to  con- 
tribute towards  so  salutary  a  measure,  as  far  the  abilities  of 
this  colony  will  admit, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  and 
Daniel  Updike,  Esq.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  chosen  and  ap- 
pointed commissioners  for,  and  in  behalf  of  this  colony,  with 
full  power  and  authority  to  appear  and  represent  the  same  at 
any  meeting  of  the  commissioners  of  the  other  British  northern 
colonies,  with  His  Excellency,  above  named  ;  and  with  them 
to  concert  proper  measures  for  quartering,  subsisting,  furlough- 
ing,  or  discharging  the  provincial  troops  now  in  the  field  ;  to 
concert  proper  measures  that  the  campaign  may  be  rendered 
successful  this  year,  or  in  the  next  spring ;  to  contrive  and  es- 
tablish proper  ways  and  means  for  supplying  the  present  or 
any  future  provincial  armies  with  provisions  and  other  neces- 
saries ;  to  agree  upon,  and  settle  the  proportion  and  quota  of 
this  and  the  other  colonies,  concerned  in  the  present  expedition 
against  Crown  Point,  for  and  towards  the  said  expedition  ;  and 
to  agree  upon  a  joint  application  unto  His  Majesty,  for  the  ob- 
taining such  assistance  to  his  colonies  as  may  enable  them  to 
repel  their  common  enemy,  and  put  in  execution  such  measures 
as  will  effectually  establish  the  peace  and  tranquility  of  His  Maj- 
esty's good  subjects  in  North  America ;  and  in  case  no  such  general 
convention  of  the  representatives  of  the  governments  in  North 
America  shall  be  had,  that  the  commissioners  above  named, 
shall  have,  and  hereby  is  granted  them  equal  authority  to 
meet  and  act  at  any  convention  of  the  governments  immedi- 
ately concerned  in  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point,  that 
shall  be  agreed  upon,  and  that  as  fully  and  effectually,  to  all 
intents  and  purposes  as  are  herein  before  expressed ;  and 
His  Honor,  the  Governor,  is  requested   to   cause  the  needful 


1755.] 


AND    PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS. 


465 


commissions  to  be  made  out,  and  to  transmit  a  copy  of  this  act 
to  all  the  governments  in  North  America. 

An  Act  for  laying  a  tax  of  £70,000  upon  the  inhabitants  of 

this  colony. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  £70,000,  old  tenor,  be  raised 
by  a  tax,  to  be  forthwith  assessed  and  levied,  agreeably  to  law, 
on  the  estates  and  poles  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  in 
the  following  proportion,  to  wit : 


£      ■  s. 

Newport 14,000  00 

Portsmouth 3,216  00 

New  Shoreham....  1,600  00 

Jamestown    1,600  00 

Middletown 2,150  00 

Tiverton  . 2,200  00 

Little  Compton  ....  2,051  00 


£26,817  00 

Providence  ... 4,900  00 

Smithfield 3,750  00 

Scituate .1,633  00 

Glocester 1,680  10 

Cumberland 1,080  00 

Cranston 2,500  00 


£15,543  10 


£        d. 

Westerly 4,730  00 

North  Kingstown.  .3,105  00 
South  Kingstown.  .5,200  00 

Charlestown    1,700  00 

Exeter 1,475  00 

Richmond..  .. 1,003  00 


£17,213  00 

Bristol 1,827  00 

Warren 1,610  00 

£3,437  00 

Warwick 3,213  00 

East  Greenwich....  1,800  00 
West  Greenwich...  1,069  10 
Coventry 907  00 


£6,989  10 


And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
£40,000  of  said  sum  be  appropriated  towards  sinking  the  col- 
ony's outstanding  bills   of  credit,  made  and  emitted  to  supply 

VOL.  V.         59 


466  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1755. 

the  general  treasury,  for  defraying  the  charge  of  the  present 
expedition ;  and  the  remaining  £30,000  towards  sinking  the 
outstanding  bills  of  credit,  made  and  emitted  to  supply  the 
treasury,  for  defraying  the  charge  of  former  expeditions. 

And  it  is  further  enacted,  that  the  assessors  or  rate-makers, 
upon  their  assessing  or  apportioning  the  aforesaid  tax,  return  a 
true  bill  or  list  thereof,  to  the  town  clerk  of  the  town  to  which 
they  respectively  belong,  within  fifty  days  after  this  Assembly 
rises ;  and  that  said  town  clerk  send  a  copy  thereof  to  the  gen- 
eral treasurer,  in  ten  days  ;  who,  upon  receipt  thereof,  shall 
issue  forth  his  warrant  in  ten  days,  to  the  several  collectors  of 
rates  of  the  respective  towns,  commanding  them,  in  His  Majes- 
ty's name,  to  collect  the  several  sums  to  them  respectively  com- 
mitted, in  bills  of  public  credit  of  this  colony,  within  five 
months  after  the  rising  of  this  Assembly ;  and  to  pay  the 
same  to  him,  or  his  successor  in  said  office,  to  be  burnt,  and 
discharge  part  of  the  colony's  debts  as  above  mentioned. 

And  it  is  further  enacted,  that  each  respective  town  shall  pay 
all  the  charges  and  fees  that  shall  arise  in  assessing  and  col- 
lecting its  part  of  the  aforesaid  tax  ;  and  that  the  secretary 
send  a  copy  of  this  act  in  print,  to  every  town  clerk  in  the 
colony,  within  twenty  days  after  the  fising  of  this  Assembly, 
to  be  by  them  immediately  delivered  to  the  assessors  of  each 
respective  town. 

God  save  the  King. 

Lieut.  Governor  Phips,  of  Ilassaekiseits,  io   Governor  Hopkins,  of 
Bhode  Island. 


Boston,  October  29tl),  17.^5. 
Sii": — 'i'ho  present  state  of  the  army,  designed  against  Crown  Point,  has  been 
under  the  consideration  of  the  General  Assembly  several  days  past,  and  the  report 
of  a  comnnittee  has  been  accepted  by  the  court,  a  copy  of  which  I  herewith  transmit 
to  Your  Honor;  and  in  consequence  of  said  vote,  three  gentlemen,  viz.:  James 
Minot,Jolin  Choate  and  Samuel  Livermore,  Esqs.,  have  been  chosen  and  approved 
of,  and  will  set  out  for  Albany  in  two  or  three  days;  and  I  must  earnestly  urge 
Your  Honor  that  some  gentlemen  may  likewise  repair  thither  from  your  govern- 
ment: for  the  great  remora  to  the    proceeding   of  the   army  seems    to   have  been- 


•1755.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  467 

the  failure  of  transportation,  which  may  prove  as  fatal  to  the  service,  if  any  one 
government  fails  in  their  peculiar  part,  as  if  there  should  be  a  failure  in  all. 

I  am,  sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 
S.  PHIPS. 
To  the  Hon.  Governor  Hopkins. 

Secretary   Pownall  to    the    Governor   and  Company   of    Rhode 

Island. 

Whitehall,  November  4th,  1755. 

Gentlemen : — The  postmaster  general  having,  in  obedience  to  His  Majesty's 
commands,  provided  vessels  for  the  carrying  on  a  regular  monthly  correspondence 
with  His  Majesty's  American  colonies,  I  am  directed  by  the  lords  commissioners  for 
trade  and  plantations,  to  acquaint  you  therewith  ;  and  that  the  first  of  these  vessels 
will  be  despatched  for  the  continent  on  the  15th  of  this  month,  to  go  and  return 
between  Falmouth  and  New  York  where  the  first  vessel  is  to  remain  twenty 
days ;  and  as  it  is  of  great  importance  to  His  Majesty's  service,  that  their  lordships 
should  have  frequent  and  certain  intelligence  of  the  true  state  of  all  His  Majesty's 
colonies  and  plantations  in  America,  their  lordships  desire  that  you  will  not  fail  of 
acquainting  them,  by  the  return  of  every  packet,  with  all  public  occurrences  which 
may  happen  in  the  colony  under  your  government ;  and  likewise  transmit  to  their 
lordships  all  such  public  papers  as  are  required  to  be  transmitted. 

I  am,  gentleman,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

JOHN  FOVVNALL,  Sec'ry. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

Secretary    RoUnson   to   the    Governor   and    Company  of  Rhode 

Island. 

• 

Whitehall,  11th  November,  1755. 

Gentlemen  : — The  accounts  which  have  been  transmitted  to  me  of  the  success  of 
His  Majesty's  arms,  in  the  action  near  Lake  George,  on  the  8th  of  September,  and 
of  the  considerable  reinforcements  sent  by  the  New  England  governments,  to  Gen- 
eral Johnson,  which  there  is  great  reason  to  hope  will  elfectually  enable  him  to 
pursue  the  advantage  he  has  gained,  and  to  recover  and  support  His  Majestj's  just 
rights,  have  been  laid  before  His  Majesty ;  and  I  have  recieved  the  King's  com- 
mands to  express  to  you  His  Majesty's  sense  of  the  great  zeal  and  spirit,  which  the 
colony  under  your  government  has  so  strongly  manifested,  in  so  cheerfully  and  ef- 
fectually promoting  this  necessary  and  important  service. 

His  Majesty,  at  all  times  desirous  of  showing  marks  of  his  royal  favor  and  regard 
to  these  who  eminently  distinguish  themselves  in  the  defence  of  his  rights,  and  in 
their  country's  service,  is  pleased  to  order  that  this  letter  be  communicated  to  the 
Council  and  Assembly  of  your  government  ;  and  that  they  be  acquainted  that  His 
Majesty  will  take  an  early  opportunity  of  laying  the  particulars  of  their  meritorious 
conduct,  upon  this  great  occasion,  before  his  Parliament ;  and  as  His  Majesty  is  sen- 
sible that  the  expenses  which  the  New  England  colonies  have  incurred,  though  cheer- 
fully borne,  cannot  but  have  been  burthensome  to  his  brave  and  good  subjects,  His 


468  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 

Majesty  -will  at  the  same  time  recommend  to  his  Parliament  to  grant  them  such  as- 
sistance, in  consideration  of  the  charges  they  have  borne,  as  their  circumstances  shall 
require,  and  as  will  enable  them  vigorously  to  pursue  the  great  and  necessary  work, 
which  has  been  so  cheerfully  undertaken,  and  hitherto  conducted  with  so  much 
spirit,  zeal  and  resolution. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

T.  ROBINSON. 
To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

p.  S.     I  have  received  Mr.  Hopkins's  letter  of  April  17th. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Cohny  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kingstown,  the  22c? 
day  of  December,  1755. 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Joncathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  Capt.  Benjamin  Wick- 
ham  and  Daniel  Jenckes,  Esq.,  Col.  Benoni  Waterman  and  the 
attorney  general,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  commit- 
tee to  take  into  consideration  the  matters  and  things  contained 
in  the  letter  sent  this  colony,  by  the  lords  commissioners  for 
trade  and  plantations,  and  prepare  an  answer  unto  the  same, 
and  present  it  unto  this  Assembly  as  soon  as  they  can. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  one  hundred  of  the  best  men  be  selected,  with  suit- 
able officers,  out  of  the  troops  of  this  colony,  returned  and  re- 
turning from  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point ;  that  the  re- 
mainder be  forthwith  discharged  ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the 
Governor,  Capt.  Benjamin  Wickham,  Daniel  Jenckes,  Esq..  and 
Col.  Benoni  Waterman  and  the  attorney  general  be,  and  they 
are  hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  prepare  a  bill  for  that  pur- 
pose, and  present  the  same  unto  this  Assembly  as  soon  as  may 
be. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  the  committee  of 


1755.]  AND   PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  469 

war  be,  and  they  are  hereby  authorized  and  fully  empowered 
to  draw  as  much  money  out  of  the  office  of  the  grand  commit- 
tee, as  may  be  necessary  to  pay  off  all  the  soldiers,  and  clothe 
such  of  them  as  shall  be  selected  as  abovesaid  ;  that  the  said 
committee  of  war  order  and  direct  as  much  money  as  will  be 
necessary  to  replace  the  bills  so  taken  out  of  the  office,  afore- 
said, to  be  struck  off  as  soon  as  possible  ;  and  that  said  bills, 
when  struck  off,  be  signed  by  the  committee  that  signed  the 
last  bills. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  all  and  every  of 
the  said  hundred  soldiers  to  be  selected,  as  aforesaid,  shall  be 
clothed  and  appareled  suitable  for  the  winter  season. 

Whereas,  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  and  the  other  gentlemen 
that  were  appointed  a  committee  to  take  into  consideration  the 
matters  and  things  contained  in  the  letter  from  the  lords  of 
trade  and  plantations,  have  prepared  an  answer  to  said  letter, 
and  presented  it  unto  this  Assembly ;  which  being  duly  con- 
sidered,— 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  said  draught  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  ac- 
cepted :  and  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  is  requested  to  fill  up 
the  blank  in  it ;  and  when  that  is  done,  to  sign  and  send  two 
copies  thereof,  to  Great  Britain,  with  two  profiles  of  the  fort ; 
two  plans  of  the  harbor  of  Newport,  and  two  copies  of  the  list 
that  contains  the  number  of  inhabitants,  small  arms,  &c.,  in  this 
colony,  with  letters  to  the  agent,  by  the  two  first  opportu- 
nities.* 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Peter  Bours,  Esq.,  and  Capt.  Peter  Harrison,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  prepare  a  plan 
of  the  harbor  of  Newport,  and  a  profile  of  Fort  George  ;  that 
Mr.  Bours  send  the  same  unto  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  as 
soon  as  possible ;  together  with  the  returns  of  the  n umber  of 
the  inhabitants,  small  arms,  &c.,  that  shall  be  sent  into  the  sec- 


There  is  no  copy  oFthis  letter  in  the  archives  of  the  secretar3'  of  state. 


470  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1755. 

retary's  office  ;  and  that  they,  the  said  Peter  Bours  and  Teter 
Harrison,  put  marks  upon  such  places  of  the  said  plan  as  they 
may  think  necessary  to  be  fortified. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Henry  Harris,  Esq.,  Mr.  Thomas  Steere  and  Col. 
Resolved  Waterman,  be,  and  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them, 
arc  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  run  the  dividing  line  be- 
tween the  towns  of  Scituate  and  Glocester ;  and  make  report 
unto  the  General  Assembly,  at  the  charge  of  said  towns. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  masters  of  all  those  ap- 
prentices and  servants  that  enlisted  into  the  service  of  this 
colony  in  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point,  shall  have  and 
receive  all  tlie  wages  that  shall  be  due  at  the  time  of  their  be- 
ing discharged,  for  the  pay  of  said  servants  and  apprentices, 
after  a  deduction  is  made  for  clothes  and  other  things  by  them 
received. 

An  Act  for  retaining  one  hundred  and  eighty-five  of  the  troops 
raised,  and  now  in  the  service  of  this  colony,  for  subsisting, 
clothing  and  paying  them  whilst  in   His  Majesty's  service, 
and  for  disbanding  and  paying  off  the  remainder. 
Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  seventy-two  of  the  forces  raised  in 
this  colony,  for  the  late  expedition  against  Crown  Point,  be  re- 
tain(Ml  ill  His  Majesty's  service,  at    the   charge  of  the  colony, 
until  Mis  Majesty's  pleasure   shall    be   known,  for  garrisoning 
tlie  two  forts  lately  built  on  the  frontiers  of  the  colony  of  New 
Vork,  and  called  Fort  Edward,  and  Fort  William  Henry. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
one  hundred  men,  exclusive  of  officers,  be  selected  out  of  the 
aforesaid  troops,  and  as  are  fittest  for  service,  and  are  most  wil- 
ling, be  retained  and  continued  in  the  service  of  this  colony,  un- 
til the  General  Assembly  shall  order  otherwise  ;  and  in  case  the 
reduction  of  any  of  the  encroachments  made  by  the  French,  at 
iir  ne;ir  Lake  Iroquois,  commonly  called  Lake  Chaniplain,  be  at- 
ti'iiiiii.'d  (lining  the  ensuiiiu-  wintei'.  the  cfiinniittee  of  war  shall 


1755J  AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  471 

have  power  to  clothe  such  men,  fit  in  all  respects  for  a  winter 
campaign ;  and  shall  advance  one  month's  pay,  and  shall  order 
them  to  such  place  for  service  as  they  shall  think  proper ;  and 
shall  appoint  proper  officers  for  conducting  the  said  one  hun- 
dred men,  formed  into  one  company,  out  "of  the  officers  in  the 
late  expedition ;  and  shall  also  clothe  said  officers  in  a  proper 
manner,  and  advance  one  month's  pay  unto  them. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  remainder  of  said  forces  be  discharged  at,  or  before  the  last 
day  of  this  instant  December ;  and  said  committee  of  war 
shall,  immediately  upon  the  discharge  of  said  soldiers,  pay 
them  their  wages  ;  and  also  those  that  shall  be  retained,  as 
aforesaid ;  and  in  order  thereto,  and  for  defraying  the  other 
necessary  expenses  of  said  expedition,  shall  cause  the  sum 
of  £60,000,  in  bills  of  public  credit,  old  tenor,  to  be  struck 
off  from  the  large  plates  last  used  ;  and  to  be  signed  by  the 
committee  that  signed  the  last  bills,  and  lodged  in  the  general 
treasury,  to  be  drawn  out  as  said  committee  of  war  may  have 
occasion. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  said  sum  of  £60,000 
shall  be  sunk,  one  half  in  one  year,  and  the  other  half  in  two 
years  after  the  same  shall  be  emitted,  by  public  taxes,  to  be 
assessed  and  levied  upon  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  in  the 
same  manner  as  the  former  bills  emitted  for  carrying  on  the 
expedition,  aforesaid,  are  ordered  to  be  sunk. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  committee  of  war  be,  and 
are  hereby  empowered  to  divulge  this  secret  to  such  of  the 
officers  as  they  shall  think  proper  ;  first  giving  them  the  oath 
of  secresy. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  all  business  lying  before  them  unfinished,  be,  and 
the  same  is  hereby  referred  unto  their  next  session,  which  is 
hereby  appointed  to  be  on  the  last  Monday  of  February 
next. 

God  save  the  King. 


472  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1755. 


Public  Acts  passed  diinng  the  year  1765. 

An  Act  in  addition  to  the  several  acts,  regulating  the  militia  in  this  colony 
(February.)  , 

An  Act  exempting  a  mill  proposed  to  be  built  on  the  land  of  Toleration  Harris,  in 
Warwick,  from  the  operation  of  the  laws  now  in  force  in  this  colony  concerning 
mills.     (February.) 

An  Act  in  addition  to  an  act  made  and  passed  Feebruary,  1728,  entitled  "  An  act 
relating  to  the  freeing  of  mulatto  and  negro  slaves."     (February.) 

An  Act  in  addition  to  an  act  in  amendment  of  an  act,  passed  October,  1752,  enti- 
tled "  An  act  to  empower  the  town  councils  of  the  respective  towns  in  the  colo- 
ny, to  exchange  highways.     (February.) 

An  Act  enabling  the  collector  of  rates  to  follow  a  person  rated  in  one,  to  any  other 
town  in  the  colony  he  shall  remove  to,  without  paying  his  tax  in  the  town  where 
be  was  rated.     (February.) 

An  Act  to  prevent  fishing  with  seines  in  Kickamult.     (February.) 

An  Act  to  restrain  the  sending  of  provisions  and  warlike  stores  to  Cape  Breton,  or 
any  other  French  port  or  settlement  in  North  America.     (March.) 

An  Act  for  laying  a  further  duty  upon  shipping,  for  and  towards  a  better  support 
of  the  light  house.     (May.) 

An  Act  to  prevent  any  person  purchasing  and  detaining  any  of  the  apparel  and 
arms  belonging  to  any  soldier  enlisted  in  this  colony.     (May.) 

An  Act  for  naturalizing  Christian  Mayer,  a  native  of  Luxembourg,  in  Germany. 
(May.) 

An  Act  altering  the  times  of  holding  the  superior  court  in  the  county  of  Kent,  and 
of  the  inferior  court  in  King's  county.     (June.) 

An  Act  for  relieving  indigent  persons  at  the  expense  of  his,  her,  or  their 
children.     (August.) 

An  Act  in  addition  to,  and  in  amendment  of  an  act  passed  at  the  June  session  of 
tlie  General  Assembly,  1743,  entitled  "  An  act  for  the  preventing  of  counter- 
feiting the  bills  of  public  credit."     (October.) 

B.  Gleasier  to  (hvernor  HopMns. 

Fort  Wm.  Henry,  January  12,  1756. 

Sir : — I  herewith  send  you  a  further  statement  of  this  garrison  ;  as  also  the  ex- 
amination of  two  French  deserters,  and  the  reports  of  our  scouts. 

You  will  see  by  these  return.s,  how  healthy  your  people  are;  and  that  they  are 
nearly  one-third  the  elFective  men  in  the  garrison.  Capt.  Whiting  I  have  appoint- 
ed to  act  at  Fort  George,  and  adjutant  to  the  garrison.  He  behaves  extremely 
well  in  all  his  ollices,  and  I  think  it  is  the  least  I  can  do  to  inform  you  of  it. 

Our  ?:irrison  is  in  as  good  order  as  can  be  expected,  and  the  men  do  their  duty 
with  gre.it  spirit. 

I  do  not  doubt  if  the  monsieurs  should  (hink  proper  to  attack  us,  we  should  be 
able  to  give  tliein  a  gond  flogging,  though  we  have  not  half  our  number  of  men.     1 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  473 

shall  continue  to  inform  you  of  the  state  of  the  garrison  monthly,  as  also  of  every 
thing  extraordinary  that  may  happen.  I  am,  &c.  &c., 

B.  gleasip:r. 

To  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Sir  Charles  Hard//,  Governor  of  Neiv  York,  to  Governor  Hopkins. 

Fort  George,  New  York,  30th  January,  1756. 
Sir: — Having  lately  recommended  to  the  Assembly  of  this  province,  to  provide 
for  the  raising  and  subsisting  one  thousand  men  to  act  :n  conjunction  with  the 
other  colonies,  in  the  proposed  attempt  upon  the  French  fort  at  Crown  Point,  this 
spring  ensuing,  agreeably  to  the  opinion  of  the  council  of  war,  lately  held  in  this 
city,  by  His  Excellency,  General  Shirley,  I  have  the  pleasure  to  inform  you,  that 
they  very  readily  came  into  the  measure  ;  and  I  enclose  you  a  copy  of  their  reso- 
lution upon  it,  not  doubting  but  the  Assembly  of  your  government  will  cheerfully 
raise  their  quota  of  men  for  this  necessary  service,  whose  resolutions  I  shall  be  glad 
to  be  informed  of,  as  early  as  possible. 

I  am  Your  Honor's  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

CHAS.  HARDY, 
To  Governor  Hopkins. 

Governor  Shirlei/  to  Governor  Hopkins. 

Boston,  February  2d,  1756. 

Sir: — I  am  favored  with  Your  Honor's  letter  of  the  16th  of  January,  informing 
m«  that  you  had  laid  before  the  Assembly  within  your  government,  the  scheme  I 
had  communicated  to  you,  when  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  Your  Honor,  at  Albany, 
for  making  an  attempt,  this  winter,  for  the  reduction  of  Crown  Point,  and  their 
great  readiness  to  join  in  it  upon  the  terms  proposed  to  them  by  you. 

In  answer  to  this,  I  am  to  acquaint  Your  Honor,  that  since  I  left  Albany,  Sir 
Charles  Hardy  and  Governor  Fitch  have  laid  the  scheme  for  prosecuting  the 
above  mentioned  expedition  upon  the  terms  I  last  proposed  before  their  respec- 
tive Assemblies ;  and  that  though  neither  of  those  governments  objected  to 
their  part  of  the  expense,  as  proposed  in  the  last  mentioned  terms,  I  expressed 
great  readiness  to  join  in  it;  yet  such  difficulties  in  other  respects  have  arisen  from 
both,  as  renders  the  prosecution  of  it  impracticable,  so  that  I  have  been  obliged  to 
drop  the  thoughts  of  it. 

I  now  enclose  Your  Honor  a  copy  of  some  intelligence  sent  me  by  express  from 
Albany,  which  I  received  yesterday,  and  seems  to  demand  the  attention  of  all  the 
colonies  concerned  in  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point,  and  to  show  the  neces- 
sity of  their  pi-epariug  with  the  utmost  despatch  and  unanimity  for  prosecuting  it 
in  the  most  efiectual  manner,  the  ensuing  spring ;  which  I  can't  but  hope  they 
will. 

I  can't  determine  upon  the  raising  of  the  two  American  regiments  I  talked  of  at 
Albany,  till  I  hear  from  England,  which  I  hourly  expect. 

I  am,  with  a  most  real  esteem  and  regard,  sir, 

Your  Honor's  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq. 

VOL.  V.  60 


474  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  South  Kingstoum,  the  last 
Monday  in  February ^  1756. 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  the  gentlemen  that  were  appointed  to  audit  the  ac- 
counts of  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  as  one  of  the  committee  of 
war,  presented  this  Assembly  with  the  following  report : 


The  colony  of  Rhode  Island  to  Stephen  Hopkins,  Dr. 

£         *-.  d. 
To  sundry  articles  as  contained    and    charged    in    the  paper  marked 

No.  1,  settled,  and  vouchers  produced 11,599  18  7 

To  sundry  articles  as  contained    and    charged    in    the  paper  marked 

No.  2,  settled,  and  vouchers  produced 15,033  17  8 

To  sundry  articles  as  contained  and  charged    in    the    paper   marked 

No.  3,  settled,  and  vouchers  produced 2,051  09  7 

To  sundry  articles   as   contained   and    charged  in  the  paper  marked 

No.  4,  settled,  and  vouchers  produced 2,040  10  2 

To  sundry  articles  as  contained   and   charged  in  the  paper  marked 

No.  5,  settled,  and  vouchers  produced 11,279  1 7  2 

£42,005  13  2 

Creditor. 
By  cash  received  from  the  general  treasurer,  by  the  hands  of  Daniel 

Jenckes.  Esq 2,000  00  0 

By  cash  received   from   the  general   treasurer,  for  which  I  gave  my 

own  receipts 42,209  00  0 


£44,209  00  0 


We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  by  the  Genera!  Assembly,  to  examine  and 
adjust  the  accounts  of  Steplien  Hopkins,  Esq.,  as  he  is  one  of  the  committee  of  war 
for  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  have  accordingly  done  the  same  ;  he  having  pro- 
duced proper  vouchers  for  the  above  sum  of  £42,005  13i-.  id ,  having  charged  noth- 
ing for  commissions. 

We  therefore  find  he  ought  to  be  credited  for  that  sum.  in  his  accounts  with  the 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  476 

colony  ;  and  as  to  what  sums  lie  hath  received   of  the  colony's  treasurer,  we  have 
no  knowledge. 

Witness  our  hands,  at  Providence,  the  20th  day  of  February,  1756. 

.  O.  BROWN, 

JOS.  LIPPITT. 

N.  B.     I  have  now  lying  by  me,  of  the  money  last  received  from 

the  treasury £1,743  6s. 

And  this  Assembly,  having  duly  considered  the  said 
report, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
same  be,  and  it  is  hereby  accepted. 

Whereas,  the  gentlemen  that  were  appointed  to  audit  the 
accounts  of  Daniel  Jenckes,  Esq.,  one  of  the  committee  of 
war,  presented  this  Assembly  with  the  following  report  : 

The  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  to  Daniel  Jenckes, 

One  of  the  committee  of  war,  Dr. 

£        s.  d. 
1766.     To  the    foot   of  my    account,    from    August    15th,    1755,  to 

February  20th,  1756,  examined £26,910  16  8 

Creditor. 
1756.     By  cash  received  of  the  general  treasurer,  as  per  my  receipts 

at  sundry  times  the  11th  August,  1755   , £ 


We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly,  to  examine  and 
adjust  the  account  of  Daniel  Jenckes,  Esq.,  as  he  is  one  of  the  committee  of  war, 
for  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island,  have  accordingly  done  the  same,  he  having  pro- 
duced proper  vouchers  for  the  above  sum  of  £26,910  16s.  8c/.,  since  the  11th  of  Au- 
gust, 1755,  having  charged  nothing  for  commissions. 

We  therefore  find  he  ought  to  be  credited  for  that  sum  in  his  accounts  with  the 
colony  ;  and  as  to  what  sums  he  hath  received  of  the  colony's  treasurer,  we  have  no 
knowledge. 

Witness  our  bands,  at  Providence,  the  20th  day  of  February,  1756. 

O.  BROWN, 
JOS.  LIPPITT. 

And  this  Assembly  having  taken  the  said  report  into  con- 
sideration, and  duly  examined  it, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
same  be,  and  is  hereby  accepted. 


476  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1756. 


Report  of  the  Tax  Assessment  Committee. 

Newport,  Feb.  13th,  1756. 
We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed   a  committee  by  the 
General  Assembly  to  receive  of  Benjamin  Nichols,  Esq.,  the 
colony's  rate  that  was  ordered  by  act  of  government,  October 
1754,  do  report: 

That  we  have  received  of  Benjamin  Nichols,  £25,000,  old 
tenor;  of  which  we  have  burnt  £13,792  ;  and  the  other  £11,- 
208,  we  have  put  into  the  colony's  chest,  which  hath  three 
locks  and  keys,  which  keys  we  have  in  possession,  said  money 
being  new,  made  in  the  year  1750. 

Burnt £13,792 

In  the  chest 11,208 


£25,000 
JOHN  TILLINGHAST,         PETER  BOURS, 
THOMAS  CRANSTON,        JAMES  SHEFFIELD, 

Committee. 

And  this  Assembly,  having  duly  examined  and  considered 
the  aforesaid  report, — 

Bo  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  said 
report  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  accepted  ;  and  that  the  com- 
mittee, aforesaid,  burn  the  remaining  £11,208,  above  men- 
tioned. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  towns  of  the  colony  pay 
the  officers  the  charges  of  numbering  the  inhabitants,  &c.,  of 
each  respective  town  ;  and  that  the  several  accounts  be  laid 
before  the  next  town  meeting. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  Benjamin  Randall  and  Benjamin  Barber, 
John  Weight,  Benoni  Hall  and  Thos.  Clarke,  were  appointed  by 
the  towns  of  Westerly  and  Exeter,  to  run  their  dividing  line, 
and  having  performed  that  service,  made  report  as  followeth : 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  477 


Boundari)  Line  between  Westerly  and  Exeter. 

Whereas,  we,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  a  committee 
by  the  towns  of  Westerly  and  Exeter,  in  order  to  run  and  set- 
tle the  line  between  the  said  towns,  have  taken  upon  us  that 
affair,  and  begun  at  Robert  Moon's  stone  wall,  something  to 
the  south  of  his  house,  and  took  a  course  according  to  some 
bounds  which  we  found,  which  bear  from  each  other  east  and 
west ;  and  we  continued  an  east  course  till  we  crossed  the;  east 
line  of  Richmond,  where  we  made  a  stone  heap  for  the  north-east 
corner  of  said  Richmond  ;  which  line  from  said  wall  ran  about 
eight  rods  and  fourteen  links  to  the  north  of  Barney  Sisson's 
house ;  and  then  we  took  a  west  course  from  said  stone  wall, 
and  run  until  we  came  some  small  distance  north  of  Samuel 
Barber's  saw  mill,  where  we  made  a  heap  of  stones ;  and  then 
continued  a  west  course,  which  run  about  six  rods  and  an  half, 
to  the  north  of  the  house  where  Benjamin  Potter  lives,  where 
Ave  erected  a  bound  ;  and  then  we  continued  said  line  to  a 
pitch  pine  tree,  some  distance  to  the  northward  of  the  dwelling 
house  of  Benjamin  Hall,  which  tree  was  marked  ;  and  from 
thence,  the  same  course,  to  a  chesnut  tree,  marked  ;  and  so  to 
continue  a  west  course,  to  the  colony  line ;  which  line,  we 
agree  and  allow  to  be  the  dividing  line  between  the  towns  of 
Westerly  and  Exeter. 

As  witness  our  hands,  the  i3th  day  of  December,  A.  D. 
1753. 

BENJAMIN  RANDALL,         BENONI  HALL, 
BENJAMIN  BARBER,  JOHN  WEIGHT. 

THOMAS  CLARKE,  Surveyor. 

And  this  Assembly,  having  duly  considered  the  return, 
aforesaid, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  said 
return  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  confirmed,  and  that  the  line 
run  by  the  said  committees,  as  mentioned  in  their  aforesaid  re- 


478  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1756. 

turn,  be,  and  remain  the  dividing  line  between  the  said  towns 
of  Westerly  and  Exeter. 

Whereas,  Stephen  Ptichmond,  Simon  Perry  and  Benjamin 
Hall,  preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this  Assembly, 
that  whereas,  the  said  Stephen  Riclimond,  Robert  Lillibridge 
and  Benjamin  Brown,  were  sometime  ago,  a  committee  appoint- 
ed by  the  General  Assembly,  to  lay  out  two  highways  in  Wes- 
terly, at  the  expense  of  said  town,  one  of  which,  was  to  be 
laid  from  Richmond  to  Exeter ;  that  at  said  time  the  dividing 
line  between  the  said  towns  of  Westerly  and  Exeter,  was  not 
settled,  so  that  they  could  not  determine  where  they  ought  to 
stop ;  but  as  the  last  course  towards  Exeter  line  was  north 
thirty-one  degrees  and  a  quarter  west,  they  continued  the 
course  to  Exeter  line,  wherever  it  should  be,  since  the  line  be- 
tween Westerly  and  Exeter  has  been  settled  ;  and  that  so  far 
to  the  northward,  that  Benjamin  Hall,  one  of  the  petitioners 
who  owned  the  land  which  the  highway  runs  through  where 
the  line  was  settled,  did  insist  that  the  committee  should  mea- 
sure the  land  taken  up  by  said  highway,  and  set  a  price  upon 
it;  whereupon,  the  said  Stephen  Richmond  and  Benjamin 
Brown,  went  in  September,  1754,  and  taking  with  them  the 
aforesaid  Simon  Perry,  as  surveyor,  ran  out  said  highway ; 
that  it  was  agreed  to  give  the  said  Benjamin  Hall  £20,  old 
tenor,  for  his  land  ;  that  a  return  was  drawn  and  sent  to  the 
General  Assembly,  by  Mr.  Benjamin  Barber,  who  was  a  deputy 
at  that  lime  ;  but  it  was  casually  lost  or  mislaid,  so  that  the 
committee  have  not  been  paid  for  their  service,  nor  the  said 
Flail  for  his  land ;  and  prayed,  upon  the  whole,  that  the  town 
of  Westerly  may  be  ordered  to  pay  them  their  just  due:  on 
consideration  whereof, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  said  town  of  Westerly  pay  the  aforesaid  Ben- 
jamin Hall  £20  for  his  land  ;  the  said  Stephen  Richmond  and 
Boiijamin  Brown,  £3  each,  for  their  time  and  expenses ;  the 
said  Simon  Perry,  for  his  surveying  and  expenses,  £3  10^. ; 
and  ten  shillings  to  Benjamin  Randall,  Esq.,  for  showing  the 
line. 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  479 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Job  Randall,  Esq.,  and  Col.  Benoni  Waterman  be, 
and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  prepare  a  bill 
for  regulating  mill  dams  in  respect  to  the  passage  of  fish  up 
the  rivers,  in  this  colony  ;  directing  the  method  of  fishing,  fix- 
ing fines,  &c.,  and  present  the  same  unto  the  General  Assembly 
as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  five  hundred  men,  officers  included,  be  raised  in 
this  colony  (including  those  now  in  pay  of  the  government), 
for  the  proposed  expedition  against  Crown  Point ;  and  that 
His  Honor,  the  Governor,  Peter  Bours  and  Daniel  Jenckes, 
Esqs.,  Capt.  Benjamin  Wickham,  and  the  King's  attorney,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  prepare  a  bill 
for  that  purpose,  and  present  the  same  unto  this  Asssembly  as 
soon  as  may  be. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  George  Brown,  Esq.,  Stephen  Haszard,  Esq.,  James 
Helme,  Esq.,  and  Mr.  Matthew  Robinson,  be,  and  they  are  here- 
by appointed  a  committee  to  prepare  a  bill  for  regulating 
taxes  in  this  colon}^,  and  make  report  unto  the  General  Assem- 
bly, as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  re- 
quested to  return  the  thanks  of  this  colony  unto  Maj.  Gen.  John- 
son, for  his  good  services  in  defence  of  the  several  governments 
of  New  England,  duriugthe  late  expedition  against  the  French 
and  Indians ;  and  that  His  Honor  request  that  gentleman  to 
pay  the  same  compliment  in  behalf  of  this  colony  unto  Capt. 
William  Ayre,  engineer  general,  in  the  expedition,  aiore.said. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  marshal  of  the  court  of 
vice  admiralty  within  this  colony,  shall  have  the  same  power 
and  authority  to  sell  goods  and  merchandise  by  public  vendue 
in  consequence  of  orders  and  decrees  of  said  court,  as  sherifis 
have  upon  executions ;  and  on  non-payment  of  any  sum  or 
sums  contracted  for  bv  the  highest  bidder,  the  said  marshal  be. 


480  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

and  he  is  hereby  authorized  and  fully  empowered  to  call  a  spe- 
cial court  or  courts,  observing  the  same  rules  and  orders  in 
prosecution,  as  are  directed  by  the  act  that  empowers  vendue 
masters  of  the  several  towns  in  this  colony  to  call  special 
courts. 

An  Act  for  raising,  subsisting  and    paying  five  hundred  men 
for  the  expedition  designed  to   reduce   the  French  forts  on 
Lake  Champlain,  to  the  obedience  of  His  Majesty. 
Bo  it   enacted  by  this    General  Assembly,  and    by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  five  hundred  men,  exclusive 
of  commissioned  officers,  and  including  the  men  now  in  the  pay 
of  this  colony,  be  forthwith  enlisted    into    the  service    of   said 
colony,  as  its  proportion  of  the  army  intended  for  the  aforesaid 
expedition. 

That  the  said  five  hundred  men  be  one  entire  regiment,  com- 
manded and  governed  by  a  colonel,  a  lieutenant  colonel  and  a 
major ;  and  consist  of  ten  companies,  each  of  which  shall  be 
led  and  conducted  by  a  captain  and  two  lieutenants  ;  except 
three  of  said  companies,  which  shall  be  under  the  immediate 
command  of  the  three  field  officers,  and  shall  have  only  two 
lieutenants  to  each. 

And  for  encouraging  men    to  enlist  into  this   service,  there 
shall  be  given  to  each  able  bodied  man,  as  a  bounty,  £25,  old 
tenor,  and  one  good  blanket ;  and  shall  bepaid,  armed  and  accou- 
tred, farnished  and  subsisted,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  troops 
ill  the  service  of  this  colony  last  year  were;  and  shall  be  en- 
titled to  all  privileges,  benefits  and  immunities  that  were  then    , 
given  to   this  colony's  soldiers;  and  that  all  apprentices  who    I 
siiall  enlist  into  this   service,  shall  have  the  whole  bounty,  and 
one  hair  tlioiv  wages  due  at  their  return,  and  their  masters  the 
olhor  liall';  liiat  the  committee  of  war  furnish  such  officers  as 
shall  he  appointed,  with  money  for  paying  the  bounty  to  such    j 
soldiers  as  shall  enlist,  and    shall    take    care  for  the  subsisting 
and  leaving  the  advance  wages  to  all  the  soldiers^  and  provide 
provisions,  warlike  and  all   other  stores,  necessary  tor  the  said 
tive  hundK^d  men.  and  cause  them  to  be  carried  forward  to  Al- 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  4:SX 

bany,  as  soon  as  possibly  they  can ;  and  take  due  care  that 
there  be  no  defect  or  delay  in  any  thing  that  ought  to  be  pro- 
vided by  this  colony  for  the  benefit  of  the  said  five  hundred 
men,  or  for  the  service  of  the  said  expedition. 

That  the  Governor  of  this  colony  commissionate  all  the  offi- 
cers who  shall  be  appointed  for  the  said  five  hundred  men,  and 
give  orders  for  the  marching  of  the  said  men,  either  all  in  one 
body,  or  in  different  companies  at  dilferent  times,  as  the  good 
of  the  service  may  require  ;  and  cause  them  to  join  and  act  in 
conjuction  with  such  forces  as  may  be  raised  by  the  other  col- 
onies concerned  in  this  expedition,  and  put  them  under  the 
command  and  government  of  such  commander  in  chief  as  may 
be  agreed  upon  by  all  the  colonies,  and  approved  by  Major 
General  Shirley. 

And  for  a  supply  of  money  in  the  general  treasury,  for  car- 
rying all  the  things  aforesaid,  into  execution,  there  be  forth- 
with emitted,  and  put  into  the  treasury  the  sum  of  £8,000, 
equal  in  value  to  the  lawful  money  of  the  Province  of  the 
Massachusetts  Bay  and  of  the  colony  of  Connecticut ;  the 
bills  to  be  printed  wholly  with  types,  in  the  following  form, 
to  wit : 

TWENTY    SHILLINGS. 

The  possessor  of  this  hill  shall  he  ijaid  hij  the  treasurer  of  the 
colon?/  of  Rhode  Tsland  twenty  shillings,  laivfid  moneij,  at  the  rate 
of  six  shillings  and  eight  pence,  for  one  ounce  of  silver,  within  tivo 
pears  from  the  date  hereof.  By  order  of  Assemhlg,  the  21th  of 
Fehriiarg,  1756. 

And  that  the  bills  be  made  of  the  denomination  of  twenty- 
five,  twenty,  ten,  five,  three,  two  and  one  shilling ;  and  of  nine 
pence  and  six  pence  ;  and  that  an  equal  number  be  made  of 
each  denomination ;  and  the  said  bills  shall  be  signed  by  any 
three  of  the  gentlemen  who  signed  the  last  bills  made  by  this 
colony ;  and  as  soon  as  made,  shall  be  put  into  the  treasury. 

And  for  the  calling  in  and  redeeming  said  bills, — 

VOL.  V.  61 


482  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

It  is  enacted,  that  all  such  money  as  may  be  received  from 
the  crown  of  Great  Britain,  for  reimbursing  the  expenses  this 
colony  have  already  or  hereafter  may  be  at,  in  the  Crown 
Point  expedition,  shall  be  first  appropriated  to  sinking  the  bills 
already  made  by  this  colony,  called  Crown  Point  bills  ;  that 
when  the  Crown  Point  bills  are  sunk,  the  remainder  of  all 
such  money  that  may  be  received  from  home,  shall  be  applied 
towards  sinking  the  bills  emitted  b}'-  this  act ;  and  that  for 
sinking  the  remainder  of  those  bills,  or  the  whole  of  them,  if 
no  money  be  received  from  home  for  that  purpose,  rates  be  as- 
sessed on  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  in  such  time  that  it 
may  be  collected  and  brought  into  the  treasury,  time  enough 
to  redeem  the  whole  of  the  bills  now  emitted,  and  that  shall  be 
then  outstanding  within  two  years  from  the  date  of  said  bills-; 
and  that  the  whole  of  the  rate  or  rates  to  be  made  for  this 
purpose,  shall  be  paid  in  the  bills  now  emitted,  or  in  silver,  at 
the  rate  of  six  shillings  and  eight  pence,  for  every  ounce ;  or 
in  gold,  at  a  proportionate  value ;  and  the  silver  and  gold,  by 
these  means  drawn  into  the  treasury,  shall  be  immediately  ap- 
plied to  redeem  the  outstanding  bills  emitted  by  this  act ;  and 
that  for  the  future,  no  other  bills  be  burnt  by  this  colony,  but 
those  called  Crown  Point  bills,  until  they  be  wholly  sunk. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  emitting  of  these  bills,  nor  any  thing  contained  in  this 
act,  shall  have  any  effect,  or  in  any  measure  influence  the  old 
or  new  tenor  bills  formerly  emitted  by  this  colony,  and  now 
circulating ;  but  that  all  bonds,  mortgages,  notes,  accounts, 
covenants  and  contracts,  made,  given  or  subsisting  in  this  colony, 
shall  be  deemed,  construed  and  adjudged  in  every  respect  as 
they  would  and  ought  to  have  been,  if  this  act  had  never  been 
made  ;  any  tiling  therein  contained  that  may  seem  to  be  con- 
trary, notwithstanding. 

And  that  the  committee  of  war  have  the  same  power  and 
authority  during  the  recess  of  the  General  Assembly,  to  carry 
all  the  matters  and  things,  aforesaid,  into  execution,  as  they 
have  at  any  time  heretofore  been  vested  with  ;  and  that  each 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  483 

commissioned  officer   shall  be   allowed  three  shillings,  lawful 
money,  for  every  soldier  he  shall  enlist. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  £5,000  more  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  gener- 
al treasury,  towards  re-building  Fort  George  ;  and  that  the  com- 
mittee appointed  for  that  service,  make  use  of  the  stones 
in  the  old  fort  towards  building  the  new  one. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  committee  of  war  be  allowed  two  per  cent,  up- 
on all  the  money  passed  through  their  hands  in  paying  the  ex- 
penses of  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point,  for  their  time 
and  trouble  respecting  that  expedition. 

Whereas,  James  Sheffield,  Esq.,  exhibited  unto  this  Assem- 
bly an  account  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for,  sundry 
disbursements,  &c.,  towards  building  the  light  house  upon  Beaver 
Tail ;  which  being  duly  examined, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  said  account  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  al- 
lowed ;  and  that  £133  12^.  lOcl,  the  balance  thereof,  be  paid 
the  said  James  Sheffield,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  whole  of  the  £70,000  rate, 
already  assessed  upon  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  be  appro- 
priated towards  sinking  the  bills  of  credit  emitted  by  this  gov- 
ernment for  carrying  on  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  committee  of  war  prepare  an  account  of  the 
charges  this  colony  hath  borne  in  the  late  expedition  against 
Crown  Point,  which  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  is  requested  to 
transmit  unto  Great  Britain. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  sum  of  £150,  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the 
general  treasury,  unto  Mr.  James  Rhodes,  for  repairing  the 
great  bridge  at  Pawtuxet  Falls,  commonly  called  Pawtuxet 
Bridge,  he  charging  no  commissions. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 


484  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

solved,  that  the'^sum  of  £200  be  allowed  and  paid  unto  Job 
Randall,  Esq.,  out  of  the  general  treasury,  for  building  the 
bridge  at  Scituate,  commonly  called  the  Meeting  House  Bridge, 
he  charging  no  commissions. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  sum  of  £5,143  14^.  6(^.,  be  paid  out  of  the 
general  treasury  unto  Mr.  William  Read,  it  being  the  balance 
of  his  account  of  charges  for  building  the  light  house  at  Bea- 
ver Tail,  and  the  dwelling  house  thereto  belonging,  with 
interest. 

And  it  is  further  voted  and  resolved,  that  interest  be  further 
allowed  the  said  Wm.  Read,  until  the  whole  of  said  sum  is  paid. 

Both  houses  being  resolved  into  a  grand  committee,  the  gen- 
tlemen tv'hose  names  are  set  down  in  the  following  list,  were 
chosen  officers,  to  command  the  regiment  of  this  colony,  going 
against  Crown  Point : 

Christopher  Harris,  Esq.,  colonel. 

Christopher  Champlin,  Jr.,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel, 

(Samuel  Angel,  Esq.,  major. 

Thomas  Burkit,  first  lieutenant  of  Col.  Harris's  company. 

Elknah  Spear,  second  lieutenant  of  the  same. 

William  Richmond,  Jr.,  first  lieutenant  of  Lieut.  Col.  Cham- 
plin s  company. 

Benjamin  Bosworth,  second  lieutenant  of  the  same. 

Silas  Cook,  first  lieutenant  of  Major  Angel's  company. 

Mark  Noble,  second  lieutenant  of  the  same. 

1st.     George  Gardner,  Jr.,  first  captain. 

John  Linscomb,  his  first  lieutenant. 

James  Tew,  Jr.,  second  lieutenant  of  said  company. 

2d.     Henry  Babcock,  second  captain. 

Giles  Russel,  his  first  lieutenant. 

Samuel  Hearne,  second  lieutenant  of  said  compan3^ 

3d.     Barzillai  Richmond,  third  captain. 

Joseph  Davis,  his  first  lieutenant. 

Nathaniel  Peck,  second  lieutenant  of  said  company 

4th.     John  Potter,  Jr.,  fourth  captain. 

Grindal  Reynolds,  his  first  lieutenant. 


1756.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  485 

George  Shearman,  second  lieutenant  of  said  company. 
5th.     Daniel  Bosworth,  fifth  captain. 
Christopher  Hargil,  his  first  lieutenant. 
Edward  Talby,  second  lieutenant  of  said  company. 
6th.     Amos  Hammond,  sixth  captain. 
Samuel  Champlin,  his  first  lieutenant. 
Samuel  Rose,  second  lieutenant  of  said  company. 
Joshua  Brown,  second   lieutenant   of  Capt.  John  Whiting's 
company,  now  at  Fort  William  IIenr3^ 
God  save  the  King. 

H.  Fox  to  the  Governor  and  Com^xm?/  of  llhode  Island. 

Whitehall,  13th  March,  1756. 

Gentlemen  : — -The  Earl  of  Loudoun,  whom  the  King  has  appointed  commander 
in  chief  of  all  his  forces  whatsoever,  in  North  America,  being  preparing  to  set  out 
with  all  possible  expedition,  together  with  two  regiments  of  foot,  a  train  of  artillery, 
and  a  sufficient  quantity  of  warlike  stores,  which  His  Majesty  has  been  pleased  to 
order  for  the  public  service  in  those  parts ;  I  am  commanded  to  signify  to  you  the 
King's  pleasure,  that  you  should  be  ready  to  give  His  Lordship,  and  the  troops  from 
England,  all  the  assistance  in  your  power,  on  their  arrival  in  America,  agreeably 
to  the  orders  sent  you  in  Sir  Thomas  Robinson's  letter  of  October  2G,  1754  ;  and 
you  will  correspond  with,  and  apply  to  the  Earl  of  Loudoun,  on  all  occasions,  in 
the  same  manner,  as  you  were  directed  to  do  with  the  late  General  Braddock,  and 
Major  General  Shirley. 

It  being  of  the  greatest  importance,  that  the  King's  regiments  already  in  North 
America  (as  well  as  the  three  stationed  in  Nova  Scotia,  as  the  four  in  the  Province 
of  New  York),  should  be  recruited,  as  soon  as  possible  to  their  full  complement  of 
one  thousand  men,  each,  it  is  His  Majesty's  pleasure,  that  you  should  forthwith  call 
together  the  Council  and  Assembly  of  the  province  under  your  government,  and  that 
you  should  press  them  in  the  strongest  manner,  to  make  the  most  early  and  effect- 
ual provision  for  raising,  and  assisting  His  Majesty's  officers  to  raise,  such  a  number, 
of  men,  as  shall  be  sufficient  to  recruit  the  King's  regiments  now  stationed,  or  to  be 
stationed  In  North  America,  up  to  their  establishments. 

And  you  will  acquaint  them,  that  the  King,  m  order  to  encourage  his  faithful 
subjects  to  engage  in  a  service  so  essential  for  their  own  defence  and  preservation, 
does  consent  that  such  recruits  shall  not  be  obliged  to  serve  any  where  but  in 
North  America ;  that  they  shall  be  discharged  when  hostilities  shall  cease  ;  and 
that  each  of  them  shall  have  a  grant  of  two  hundred  acres  of  land,  free  from  the 
payment  of  quit  rents  for  ten  years,  either  in  the  Province  of  New  York,  New 
Hampshire,  or  Nova  Scotia,  at  their  own  choice  ;  which  lands  shall  be  granted 
them,  on  producing  their  discharge  from  the  commander  in  chief,  to  the  Governor 
of  either  of  the  said  provinces,  respectively  ;  and,  in  case  they  should  be  killed  in 
the  service,  their  widows  and   children    shall   be  entitled  to  the  said  lands,  in  such 


486  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE  ISLAJND  [1756. 

proportions  as  the  Governor  and  Council   of  the  province  -whereia  such  lands  lie, 
shall  direct. 

You  will  acquaint  the  Council  and  Assembly  with  His  Majesty's  great  goodness, 
in  havinf  recommended  their  case  to  the  consideration  of  his  Parliament,  who 
have  "ranted  the  sum  of  £115,000,  to  be  distributed  in  such  proportions  as  the 
Kins  shall  think  proper,  to  the  four  provinces  of  New  England  ;  and  those  of  New 
York  and  New  Jersey ;  and  thereby  enabled  His  Majesty  not  only  to  manifest  his 
sense  of  their  past  services,  but  also  to  encourage  them  for  the  future  to  exert 
themselves  in  the  service  with  spirit  and  vigor ;  that  His  Majesty  therefore  expects 
that  they  will  heartily  and  zealously  concur  in  every  measure  which  shall  be 
thought  advisable,  for  carrying  on  the  war  in  North  America ;  and  that  they  will 
forthwith  raise  the  same  number  of  men,  in  each  colony,  as  were  raised  last  year 
(whereof  as  great  a  proportion  as  may  be,  to  consist  of  rangers),  to  act  in  conjunc- 
tion with  the  King's  troops,  in  such  operations  as  shall  be  undertaken  for  annoying 
the  enemy,  and  recovering  His  Majesty's  just  rights. 

This  service  will  be  the  less  burthensome  to  them,  as  the  raising  of  the  men, 
their  pav,  arms  and  clothing,  will  be  all  that  will  be  required  of  them,  measures 
having  been  already  taken  tor  laying  up  magazines  of  stores,  and  provisions  of  all 
kinds,  at  the  sole  expense  of  the  crown  ;  and  you  will  use  your  utmost  endeavors 
to  induce  the  Council  and  Assembly  to  give  the  necessary  orders  for  raising  their 
quota  of  these  men,  with  the  greatest  expedition,  so  that  they  may  be  ready  to 
march  to  such  place  as  the  commander  in  chief  shall  upon  his  arrival,  direct. 

It  is  also  His  Majesty's  pleasure,  that  you  should  particularly  recommend  it  to 
vour  Assembly,  to  make  provision  out  of  such  funds  as  already  exist,  or  may  here- 
after be  raised  ibr  the  King's  service,  for  re-paying  the  masters  of  such  indented 
servants,  as  shall  engage  in  His  Majesty's  service,  the  money  paid  by  the  said  mas- 
ters upon  the  original  contract,  in  proportion  to  the  time  such  indented  servants 
have  to  serve. 

And  you  will  at  all  times  discourage  the  harboring,  concealing  or  assisting  such 
as  shall  desert  the  service  ;  and  also  use  all  means  for  discovering,  and  apprehend- 
ing such  deserters. 

You  will  likewise  use  your  best  endeavors  to  prevail  on  your  Assembly  to  ap- 
propriate such  part  of  the  funds  now  raised,  or  which  shall  be  raised  for  the  pub- 
lic service,  to  be  issued  and.  applied  to  the  general  service  iu  such  manner  as  the 
commander  in  chief  shall  direct. 

The  King  would  have  you  recommend  it  in  the  strongest  manner  to  your  Council 
and  Assembly,  to  pass  efTectual  laws  for  prohibiting  all  trade  and  commerce  with 
the  Frencli,  and  for  preventing  the  exportation  of  provisions  of  all  kinds,  to  any 
of  heir  islands  or  colonies. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

H.  FOX. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 


1756.]  AND   PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  487 


Proceedings  of  the  Genci^al  Assembly,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivpoii,  the  first  Wednes- 
day of  May,  1756. 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  all  and  every  the  persons  whose  names  hereafter 
follow,  have  taken  the  oath  or  affirmation,  prescribed  by  the 
colony  law,  against  bribery  and  corruption,  in  the  election  of 
officers  in  this  government,  as  appears  by  proper  returns  from 
the  respective  town  clerks, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  all  and  every  of  them  be,  and  are  hereby  made  free 
of  the  colony,  and  may  therefore  lawfully  give  their  votes  to 
choose  officers,  not  only  for  their  respective  towns,  but  also  in 
the  choice  of  general  officers. 

Newport — Jos.  Yeamans,  Thos.  Teacle  Taylor,  Wm.  Gard- 
ner Wanton,  Robert  Stoddard,  Daniel  Fourtane,  James  Carter, 
Joseph  Phillips,  Isaac  Ingraham,  Jr.,  James  Collins.  Joseph 
Burrrel,  Timothy  Balch,  Edward  Simmonds,  Richard  Mumford, 
Joseph  Belcher,  John  Clarke,  son  of  John  Smith  ;  Benjamin 
Wanton,  William  Taggart,  John  Congdon,  Robert  Pate,  John 
Baggs,  Robert  Kelly  and  Nathan  Ingraham. 

Providence — John  Foster,  John  Potter,  Jr.,  Samuel  Tucker, 
Jr.,  Edward  Dexter,  John  Peck,  Dean  Kimball,  James 
Henry,  Benjamin  Thurber,  Knight  Dexter,  Jabez  Whipple, 
William  Aherson,  Jr.,  Nathoaniel  Wheaton,  Richard  Borden, 
Luther  Hawkins,  Barak  M'Donald,  Levi  Whipple  and  Nathan 
Sterry. 

Portsmouth — Benjamin  Cornell,  Isaac  Barker  and  Caleb 
Cory. 

Warwick — Thomas   Utter,  Seth    Chace,  Antliony  Low,  Wra. 


488  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

Gorton,  Jr.,  Oliver  Arnold,  John  Gorton,  Elisha  Whitman,  Zeb- 
ulon  Utter,  John  Holdon,  son  of  Randal ;  and  John  Budlong. 

Westerly — David  Lewis,  Jr.,  Simeon  Burdick,  Jos,  Noyes,  Na- 
than Smith,  David  Hall,  John  Larkin,  Jr.,  and  John  Thompson. 

New  Shoreham — Nathaniel  Lock,  Nathaniel  Littlefield,  the 
2d,  and  Caleb  Littlefield,  the  2d. 

North  Kingstown — James  Rhodes,  Nicholas  Gardner,  Wil- 
kinson Browning,  Nathaniel  Lock,  William  Caswell,  Daniel 
Weeden,  Jeremiah  Carpenter,  Jeoffrey  Watson,  Jr.,  and  David 
Babcock,  Jr. 

East  Greenwich — Caleb  Spencer,  Josiah  Matteson,  Silas  Ca- 
sey, Ebenezer  Hill,  Jeremiah  Sweet  and  Thomas  Briggs,  son 
of  Benjamin. 

Smithfield — James  Appleby,  Jr.,  Gideon  Paine,  Stukely  Ar- 
nold, Enoch  Arnold,  Joseph  Carpenter,  Jr.,  Peter  Aldrich,  Jr., 
Thomas  Herenden,  Joshua  Shrife,  William  Gaskil,  Daniel  Gal- 
lom,  Joshua  Windsor,  Jeremiah  Ballard,  John  Angel,  Nathan 
Arnold,  Cornelius  Walling  and  Daniel  Smith. 

Scituate — Eliezer  Collins,  Jabez  Wight,  Jer.  Angel,  Moses 
Colvin,  Stephen  Smith,  son  of  Thomas  ;  and  Jer.  Angel,  Jr. 

Charlestown — William  Greene  and  Nathan  Kinyon. 

Coventry — Ezekiel  Johnson,  James  Bates,  Jr.,  Israel  Bowen, 
Caleb  Bates  and  Peter  Barker. 

West  Greenwich — George  Reynolds,  Robert  Campbell,  Wm. 
Davis,  Job  Spencer,  Benjamin  Greene,  son  of  James  ;  James 
Moon,  John  Matteson,  Jr.,  Philip  Ayls worth,  John  Straight, 
Job  Jenkins,  William  Nichols  and  John  King. 

Exeter — John  Babcock,  William  Hall,  Jr.,  Jonathan  Ayls- 
worth  and  George  Sweet. 

Middletown — Nicholas  Easton. 

Bristol — Royal  Paine,  Gamaliel  Clarke  and  Charles  Church. 

Cumberland — John  Goold,  Daniel  Miller,  Beach  Cutter,  Jo- 
seph Arnold,  Christopher  Brown,  Henry  Richmond,  Benoni 
Stud  ley,  John  Fisk,  John  Bartlet  and  Bcnj.  Batter.  j 

Richmond — William  Thomas,  Joseph  Petty,  Barnet  Sisson,  ^ 
Benjamin  Enos  and  Andrew  Nichols. 

Cranston — Stephen  l^rown  and  Nathan  Williams. 


1756.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS. 


489 


The  following  officers  declared  elected,  were  duly  engaged. 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 


ASSISTANTS. 


Mr.  James  Honeyman, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Easton, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Cooke, 
Mr.  Obadiah  Brown, 
Mr.  Robert  Lawton, 


Mr.  Joseph  Brownell,  Jr.. 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Lippitt, 
Mr.  William  Richmond, 
Mr.  John  Congdon, 
Col.  Thomas  Hazard. 


SECRETAEY. 

Mr.  Thomas  Ward. 

ATTORNEY    GENERAL. 

Mr.  Daniel  Updike. 


GENERAL  TREASURER. 

Mr.  Thomas  Richardson. 


DEPUTIES. 


M<> 


IV port. 


Capt.  Benjamin  Wickham, 
Mr.  Thomas  Cranston, 
Mr.  Peter  Bours, 
Capt.  Joseph  Wanton,  Jr., 
Capt.  Wm.  Mumford, 
:\Tr.  William  Read. 

Providence. 
Mr.  Elisha  Brown, 
Mr.  Nicholas  Brown, 
Mr.  Henry  Harris, 
Mr.  George  Brown. 

Portsmouth. 
Mr.  William  Anthony,  Jr., 
Mr.  Jonathan  Freeborne, 
Mr.  Thomas  Brownell, 
Mr.  William  Earl. 
VOL.  v.         62 


Warwick. 
Col.  Benoni  Waterman, 
Mr.  Daniel  Greene, 
Capt.  Randall  Rice, 
Capt.  James  Greene. 

Westerii/. 
Major  Joseph  Clarke, 
Mr.  Samuel  Ward. 

New  SJioreham. 
Mr.  Robert  Hull, 
Mr.  John  Littlefield. 

North  Kiugstoivn. 
Mr.  Thomas  Allen, 
Mr.  Samuel  Albro. 

South  Kingsto2vn. 
Mr.  Henry  Gardner, 
Mr.  Joseph  Haszard. 


490 


RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE    ISLAND 


[1756. 


DEPUTIES. 


East  Greemvich. 
Mr.  William  SpeDcer, 
Lieut.  Col.  Isaac  Gardner, 

Jamestown. 
Capt.  Wm.  Haszard. 
Mr.  Edward  Carr. 
Smithfield. 
Mr.  Thomas  Owens, 
Capt.  John  Sayles,  Jr. 

Scituatc. 
Capt.  Job  Randall, 
Mr.  Gideon  Harris. 

Glocesier. 
Mr.  John  Walton, 
Mr.  Silas  Williams. 
Charlestomi. 
Col.  Christopher  Champlin, 
Capt.  Robert  Potter. 
Wed  Greenwich. 
Mr.  Jeremiah  Ellis, 
Mr.  Samuel  Dyer. 

Coventry/. 
Mr.  Caleb  Greene. 
^Ir.  Job  Greene. 

Eo:eier. 
Capt.  John  Weight, 
^Ir.  Benoni  Gardner. 


Middletmvu. 
Mr.  Thomas  Gould, 
Capt.  William  Turner. 

Bristol. 
Mr.  Thomas  Greene, 
Mr.  Nathaniel  Fales. 

Tiverton. 
Mr.  Thomas  Howland, 
Mr.  John  Brown. 

Little  Compton. 
Mr.  Richard  Brownell, 
Mr.  Thomas  Church. 

^Varren. 
Capt.  Josiah  Humphreys, 
Capt.  Benjamin  Barton. 

Cumberland. 
Mr.  John  Dexter, 
Capt.  David  Whipple- 

Bichmond. 
Capt.  W^illiam  Clarke,  Jr., 
Mr.  Stephen  Richmond. 

Cranston. 
Mr.  Joseph  Harris, 
Mr.  Christopher  Lippitt. 


The  Hon.  Thomas  Cranston,  speaker,  and  ]Mr.  Josias  Lyndon, 
clerk. 


This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  warrants  to  the  collector  of  rates,  be  lengthened 
out  unto  the  next  session  of  this  Assembly,  and  no  longer. 

Wliereai?,  the  committee  of  war  have  received  of  His  Excel- 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  41^1 

lency,  William  Shirley,  Esq.,  commander  in  chief  of  His  Maj- 
esty's forces  in  North  America,  three  hundred  firelocks,  three 
hundred  bayonets,  three  hundred  cartouch  boxes,  nine  barrels 
of  gunpowder,  one  ton  of  musket  balls,  and  one  cask  of  flints, 
for  the  use  of  the  forces  raised  in  this  colony,  to  be  employed 
in  the  expedition  now  carrying  on  against  the  French  forts 
and  settlements  on  Lake  George,  late  St.  Sacrament,  at  Crown 
Point,  and  on  the  Lake  Iroquois,  otherwise  called  Lake  Cham- 
plain  ;  and  whereas,  the  said  committee  of  war  have,  by  an  in- 
denture, under  their  hands  and  seals,  dated  the  20th  day  of 
April  last,  promised,  in  behalf  of  the  colony,  to  be  answerable 
to  the  quartermaster  general  and  financial  officer  of  His  Maj- 
esty's ordnance,  for  all  said  arms  and  accoutrements,  and  that 
the  same  shall  be  returned  (such  only  as  shall  be  lost  by  in- 
evitable accidents  in  actual  service,  excepted)  at  the  end  of  the 
aforesaid  exp'edition,  to  His  Majesty's  comptroller  of  the  ord- 
nance, in  North  America,  at  such  place  as  shall  be  appointed 
by  His  Excellency,  William  Shirley,  Esq.,  or  the  commander  in 
chief,  for  the  time  being  ; — 

This  Assembly  do  therefore  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted 
and  resolved,  that  they  approve  of  the  conduct  of  the  commit- 
tee of  war,  in  obligating  themselves,  as  abovesaid,  in  behalf 
of  the  colony  ;  and  that  the  colony  will  abide  by,  and  perform 
the  promise  contained  in  said  indenture. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  wages  of  the  first  lieuten- 
ant of  each  of  the  field  officers'  companies  going  in  the  expedi- 
tion against  Crown  Point,  be  £90  per  month ;  and  that  the 
second  lieutenant  of  each  of  the  said  officers,  be  allowed  the 
monthly  wages  of  £00. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  committee  of  war  be,  and 
they  are  hereby  directed  and  fully  empowered  to  issue  war- 
rants unto  the  colonels  of  the  several  regiments  in  this  colony, 
to  cause  to  be  impressed  such  a  number  of  able  bodied  men  as 
shall  be  wanted  to  fill  up  the  several  companies  rasing  for  the 


492  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLO.NY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1756. 

expedition  against  Crown  Point,  in  such  proportion  as  the  com- 
mittee of  war  shall  think  just ;  and  that  said  warrants  be 
given  out  upon  the  10th  day  of  this  instant  May,  if  said  com- 
panies iiY2  not  filled  up  by  that  time. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  20th  day  of  this  instant 
May,  be  set  apart  and  observed  as  a  day  of  flisting  and  prayer, 
throughout  this  colony ;  and  that  no  servile  labor  be  done  on 
said  day  ;  and  that  His  Plonor,  the  Governor,  be,  and  is  hereby 
requested  to  put  out  a  proclamation  for  that  purpose  ;  and  that 
this  act  be  forthwith  proclaimed. 

Published  in  Newport,  May  8th,  1756,  by 

THO.  AVARD,  Secretary. 

An  Act  for  regulating  and  governing  the  forces  raised,  and  to 
be  raised  by  this  colony,  for  the  intended  expedition  against 
Crown  Point. 

Whereas,  this  government  has  been,  and  are  now  levying 
forces  for  an  expedition  against  Crowm  Point,  and  it  is  neces- 
sary that  they  should  be  under  proper  government, — 
Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  commissioned  officers  of 
the  forces  raised,  and  to  be  raised  in  this  colony,  for  the  expe- 
dition aforesaid,  may,  by  the  appointment  of  their  colonel  or 
commanding  officer,  hold  a  regimental  court  martial,  for  inflict- 
ing such  corporeal  punishments  as  the  neglect  of  duty,  disor- 
ders in  quarters,  or  other  such  crimes,  may  deserve ;  which 
regimental  court  martial,  shall  consist  of  five  commissioned  offi- 
cers, at  the  least ;  two  of  whom,  shall  be  of  the  degree  of  cap- 
tain ;  and  the  judgment  or  sentence  by  them  given,  shall  be 
always  according  to  the  plurality  of  A'oices  ;  but  never  execut- 
ed until  the  commanding  officer  of  the  regiment  sliall  have  con- 
firmed and  approved  the  same. 

And  be  it  further  enacted   by  the   authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  regiment  of  this  colony,  and   all    the    officers  and  soldiers 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  493 

thereto  belonging,  shall  be  subject  to  such  general  courts  mar- 
tial as  may  be  holden  in  the  army,  by  order  of  the  commander 
in  chief. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Mr.  Ephraim  Starkweather  be,  and  is  hereby  ap- 
pointed chaplain  of  the  regiment  of  this  colony,  raised  for  the 
expedition  against  Crown  Point,  and  be  allowed  the  monthly 
wages  of  £100,  old  tenor. 

Whereas,  Messrs.  John  Wanton,  Thomas  Rodman,  Edward 
Wanton,  Joseph  Cozzens,  Samuel  Dyre,  Jr.,  Edward  Calverson, 
Clothier  Pierce,  Ji\  Matthew  Cozzens,  Robert  Wheatley,  Au- 
gustus Johnston  and  Israel  Brayton,  preferred  a  petition,  and 
represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  whereas,  there  is  great 
danger  of  an  approaching  war,  and  this  government  is  repair- 
ing the  fort,  and  putting  the  colony  into  a  posture  of  defence ; 
and  as  the  greater  part  of  the  petitioners  have  been  used  to  the 
exercise  of  cannon,  they  proposed  an  act  may  be  passed  that 
the  masters  of  vessels  in  the  town  of  Newport,  or  so  many  as 
shall  be  thought  necessary  by  the  captain  of  the  fort,  may,  in- 
stead of  being  obliged  to  bear  arms  in  the  trained  bands  of  said 
town,  be  obliged,  by  an  order  from  the  captain  of  said  fort,  for 
the  time  being,  to  appear  six  times  every  year  at  the  fort,  on 
such  days  as  the  captain  shall  see  cause  to  appoint,  in  order  to 
exercise  the  cannon  there  ;  by  means  whereof,  they  may  gain 
further  knowledge  of  that  exercise,  and  be  the  better  enabled  to 
defend,  in  case  of  an  attack  of  said  fort;  on  consideration 
whereof; — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  prayer  of  the  petitioners 
be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  granted  ;  that  the  captain  of  Fort 
George  enlist  fifty  men  for  the  purpose,  in  said  petition  men- 
tioned. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  William  Read,  hire  for  the  use  of  the  colony,  so 
much  money  as  is  at  present  necessary  for  carrying  on  the 
building  of  Fort  George ;  but  nevertheless,  he  may  not  exceed 
the  sum  granted  by  the  General  Assembly,  for  that  purpose. 


494  llECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve;  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  committee  of  war  be,  and  they  are  hereby  di- 
rected and  fully  empowered  to  issue  warrants  to  the  sheriffs  of 
the  several  counties  within  this  colony,  to  impress  so  many 
blankets  as  shall  be  necessary  for  the  present  expedition 
against  Crown  Point. 

Whereas,  a  certain  sloop  (the  master's  name  unknown  to  this 
Assembly)  was  lately  cast  on  shore  at  Point  Judith,  in  this 
colony  ;  out  of  which  a  person  was  buried,  who  died  with  the 
small  pox,  which  the  master  concealed ;  and  as  almost  all  the 
people  belonging  to  said  sloop,  are  taken  down  with  said  dis- 
temper, and  the  whole  colony  is  in  danger  by  said  conceal- 
ment,— 

This  Assembly  do  therefore  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted 
and  resolved,  that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Kings  county,  or 
his  deputy,  take  the  said  vessel  with  her  cargo,  into  custody, 
and  safely  keep  the  same  until  all  charges  and  damages  be 
paid,  which  have,  or  shall  arise  by  means  of  said  vessel's 
bringing  the  infection  into  this  colony,  or  until  sufficient  se- 
curity be  given  for  the  same,  not  less  than  £'5,000 ;  and  that 
this  act  be  forthwith  proclaimed,  and  a  copy  thereof  immedi- 
ately sent  to  said  sheriff,  by  the  secretary. 

Published  in  Newport,  May  8th,  1756,  by 

THOMAS  WARD,  Secretary. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re 
solved,  that  all  business  lying  before  them  unfinished,  be,  and 
the  same  is  hereby  referred  unto  their  next  session  ;  that  the 
secretary  publish  in  Newport,  by  beat  of  drum,  all  the  acts  and 
orders  now  made  and  passed,  within  ten  days  after  the  rising 
of  this  Assembly,  which  is  hereby  adjourned  to  the  second 
Tuesday  of  June  next. 

God  save  the  Kine;. 


175G.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  495 


Proceedings  of  the  Geiieral  AssemMy,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Bhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  the  second  Tuesday  in  Juney 
1756. 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  Gideon  Northup,  William  Northup,  Benjamin  Da- 
vis, Stephen  Watson,  Caleb  Watson,  Ephraim  Haszard,  John 
Gardner  son  of  Ezekiel;  Stephen  Northup,  son  of  Joseph; 
Isaac  Browning,  Joseph  Congdon,  Jr.,  Jonathan  Vaughan,  John 
Greene,  John  Hill,  Jeremiah  Haszard,  Thomas  Douglas,  Peleg 
Briggs,  Samuel  Browning,  Alexander  Huling,  Richard  Chad- 
sey,  Christopher  Allen,  Richard  Durfey  and  David  Sprague, 
all  of  North  Kingstown,  in  the  county  of  Kings  county,  having 
taken  the  oath,  or  affirmation,  by  law  prescribed  against  bribery 
and  corruption  in  the  election  of  officers,  were  admitted  free- 
men of  said  town,  since  the  general  election,  held  at  Newport, 
in  May,  1755 ;  but  by  accident,  their  names  were  not  returned 
at  the  last  general  elaction,  so  that  they  have  not  been  made 
free  of  the  colony, — 

This  Assembly,  therefore,  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted 
and  resolved,  that  all  and  every  of  the  persons  above  named, 
be,  and  hereby  are  made  free  of  the  colony,  and  may  therefore 
lawfully  give  their  votes,  not  only  to  choose  officers  for  their 
said  town,  but  also  in  the  choice  of  general  officers. 

Whereas,  Abraham  Sheldon,  Jr.,  Jonathan  Knight,  Jr.,  Jo- 
seph Randall,  the  3d,  John  Waterman,  son  of  Richard  ;  Abiah 
Corp,  Stephen  Westcot  and  John  Burton,  Jr.,  all  of  Cranston, 
in  the  coinity  of  Providence,  having  taken  the  oath,  or  affirma- 
tion, by  law  prescribed  against  bribery  and  corruption  in  the 
election  of  officers,  were  admitted  freemen  of  said  town  since 
the  general  election,  held  at  Newport,  in  May,  1755,  but  by 
accident    their  names  were    not   returned    at   the    last  gen- 


496  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1756. 

eral  election,  so  that  they  have  not  been  made  free  of  the 
colony, — 

This  Assembly,  therefore,  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted 
and  resolved,  that  all  and  every  of  the  persons  above  named, 
be,  and  hereby  are  made  free  of  the  colony ;  and  may  there- 
fore lawfully  give  their  votes  to  choose  officers,  not  only  in 
their  said  town,  but  also  in  the  choice  of  general  officers. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Nicholas  Easton,  Robert  Lawton,  Esqrs.,  Capt.  Ran- 
dall Rice,  George  Brown,  Esq.,  Capt.  William  Mumford,  and 
Mr.  Samuel  Ward,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  com- 
mittee, with  power  to  inquire  jointly  and  severally,  whether 
any  person  or  persons  have  been  guilty  of  the  breach  of  any 
of  the  acts  of  Assembly  or  laws  of  this  colony,  made  to  restrict 
or  prohibit  the  exportation  of  provisions  out  of  this  colony ; 
and  the  said  committee,  or  the  major  part  of  them,  are  hereby 
invested  with  power  to  send  for  any  person  or  persons  to  come 
before  them  to  be  examined  upon  oath  or  otherwise ;  and  also 
to  send  for  any  book,  records,  or  papers  within  this  colony,  to 
be  examined,  and  to  make  report  to  this  Assembly,  at  this 
present,  or  their  next  session,  of  any  breach  of  said  acts  or 
laws,  that  they  shall  discover. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Col.  Benoni  Waterman,  and  Major  Thomas  Greene, 
be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  prepare  a 
bill  for  the  good  government  of  our  forces  in  the  expedition 
against  Crown  Point,  and  present  the  same  unto  this  Assem- 
bly as  soon  as  may  be. 

WJiereas,  the  town  council  of  Newport  preferred  a  petition, 
and  represented  unto  this  Assembly,  that  the  General  Assem- 
bly of  this  colony,  at  their  session  on  the  third  Monday  of 
iNIarch,  1750,  made  and  passed  an  act  for  granting  an  excise 
upon  WMnes  and  spirituous  liquors,  sold  by  retail  in  said  town, 
which  Avas  to  continue  and  be  in  force  for  five  years ;  and 
tliat  the  said  act  expired  last  March  ;  whereupon,  they  prayed 
it  may  be  revived  and  continue  in  force  for  such  a  term  of 
years  as  may  be  thought  proper; — 


175G.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  497 

On  consideration  whereof,  be  it  enacted  by  this  General  As- 
sembly, and  by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  act 
aforesaid  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  revived,  and  shall  continue 
and  be  in  force,  for,  and  during  the  term  of  five  years  more, 
commencing  from  the  day  of  its  expiration. 

Whereas,  Benjamin  King  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly  an 
account  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  making  an  in- 
strument to  determine  the  latitude  in  order  to  run  the  dividing- 
line  between  this  colony  and  tlie  Province  of  the  Massachusetts 
Bay,  which  being  duly  examined, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  said  account  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  allowed  ; 
and  that  £300,  the  amount  thereof,  be  paid  the  said  Benjamin 
King,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be,  and  he  hereby  is  re- 
quested and  fully  empowered  to  receive  the  money  granted 
this  colony,  by  the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain,  when  the  same 
shall  arrive  ;  and  if  it  shall  happen  to  be  brought  to  New  York, 
or  Boston,  that  His  Honor  cause  it  to  be  transported  by  land 
or  water,  to  Newport,  as  he  shall  jndge  best,  and  most  safe  for 
the  government,  and  cause  it  to  be  lodged  in  the  general  treas- 
ury, giving  and  taking  receipts  ;  and  that  the  said  money  be, 
and  remain  in  the  treasury,  until  further  orders  from  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  forces  already  raised,  or  that 
hereafter  ma}^  be  raised  by  this  colony,  shall  be  under  the  same 
regulation,  as  to  a  general  court  martial,  as  the  forces  in  the 
other  governments  are. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  general  treasurer  be,  and 
he  is  hereby  directed  to  receive  the  bills  of  public  credit  last 
emitted  by  this  colony  ;  and  called  lawful  money  in  all  pay- 
ments into  the  general  treasury,  at  the  same  rate  that  they  now 
pass;  and  that  a  rate  of  £100,000  be  assessed  and  levied  upon 
the  inhabitants  of  this  colony. 

VOL.  V.  P.P.  • 


498  RECORDS   OF  THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

This  Assemljly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  George  Brown,  Esq.,  and  Mr.  Nicholas  Brown,  be, 
and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  prepare  a  bill 
for  making  the  work  house,  in  Providence,  a  house  of  ccrrec- 
tion,  also. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  all  vessels  coming  into  the  port 
of  Newport,  which  shall,  after  being  hailed  by  Fort  George, 
presume  to  enter  the  harbor  without  ha"\ang  first  obtained  lib- 
erty from  the  captain,  or  gunner  of  said  fort,  shall  be  brought 
to  by  said  fort,  and  be  obliged  to  lie  to,  until  liberty  is  ob- 
tained for  entering  the  harbor  ;  and  the  master  or  commander 
of  such  vessel,  shall  pay  into  the  naval  office,  £4  for  the  first 
shot,  £8  for  the  second,  and  for  every  shot  after,  £12  ;  and  no 
such  vessel  shall  be  cleared  out,  until  the  same  is  paid  ;  and 
that  the  captain  of  said  fort,  or  in  his  absence,  the  gunner, 
inform  the  naval  ofiicer  of  every  shot  that  shall  be  fired,  as 
aforesaid  ;  and  that  the  captain  of  the  fort,  or  in  his  absence, 
the  gunner,  shall  not  permit  any  vessel  to  sail  out  of  the 
harbor  of  Newport  without  producing  a  pass  to  the  captain,  or 
in  his  absence,  to  the  gunner  of  said  fort ;  woodmen  and  small 
fishing  boats,  excepted. 

God  save  the  Kins. 


Procecdiugs  of  the  General  Assemhli/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  the  %1d  day 
of  June,  11  bQ. 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  committee  of  Avar,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  di- 
rected and  fully  empowered,  to  provide  fresh  victuals,  at  the 


1756.]  AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  499 

colony's  expense,  for  such  of  His  Majesty's  troops  coraing  from 
England,  as  shall  arrive  in  this  colony  ;  and  likewise  to  furnish 
the  officers  who  may  have  occasion  to  go  from  place  to  place, 
with  all  necessaries  for  travelling  by  land,  in  case  there  are  no 
means  of  going  by  sea,  agreeably  to  His  Majesty's  instructions 
now  before  this  Assembly. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  James  Honeyman,  Thomas  Cranston  and  Peter 
Bours,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  appointed  a  committee,  to  pre- 
pare a  bill  for  preventing  the  depreciation  of  the  paper  cur 
rency  in  this  colony,  and  present  the  same  unto  this  Assembly 
at  their  next  session. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  James  Honeyman  and  Nicholas  Cooke,  Esqs.,  Col. 
Benoni  Waterman  and  Mr.  Samuel  Ward,  be,  and  they  are 
hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  prepare  a  bill  for  preventing 
the  exportation  of  provisions  and  warlike  stores  out  of  this 
colony. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  James  Honeyman  and  Nicholas  Cooke,  Esqs.,  Capt» 
Benjamin  Wickham,  George  Brown,  Esq.,  and  Major  Thomas 
Greene,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  pre- 
pare a  bill  for  preventing  the  exportation  of  provisions  and 
warlike  stores  out  of  this  colony,  that  the  French  may  not  be 
supplied  therewith,  and  present  the  same  unto  this  Assembly, 
as  soon  as  may  be. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Mr.  William  Thurston  Gardner,  be,  and  he  is  here- 
by chosen  and  appointed  deputy  commissary  of  the  forces 
raised  and  to  be  raised  by  this  colony,  for  the  expedition 
against  Crown  Point ;  that  he  assist  Mr.  Rufus  Hopkins,  the 
commissary  of  said  forces,  and  be  allowed  £100,  old  tenor,  per 
month,  for  his  service. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Samuel  Albro,  Esq.,  Mr.  Jonathan  Nichols,  inn- 
holder,  Capt.  Josiah  Arnold  and  Capt.  William  Haszard,  be, 
and   they  are  hereby  appointed   .     committee,  to  consider  the 


50U  KECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1756. 

circumstances  of  the  several  ferries  in  this  colony ;  and  also 
whether  it  he  reasonable  to  raise  the  prices  of  ferriage,  and  if 
SO,  how  much. 

This  Assembh^  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  one  hundred  men,  exclusive  of  officers,  be  forth- 
with raised,  by  enlistment,  to  join  the  forces  already  raised  by 
this  colony,  and  sent  upon  the  expedition  against  Crown 
Point ;  and  that  Obadiah  Brown,  Job  Randall,  John  Dexter, 
and  John  Walton,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a 
committee  to  prepare  a  bill  for  that  purpose,  and  present  the 
same  unto  this  Assembly,  as  soon  as  may  be. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  clerk  of  the  lower  house  be,  and  he  is  hereby 
added  unto  the  committee  that  was  appointed  to  examine  the 
accounts  of  those  gentlemen  that  were  appointed  to  pay  the 
charges  of  the  last  expedition  that  was  undertaken  to  reduce 
Canada  unto  the  obedience  of  His  Majesty ;  and  to  receive  the 
money  belonging  unto  the  colony,  which  is  in  the  hands  of 
said  gentlemen. 

An  Act  for  raising,  subsisting,  and   paying  one  hundred  men, 
in  addition  to  those  already  raised  by  this  colony,  and  sent 
on  the  expedition  designed  to   reduce   the  French  forts  on 
Lake  Champlain,  to  the  obedience  of  His  Majesty. 
Be  it  enacted   by  this   General  Assembly,  and  by  the   au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  one  hundred  men,  exclusive 
of  commissioned  officers,  be  forthwith  enlisted  into  the  service 
of  this  colony,  divided  into  two  companies  of  fifty  men  each, 
and  sent  and  joined  unto  the  forces  already  raised  by  said  col- 
ony, and  now  in   actual  service,  under    the  command    of  Col. 
Christopher  Harris. 

And  for  the  more  speedy  raising,  enlisting  and  conducting 
the  said  two  companies, — 

Be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  committee  of  war,  or  any  two 
uf  them,  be,  and  are  hereby  authorized  and  fully  empowered  to 
issue  and  grant  enlisting  warrants  to  such  and  so  many  per- 
sons as   they  shall   think   proper,  to    enlist    the    hundred  men 


1756.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  501 

aforesaid ;  and  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be,  and  he  is 
hereby  requested  to  commissionate  one  captain  and  two  lieu- 
tenants for  each  company  when  enlisted,  which  captains  and 
lieutenants  shall  be  selected  out  of  the  aforesaid  enlistino:  ofii- 
cers,  by  the  committee  of  war. 

And  for  the  encouraging  one  hundred  men  to  enlist  into  the 
service,  aforesaid, — 

Be  it  further  enacted,  that  there  shall  be  given  unto  each 
able  bodied  man,  that  shall  enlist,  as  aforesaid,  the  same  boun- 
ty, wages,  privileges,  benefits  and  immunities  as  have  been 
granted  to  those  now  in  the  service  of  this  colony,  and  gone 
upon  the  expedition,  aforesaid. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  commissioned  officers  of 
the  aforesaid  companies  shall  have  and  receive  the  same  wages 
and  enjoy  equal  privileges,  benefits  and  immunities  with  those 
of  the  same  rank,  that  are  already  gone  into  the  service, 
aforesaid. 

And  for  the  more  speedy  payment  of  the  bounties  and  wa- 
ges, aforesaid,  and  providing  necessary  stores,  the  committee  of 
war  is  hereby  empowered  to  draw  out  of  the  general  treasury 
such  sum  and  sums  of  money  from  time  to  time  as  they  shall 
think  proper ;  and  if  there  be  not  a  sufficiency  in  the  treasury, 
that  the  said  committee  of  war  and  general  treasurer,  or  either 
of  them,  be,  and  hereby  is  empowered  to  hire,  from  time  to  time, 
so  much  money  as  they  shall  think  proper,  giving  no  more 
than  ten  per  cent,  per  annum,  for  interest. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  it  is  the  true  intent  and 
meaning  of  the  act  made  and  passed  at  this  session  of  Assem- 
bly, for  the  more  effectual  obstructing  the  exportation  of  pro- 
visions and  warlike  stores  out  of  this  colony,  that  fish  is  not 
comprehended  in  the  article  of  provisions  mentioned  in  said 
act. 

God  save  the  King. 


502  EECORDS   OP   THE   COLONY   OF  RHODE  ISLAND  [1756. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhli/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  on  thejoiirth 
Monday  of  August,  1756.  , 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  James  Honeyman,  Obadiah  Brown,  Jer.  Lippitt 
and  Job  Randall,  Esqs.,  with  Messrs.  Elisha  Brown  and  Nicho- 
las Brown,  be,  and  they  are  appointed  a  committee  to  take  into 
consideration  His  Honor,  the  Governor's  message  unto  this  As- 
sembly, and  prepare  a  bill  agreeably  thereto,  and  present  the 
same  as  soon  as  may  be. 

That  which  follows,  contains  a  copy  of  the  message  referred 
to  in  the  preceding  vote : 

Governor  Hopkins's  Message  to  the  General  Assembly. 

To  tlic  General  Assembly  : 

Gentlemen : — Public  atFairs  of  the  greatest  importance  to  the  honor  and  interest 
of  this  colony,  must  receive  their  determination  from  your  resolutions  at  this 
time. 

The  money  granted  by  the  British  Parliament  to  the  colonies  of  New  England, 
New  York  and  New  Jersey,  being  now  arrived  in  America,  the  manner  in  which 
this  colony's  proportion  of  it  shall  be  applied  to  the  calling  in  and  sinking  the  bills 
heretofore  ordered  to  be  sunk  by  it,  must  now  be  ascertained. 

The  bills  of  credit  last  emitted  by  this  colony,  being  so  much  obstructed  in  their 
circulation  by  many,  whose  designs  seem  calculated  to  ruin  the  public  credit  of  this 
colony,  with  which  its  constitution  must  also  sink,  it  is  become  absolutely  necessary 
either  to  call  in  and  sink  those  bills  immediately,  or  find  some  other  expedient  to 
give  them  credit. 

The  money  already  provided  for  carrying  on  the  present  expedition  against 
Crown  Point,  being  wholly  exhausted,  and  our  forces  like  to  continue  some  time 
longer  abroad,  where  they  must  be  provided  for ;  and  at  their  return,  will  reasona- 
bly demand  their  wages  ;  and  many  expenses  already  accrued,  not  being  paid,  some 
method  must  be  taken  to  supply  the  general  treasury  with  money  sufficient  for 
those  purposes.  These,  with  such  other  things  as  are  in  course  before  you,  will 
come  under  your  consideration  at  this  session. 

STEPHEN  HOPKINS. 

Council  Chambci,  Newport,  2.3d  August,  175G. 


1756.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  603 

Whereas,  Jolin  Tillinghast,  Thomas  Cranston,  James  Shef- 
field and  Peter  Bours,  Esqs.,  were,  by  the  General  Assembly, 
at  their  session,  holden  at  South  Kingstown,  the  last  Monday 
of  February  last,  appointed  a  committee  to  burn  £11,208,  at 
that  time  lodged  in  the  general  treasury,  and  having  per- 
formed that  service,  presented  this  Assembly  with  the  following 
report : 

"  Agreeably  to  an  act  of  the  General  Assembly,  passed  at 
their  session,  in  February,  1756,  do  report, — 

That  we  have  exchanged  with  the  general  treasurer,  the 
£11,208,  for  Crown  Point  money  (said  money  was  part  of  the 
£25,000  rate),  and  have  burnt  the  same. 

As  witness  our  hands  in  Newport,  March  4,  1756. 

JOHN  TILLINGHAST,        JAMES  SHEFFIELD, 

THOMAS  CRANSTON,     PETER  BOURS,  Committee. 
Test,  BENJAMIN  NICHOLS." 


^} 


Crown  Point  money  burnt :  first £7,000 

"         "  "  "        second 11,200 


£18,208 

And  this  Assembly,  having  duly  examined  and  considered 
said  report, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
same  be,  and  is  hereby  accepted. 

Whereas,  Thomas  Cranston,  Peter  Bours  and  James  Shef- 
field, Esqs.,  were  appointed  a  committee  to  examine  the  £16 
counterfeit  bills,  that  were  lodged  in  the  general  treasury,  in 
order  to  be  exchanged  by  the  money  paid  in  there,  by  John 
Coggswell,  for  that  purpose,  &c. ;  and  having  performed  that 
service,  presented  this  Assembly  with  the  following  report : 

Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  to  examine  counterfeit  hills  of 
public  credit. 

Newport,  March  12th,  1756. 
Agreeably  to  an  act  of  the  General  Assembly,  we,  the  subscribers,  do  report : 
That  we  have  examined  the  £16  counterfeit  bills  that  were  lodged  in  the  general 


504  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1756 

treasury,  in  order  to  be  exchanged  for  part  of  the  good  money  paid  into  the  general 
treasury,  by  John  Coggswell,  for  that  purpose. 

And  do  further  report,  that  we  find  the  number  of  said  bills  lodged,  to  be  one 
hundred  and  forty-seven  ;  and  the  money  paid  in  by  said  Coggswell  for  their  re- 
demption, to  be  £1,600,  out  of  which,  the  treasurer,  by  act  of  government,  is  al- 
lowed five  per  cent.,  which  is  £80  for  his  trouble  ;  the  remaining  sum  of  £l,520, 
divided  by  one  hundred  and  forty-seven,  the  number  of  bills  lodged,  leaves  for 
every  £l6  counterfeit  bill  £10  6s.  9d.,  in  good  money,  which  the  treasurer  is  pay- 
ing, and  is  ready  to  pay  any  one  who  hath  a  right ;  a  list  of  the  names  of  the  per- 
sons' being  lodged  in  the  office. 

We  also  have  burn)  the  one  hundred  and  forty-seven  counterfeit  bills. 

THOMAS  CRANSTON,  JAMES  SHEFFIELD, 

PETER  BOURS,  Committee. 


And  this  Assembly  having  taken  the  said  report  and  ac- 
count into  consideration,  and  duly  examined  them, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
said  report  be,  and  it  is  hereby  accepted  ;  and  that  £9,  the 
amount  of  the  account,  be  allowed  and  paid  the  said  Thomas 
Cranston,  Peter  Bours  and  James  Sheffield,  out  of  the  general 
treasury. 

Whereas,  the  proprietors  of  the  ferry  places  in  Newport, 
Jamestown,  North  Kingstown  and  South  Kingstown,  preferred 
a  petition  and  representation,  that  since  the  General  Assembly 
made  the  last  act  for  regulating  the  prices  of  the  ferriage,  the 
currency  hath  greatly  depreciated ;  provisions  of  all  sorts,  as 
well  as  canvas,  rigging,  iron  work,  tallow,  and  all  other  necessa- 
ries, for  keeping  their  boats  and  wharves  in  a  condition  suitable 
to  the  purpose  that  they  were  procured  and  made  for,  having 
risen  to  more  than  double  the  prices  they  stood  at  when  the 
act,  aforesaid,  was  made  ;  and  thereupon  prayed  the  prices  of 
ferriage  may  be  augmented  ;  on  consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
ihiirity  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  prices  of  ferriage  between 
Newport  and  Jamestown,  and  between  Jamestown  and  North 
Kingstown,  and  South  Kingstown,  be  raised,  and  stated  at  the 
following  prices,  to  wit : 

For  a  man  and  horse,  six  shillings  ;  for  a  draft  horse,  six 
shillings ;  a  single  person,  three  shillings ;  an  ox,  or  neat 
creature,  eight  shillings;  a  hog,  calf,  or  sheep,  one  shilling; 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  505 

and  for  a  horse  and  chaise,  or  chair,  twenty-four  shillings ;  the 
owners  of  every  ferry,  taking  leases  of  the  committee  that  shall 
be  appointed  for  that  purpose ;  and  giving  bond  for  their  due 
and  faithful  performance  of  such  their  leases. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Nicholas  Easton,  Obadiah  Brown,  Jeremiah  Lip- 
pitt  and  John  Walton,  Esqs.,  together  with  Mr.  Samuel  Ward 
and  Col.  Benoni  Waterman,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed 
a  committee  to  prepare  a  bill  in  amendment  of,  and  addition  to, 
the  several  laws  of  this  colony,  regulating  the  public  rates  and 
taxes  thereof 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  committee  appointed  to  lease  out  the  ferries, 
give  leases  of  the  same  for  four  years. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  a  public  lottery  be  set  up  by  this  colony,  for  rais- 
ing the  sura  of  £10,000,  to  carry  on  the  building  of  Fort 
George  ;  and  that  Edward  Scott,  Esq.,  with  Messrs.  Augustus 
Johnston  and  Martin  Howard,  Jr.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  ap- 
pointed a  committee  to  prepare  a  bill  for  that  purpose,  and  pre- 
sent the  same  unto  this  Assembly  as  soon  as  may  be. 

Whereas,  William  Pelsue,  exhibited  unto  this  Assembl}'^,  an 
account  of  £2  10s.,  by  him  charged  against  the  colony,  for  his 
horse  hire  and  time,  in  going  to  His  Honor,  the  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, by  order  of  James  Honey  man,  Esq.,  to  get  a  warrant,  for 
proclaiming  His  Majesty's  declaration  of  war  against  France  ; 
Avhich  being  duly  examined, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  thirty  shillings  of  said  account  be  allowed  and 
paid  the  said  William  Pelsue,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Mr.  Caleb  Carr,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  chosen  lieu- 
tenant of  Fort  George,  and  be  allowed  the  monthly  wages  of 
£60,  he  finding  himself,  and  attending  there  constantly,  both 
night  and  day. 

And  that  twenty  soldiers,  being  good  and  able  bodied  men, 
be  enlisted  for  said  fort,  to   reside  there,  also,  both  night  and 

VOL.  V.         64 


50G  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

day,  and  be  allowed  £30  per  month,  they  finding  themselves  ; 
and  that  said  soldiers  be  employed  in  building  the  fort,  at  all 
times  when  their  other  duties  will  admit  of  it ;  and  the  lieu- 
tenant hereby  is  directed  to  take  particular  care  to  see  the 
same  performed. 

Whereas,  Joshua  Babcock,  Jeremiah  Lippitt  and  Benjamin 
Nichols,  Esqs.,  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly,  the  following  ac- 
count,— 

"  1755.     Colony  of  Rhode  Island, 

To  Joshua  Babcock,  Benj.  Nichols  and  Jer.  Lippitt,     Dr. 

To  signing  £60,000,  ordered  by  act  of  Assembly,  in 
March,  A.  D.  1755,  at  half  per  cent.;  three  quarters 
of  which  amounts  to £225 

To  signing  £30,000,  ordered  by  act  of  Assembly,  in 
June,  A.  D.  1755,  at  half  per  cent 1 50 

To  signing  £10,000,  struck  with  the  small  plate,  ordered 
by  the  Assembly,  in  June,  1 755,  at  twenty  per  cent. .      100 

To  signing  £20,000,  ordered  by  the  Assembly,  in  Au- 
gust, 1755 , 100 

To  signing  £60,000,  ordered  by  the  Assembly,  in  Sep- 
tember, 1755 300 

To  signmg  £60,000,  ordered  by  the  Assembly,  in  De- 
cember, 1755 300 


Errors  excepted,  per  £1,175 

J.  BABCOCK, 
JER.  LIPPITT, 

Newport,  January  10th,  1755.  BENJ.  NICHOLS.'" 

And  this  Assembly,  having  taken  said  account  into  consid- 
eration, and  duly  examined  it, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
said  Jeremiah  Lippitt,  Joshua  Babcock  and  Benjamin  Nichols, 
Esq.,  be  allowed  and  paid  out  of  the  general  treasury,  the  sum 
of  £1,175,  for  the  services  in  their  account  charged  against  the 
colony  ;  it  being  half  per  cent.,  agreeably  to  law,  exclusive  of 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  507 

Col.  Updike's  service,  in  signing  the  bills  mentioned  in  the 
first  article  of  said  account. 

An  Act  for  calling  in  and  sinking  the  bills  of  credit  emitted 
by  this  colony,  called  Crown  Point  bills ;  and  for  supplying 
the  general  treasury  with  money  to  carry  on  what  the  colo- 
ny hath  undertaken,  with  regard  to  the  expedition  against 
Crown  Point 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  bills  made  for  the  Crown 
Point  expedition,  called  Crown  Point  bills,  be  forthwith  called 
in  and  sunk ;  and  the  general  treasurer  is  hereby  ordered  and 
directed,  upon  the  possessors  of  said  bills  bringing  into  the  gen- 
eral treasury  any  of  them,  amounting  to  the  sum  of  £6  and 
upwards,  to  satisfy  and  pay  such  possessors  out  of  the  ster- 
ling money,  by  His  Majesty  granted  to  this  colony  (when  the 
same  shall  be  received),  two-third  parts  of  said  bills,  at  and  after 
the  following  rate  or  proportion,  to  wit : 

A  milled  dollar,  or  gold,  according  to  its  proportionate  value, 
for  every  £4,  old  tenor,  expressed  on  the  back  of  said  bills ; 
the  remaining  third  part  of  the  bills  due  to  such  possessor,  the 
general  treasurer  shall  give  his  promissory  note  for  the  pay- 
ment of  in  silver  and  gold,  according  to  its  value ;  regulated 
and  stated,  as  aforesaid,  on  or  before  the  22d  day  of  Decem- 
ber, in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1757,  under  the  following  manner, 
to  wit : 

The  possessor  hereof,  is  entitled  to,  and  shall  receive  out  of  the 

general  treasure/  ,  Spanish  milled  dollars,  or  gold,  according  to 

its  proportionate  value,  on  or  hefore  the  lid  day  of  December,  A.  D^ 
1757  ;  the  same  being  for  value  received.  As  ivitness  my  hand, 
this  —  day  of ,  A.  D.  1756. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
there  be  a  rate  of  £4,000,  lawful  money,  assessed  and  levied 
on  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony  ;  and  the  same  to  be  burnt. 


•308  RECORDS   OF   THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

And  also  a  rate  on  said  inhabitants  of  the  sum  of  £53,000,  old 
tenor,  for  supplying  the  general  treasury  ;  and  the  same  to  be 
assessed,  levied  and  collected  on  or  before  the  last  day  of  Februa- 
ry next ;  and  that  the  act  passed  by  this  Assembl}^,  at  their  last 
session,  for  assessing  and  levying  a  rate  of  £100,000,  upon  the 
the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  re- 
pealed. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  committee  of  war,  or  the  general  treasurer,  hire  the 
sum  of  £50,000,  old  tenor,  for  the  use  of  the  colony,  from  time 
to  time,  as  occasion  may  require,  not  giving  a  larger  interest 
than  six  per  cent,  and  ascertaining  the  value  of  the  sum 
hired  ;  which  sum  shall  be  paid  to  the  persons  of  whom  the 
same  is  hired,  out  of  the  £53,000,  when  received  by  the  gen- 
eral treasury. 

And  it  is  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  in 
ease  money  cannot  be  hired  of  private  persons,  upon  equitable 
terms,  within  twenty  days  after  the  giving  public  notice,  that 
the  committee  of  war  be  authorized,  and  hereby  are  fully  em- 
powered, to  cause  £4,000  of  lawful  money  to  be  impressed,  all 
of  the  same  tenor  with  the  lawful  money  already  made,  with 
the  addition  of  the  time  of  its  being  made  ;  and  said  bills, 
when  struck  olf,  shall  be  signed  by  the  committee  that  signed 
the  Ibrmer  bills,  and  put  into  the  general  treasury,  for  the  colo- 
ny's use,  and  be  sunk  by  a  rate  or  tax,  within  two  years. 

An  Act  to  prevent  the  currency  of  the  bills   of   public  credit 

emitted  by  the  Province  of  New  Hampshire. 

Whereas,  great  quantities  of  bills  of  public  credit,  emitted 
by  the  Province  of  New  Hampshire,  have  been  lately  brought 
into  this  colony,  not  only  from  said  Province,  but  also  from  the 
col. my  of  Connecticut,  Avhich,  with  great  sums  of  counterfeit 
bills  in  imitation  of  the  true  bills  of  public  credit  emitted  by 
said  Province,  inadvertently  received  by  the  inhabitants  of  this 
colony,  have  not  only  had  u  great  tendency  towards  the  depre- 


1756.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  _  509 

ciation  of  our  own  bills  of  public  credit,  but  the  inhabitants  of 
this  colony  have  also  been  greatly  defrauded  thereby  ;  for  rem- 
edy whereof,  for  the  future, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  for  the  future,  the  bills  of  public 
credit  of  the  said  Province  of  New  Hampshire,  shall  not  be  a 
tender  in  law,  in  any  payment,  whatsoever  ;  and  all  contracts 
and  bargains,  of  what  nature  or  kind,  whatsoever,  which  here- 
after shall  be  made  for  the  payment  of  such  bills,  shall  be  ut- 
terly void  ;  and  that  from  and  after  the  1st  day  of  August 
next,  if  any  person  or  persons  shall  pass,  or  receive  in  payment, 
any  of  said  bills,  he,  she,  or  they  so  offending,  shall  forfeit  and 
pay  the  sum  of  £500,  old  tenor;  to  be  recovered  in  any 
court  of  record,  within  the  county  where  such  offence  shall  be 
committed,  by  bill,  plaint  or  information ;  one  half,  to  and  for 
the  use  of  the  colony,  and  the  other  half,  unto  him,  her,  or 
them,  that  shall  inform  and  sue  for  the  same. 

Provided,  nevertheless,  that  this  act,  or  any  thing  herein 
contained,  shall  not  extend,  nor  be  deemed  or  construed  to  ex- 
tend to  such  New  Hampshire  bills  as  have  been  levied  upon 
execution  by  any  of  the  sheriffs  or  their  deputies,  and  are  now 
actually  in  his,  or  their  hands ;  but  the  same  shall  be  received 
by  the  person  or  persons  for  whose  use  they  were  levied,  if 
tendered  to  him,  her,  or  them,  by  such  officer,  within  twenty 
days  after  the  publication  of  this  act. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  all  the  acts  heretofore  made 
and  passed  by  the  General  Assembly  of  this  colony,  to  prohibit 
the  sending  of  provisions  and  warlike  stores,  be,  and  they,  and 
every  of  them,  are  hereby  repealed,  and  made  utterly  void  and 
of  none  effect,  excepting  those  parts  of  said  acts  which  prohibit 
the  exporting  provisions  and  warlike  stores  to  the  West  In- 
dia neutral  islands  ;  and  provided,  that  the  paragraphs  of  the 
acts,  above  mentioned,  that  prohibit  the  sending  provisions 
and  warlike  stores  among  the  French,  be  not  repealed. 

Whereas,  His  Excellency,  the  Earl  of  Loudoun,  general  and 
commander  in  chief  of  all  His   Majesty's    forces   in    North 


510  .    RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

America,  hath,  by  his  letter  of  the  20th  of  this  instant  August, 
informed  this  government  that  His  Majesty's  fort  and  garrison 
at  Oswego,  together  with  the  naval  armament  and  stores  there, 
have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  French, — 

This  Assembly,  therefore,  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is 
voted  and  resolved,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be,  and  he 
is  hereby  requested  to  send  one  suitable  person  to  the  Province 
of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  and  another  to  the  colony  of  Connec- 
ticut, to  confer  with  them,  as  to  what  is  necessary  to  be  done 
upon  this  extraordinary  event ;  and  that  the  committee  of  war, 
the  field  officers  of  every  regiment  in  this  colony,  and  the  dep- 
uties of  each  town,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  com- 
mittee to  make  inquiry  where  provisions,  arms,  blankets,  war- 
like and  other  stores  of  all  sorts  can  be  had  for  five  hundred 
men ;  and  make  report  unto  this  Assembly  at  their  next 
session. 

God  save  the  King. 

Lord  Loudoun  to  Governor  HopMns. 

Albany,  20th  August,  175G. 

Sir: — As,  by  accounts  T  received  last  night.  His  Majesty's  fort  and  garrison  at 
Oswego,  together  with  the  naval  armament  and  stores,  have,  by  a  series  of  bad  cir- 
cumstances, fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  French  ;  and  as,  from  the  condition  and 
number  of  the  troops  left  to  me,  when  I  came  to  my  command,  I  can  scarce  hope 
to  do  more  than  to  resist  the  French  power  in  that  quarter,  I  must  earnestly  recom- 
mend to  you  to  consider  without  delay,  how  far  the  provincials  now  in  arms,  are 
exposed  to  the  weight  of  the  French,  in  the  parts  towards  Crown  Point,  and  the 
dangerous  events  of  any  accident  happening  to  them  in  consequence  of  these  cir- 
circumstances,  and  what  forces  you  can  immediately  send  to  reinforce  them,  as  it 
seems  absolutely  necessary  to  do,  for  the  security  and  safety  of  the  country. 

Therefore,  in  consequence  of  the  powers  given  to  me.  by  His  Majesty's  commis- 
sion under  the  great  seal,  and  of  his  orders  signified  to  you,  by  liis  secretary  of 
state,  I  do  demand  of  you  an  aid  of  as  considerable  a  body  of  men,  with  arms,  as 
you  can  send,  to  be  raised  in  companies,  and  sent  off  as  fast  as  raised ;  and  also  a 
number  of  carriages,  or  ox  teams,  wherewith  I  may  be  able  to  transport  provisions, 
as  this  province  alone  is  not  able  to  supply  all. 

I  am  with  great  truth  and  regard,  sir. 

Your  most  humble  servant, 

LOUDOUN. 
Tu  tlic  Hon.  ytephen  Hopkins,  Esq. 


1756.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  511 


Proceedings  of  the  General  AssemUy,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Neivport,  the  Wi  of 
September,  1756. 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 

The  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols,  Deputy  Governor. 

Whereas,  the  following  account  was  exhibited  unto  this  As- 
sembly, by  James  Sheffield,  Esq.,  one  of  the  committee  ap- 
pointed to  build  the  fort  on  Goat  Island,  in  the  township  of 
Newport, — 

Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  Dr. 

1755.  £     s.  d 

To  sundry  disbursements  for  Fort  George,  as  per 

account  showed  the  audit 156  4  9 

To  ditto  on  the  outworks,  as  per  account  showed 

ditto ■  2,847  4  8^ 


• 


£3,003  9  5J 


Per  Contra,  Cr. 

By  cash  received  of  the  general  treasurer  at  sundry 

"times 2,113  2  5 

By  500  bricks,  sold  to  Nicholas  Easton,  Esq 4 

"   balance  due  to  J.  S 886  7  0| 

E.  B.,  per  JAMES  SHEFFIELD.  £3,003  9  5^ 

And  the  said  account  being  duly  examined, — 
This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  same  be,  and  it  is  hereby  allowed  ;  and  that 
the  above  balance   of  £886  7^.  \d.,  be  paid  the  said  James 
Sheffield,  out  of  the  general  treasury. 


512  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

Whereas,  there  hath  been  laid  before  this  Assembly,  the 
draught  of  a  receipt,  to  be  given  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor, 
•when  he  shall  receive  the  money  granted  this  colony  by  the 
Parliament  of  Great  Britain,  which  being  duly  examined  and 
considered, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  said  draught  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  ap- 
proved ;  and  that  the  secretary  affix  the  seal  of  the  colony  to 
fair  copies  of  it,  to  be  signed  by  His  Honor,  the  Governor. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  mathematical  instrument  now  in  the  colony 
house,  and  which  was  procured  by  Capt.  Joseph  Harrison,  for 
the  use  of  the  colony,  be  lodged  in  the  Redwood  Library ;  but 
so,  nevertheless,  that  the  property  thereof,  shall  stand  and  re- 
main vested  in  the  colony. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  re- 
quested to  accept  the  bills  of  exchange  drawn  on  him  by  Rich- 
ard Partridge,  Esq.,  the  colony's  agent,  in  fevor  of  Gideon 
Wanton,  Esq. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembl}^,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  directors  of  the  lottery 
set  up  to  raise  a  sum  of  money,  for  carrying  on  the  building  of 
Fort  George,  shall  be,  and  hereby  are  indemnified  from  all 
damages  that  may  accrue  to  them  by  fire,  from  the  enemy,  by 
receiving  counterfeit  bills,  or  any  other  extraordinary  casualty  ; 
the  same  being  made  to  appear  by  the  oath  of  the  person  that 
shall  sustain  damage. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Nicholas  Easton,  Thomas  Haszard  and  John  Dex- 
ter, Esqs.,  Mr.  Nicholas  Brown  and  Caleb  Greene,  Esqs.,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  prepare  a  bill  for 
regulating  rates  and  taxes,  and  make  report  unto  this  Assem- 
Ijly,  as  soon  as  conveniently  may  be. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  James  Honeyman  and  Jeremiah  Lippitt,  Esqs.,  Mr. 
Saiiiiicl  Ward  and  Maj.  Thomas  Greene,  be,  and  they  are  here- 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  513 

by  appointed  a  committee  to  prepare  a  bill  directing  in  what 
manner  the  subjects  of  the  French  king,  that  now  are,  or  here- 
after may  be  prisoners  in  this  colony,  shall  be  treated  ;  and 
also  prohibiting  the  carrying  on  any  trade  with  the  subjects  of 
the  French  King. 

Whereas,  Jeremiah  Lippitt,  Benjamin  Nichols  and  Joshua 
Babcock,  Esqs.,  exhibited  unto  this  Assembly  an  account  by 
them  charged  against  the  colony,  for  signing  £8,000  lawful 
money,  ordered  to  be  made  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  their 
session,  held  in  South  Kingstown,  on  the  last  INIonday  of  Feb- 
ruary last,  which  being  duly  examined, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  said  account  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  allowed ; 
and  that  £40,  lawful  money,  the  amount  thereof,  be  paid  the 
said  Jeremiah  Lippitt,  Benjamin  Nichols  and  Joshua  Babcock, 
out  of  the  general  treasury. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Peter  Bours,  Esq.,  George  Brown,  Esq.,  and  Mr 
Samuel  Ward,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee 
to  draw  up  an  address  to  His  Excellency  the  Earl  of  Loudoun, 
and  present  the  same  unto  this  Assembly. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Providence,  be,  and  he 
is  hereby,  directed  to  pay  the  rate  that  was  assessed  on  the  es- 
tate of  Samuel  Bartlett,  late  of  Cumberland,  deceased  (which 
estate,  the  said  Samuel,  in  his  life,  forfeited  to  the  colony),  out 
of  the  money  that  accrued  to  the  colony  from  the  sale  of  said 
estate. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Edward  Scott,  Peter  Bours  and  Thomas  Ward, 
Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  revise 
all  the  public  laws  of  this  colony,  which  have  been  made  and 
passed  since  the  time  that  they  were  last  printed ;  and  that 
they,  the  committee,  procure  five  hundred  copies  to  be  printed ; 
and  get  the  same  stitched  in  covers  of  marble  paper,  at  the 
colony's  charge. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 

voL.  V.         65 


514  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY   OF   RHODE  ISLAND  [1756. 

solved,  that  the  captain  of  the  fort,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  di- 
rected to  fire  minute  guns  at  the  funeral  of  His  Honor,  the 
Deputy  Governor ;  and  that  the  four-pound  guns  be  used  on 
that  occasion,  but  not  oftener  than  twenty  times. 

Whereas,  by  the  death  of  the  late  Hon.  Jonathan  Nichols, 
Esq.,  the  second  seat  in  the  government  is  become  vacant, 
and  other  vacancies  have  happened  since  the  last  session  of 
this  Assembly ;  whereupon,  both  houses  resolved  into  a  grand 
committee,  and  chose  the  following  officers,  to  wit : 

The  Hon.  John  Gardner,  Esq.,  for  the  remaining  part  of  the 
current  year ;  who  soon  after  appeared,  and  in  the  presence  of 
the  General  Assembly,  took  the  engagement  by  law  pro- 
vided. 

His  Honor,  the  Deputy  Governor,  was  also  chosen  one  oi 
the  committee  of  war,  in  the  room  of  the  late  Mr.  Nichols. 

Whereas,  the  works  that  have  been  begun  and  carried  on 
at  Fort  George,  for  the  defence  and  security  of  the  colony,  re- 
main still  unfinished,  and  it  is  thought  absolutely  necessary 
that  said  works  should  continue  still  to  be  carried  on  further,  in 
order  to  their  being  rendered  complete,  as  well  as  to  secure  and 
prevent  what  is  already  done,  from  falling  into  ruin, — 

This  Assembly,  therefore,  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted 
and  resolved,  that  Capt.  William  Mumford  and  Lieut.  Caleb 
Carr,  be  and  they  are  hereby,  empowered  to  procure  (as  soon  as 
may  be),  all  such  materials  as  shall  be  found  necessary  for  the 
carrying  on  said  work  ;  and  also  to  employ  such  a  number  of 
workmen  thereon  as  shall  be  necessary  for  the  same  ;  that  the 
charges  thereon  accruing,  be  paid  out  of  the  lottery  intended 
for  that  purpose ;  and  that  said  captain  and  lieutenant  perform 
said  services,  without  any  expense  or  charge  unto  the  govern- 
ment, for  their  own  trouble. 

An  Act  for  raising,  subsisting  and  paying  a  company  of  sixty 
men,  as  a  reinforcement  to  the  provincial  army. 
Be  it   enacted  by  this   General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that   one    company  of  sixty  men, 
including  officers,  be  forthwith  raised  in  this  colony,  as  a  rein- 


1756.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  515 

forcement  to  the  provincial  army  gone,  this  year,  in  the  expe- 
dition against  Crown  Point ;  that  as  soon  as  said  company  is 
raised,  they  be  sent  unto  His  Excellency  the  Earl  of  Loudoun, 
under  the  command  of  the  following  officers,  who  are  chosen,  to 
wit: 

Joseph  Windsor,  captain ;  John  Power,  Jr.,  first,  and  Benja- 
min Butler,  second  lieutenants. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  if  any  of  said  officers  refuse 
to  take  the  command  hereby  assigned  him  or  them,  the  com- 
mittee of  war  shall,  and  hereby  is  directed  and  fully  empow- 
ered to  appoint  another  or  other  in  the  place  or  places  of  him 
or  them  that  shall  so  refuse. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  if  the  said  company  shall  not 
be  filled  by  enlistment  before  or  upon  the  25th  day  of  this 
instant  September,  the  committee  of  war  be,  and  is  hereby,  au- 
thorized and  fully  empowered  to  issue  and  give  orders  for 
raising  the  number  of  men  that  shall  be  wanted  to  complete 
the  said  company ;  which  shall  be  done  in  such  manner  as 
they,  the  committee  of  war,  shall  think  most  proper. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  all  and  every  the  officers  and 
soldiers  that  shall  go  in  the  present  service,  shall  be  entitled  to 
have  and  enjoy  the  same  wages,  bounty  and  immunities,  which 
the  officers  and  soldiers  last  raised  in  this  colony  were  or  are 
entitled  to. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the  committee  of  war  pro- 
vide all  necessaries  for  said  company,  as  heretofore  ;  and  that, 
for  defraying  the  charges  thereof,  the  general  treasurer,  or  the 
committee  of  war,  is  hereby  directed  and  fully  empowered  to 
hire  the  sum  of  £20,000,  old  tenor,  upon  the  credit  of  the 
colony,  giving  no  more  than  ten  per  cent,  interest ;  and  in  case- 
the  said  sum  of  £20,000  cannot  be  hired,  as  aforesaid,  that  the 
committee  of  war  direct  and  order  the  sum  of  £2,000  lawful 
money  to  be  struck  off  and  signed  by  the  committee  who 
signed  the  last  bills  ;  which  shall  be  redeemed  and  sunk  in  two 
years,  according  to  act  of  Parliament,  by  a  rate  or  tax,  to  be 
assessed  and  levied  on  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony. 

And  it  is  further  enacted,  that  His  Honor,  the  Governor,  be, 


516  RECORDS    Of   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756= 

and  he  hereby  is,  requested  to   commissionate  the  officers  that 
are,  or  shall  be,  appointed  to  the  command  of  said  company. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  and 
Martin  Howard,  Jr.,  Esq.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a 
committee,  and  fully  empowered  to  w^ait  on  His  Excellency 
the  Eaii  of  Loudoun,  general  and  commander  in  chief  of 
all  His  Majesty's  forces  in  North  America,  and  congratulate 
him  upon  his  safe  arrival  in  North  America ;  that  they  lay  be- 
fore His  Excellency,  the  state  of  this  colony,  in  all  its  circum- 
stances, (with  which  His  Honor  the  Governor,  is  intimately  ac- 
quainted), and  request  His  Lordship's  assistance  in  such  mat- 
ters as  concern  this  colony,  according  to  the  instructions  given 
them  by  this  Assembl3^ 

An   Act   for   prohibiting   all    tiade    and  commerce  with   the 

French. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  collector  of  His  Majesty's 
customs  of  this  colony,  and  also  the  naval  officer,  be,  and  they 
are  hcreby,restricted  to  clear  out  any  vessel  for  parts  beyond  sea, 
until  the  master  of  such  vessel  shall  have  made  oath  or  affir- 
mation before  the  naval  officer,  that  he  will  not,  directly  or  in- 
directly, go  with  his  vessel  to  any  port  or  place,  subject  to,  of 
within  the  dominions  of  the  French  king,  unless  forced  thereto, 
by  an  enemy,  or  other  unavoidable  misfortune ;  which  oath,  or 
affirmation,  shall  be  certified  by  the  naval  officer,  on  every 
clearance  that  shall  be  given  for  such  vessel ;  and  if  any  per- 
son violate  his  oath  or  affirmation,  made  as  aforesaid,  he  shall, 
upon  conviction  thereof,  before  any  court  of  record  in  the 
colony,  forfeit  all  and  singular  his  estate,  both  real  and  per- 
sonal,— one  half  to  the  person  or  persons  who  shall  inform 
and  sue  for  the  same,  and  the  remainder  to  and  for  the  colo- 
ny's use ;  and  such  ollender  shall  also  sufler  all  the  i)ains  and 
penalties  of  perjury,  as  he  should  or  ought  if  the  said  oath  or 
affirmation  had  been  made  in  a  court  of  record. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  if 


1756.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  517 

at  any  time  hereafter,  a  vessel  shall  go  with,  or  without,  a  clear- 
ance, as  obtained  aforesaid,  unto  any  port  or  place,  subject  to  or 
within  the  dominions  of  the  French  king,  such  vessel,  together 
with  her  cargo,  upon  her  return  to,  or  arrival  at  Newport,  or  any 
other  port  or  place  within  this  colony,  shall  be  forfeited  ; — 
one  half  to,  and  for  the  use  of  the  colony,  and  the  remainder  to 
him  or  them  that  shall  inform  and  prosecute  for  the  same,  in 
any  court  of  record  within  the  colony. 

And  for  rendering  this  act  still  more  fully  effectual, — 

It  is  further  enacted,  that  all  judges,  justices,  sheriffs  and 
other  ministers  of  the  law,  whatsoever,  in  this  colony,  be,  and 
they  are  hereby  directed  and  required  to  use  their  utmost  en- 
deavors to  discover  and  bring  to  justice  all  and  every  the  of- 
fenders that  shall  be  guilty  ol  the  breach  of  this  act. 

And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  when  any  person  or  persons 
shall  complain  to,  or  inform  any  of  the  authorities,  aforesaid, 
that  he  or  they  have  just  cause  to  suspect  that  a  person  who 
has  returned  to  Newport  or  any  other  place  or  port  within 
this  colony,  from  parts  beyond  sea,  hath  violated  this  act ;  if 
such  officer  shall  neglect  or  refuse  to  issue  his  warrant  against 
the  party  so  returned,  for  the  seizing  his  vessel  and  cargo,  un- 
til a  trial  shall  be  had  thereon,  he  shall  forfeit  the  sum  of 
£1,000,  to  and  for  the  colony's  use,  to  be  recovered  by  bill, 
plaint  or  information,  in  any  court  of  record  within  the  colony, 
and  forever  thereafter  be  rendered  incapable  of  sustaining  any 
post  or  office  therein ;  and  the  officer  to  whom  such  Avarrant  is 
directed,  if  he  refuse  or  neglect  to  execute  the  same,  immedi- 
ately upon  receipt  thereof,  shall  be  liable  to  the  same  penalties, 
to  be  recovered  in  manner  aforesaid. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  James  Honeyman,  Peter  Bours  and  George  Brown, 
Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee  to  con- 
sider of  an  allowance  to  be  made  the  judges  of  the  superior 
court  of  judicature,  couit  of  assize  and  general  jail  delivery, 
for  their  sitting  at  the  trial  of  criminals,  and  make  report  unto 
this  Assembly  at  their  next  session. 

An  it  is  further  voted    and    resulvedj  that  what  shall  be  al- 


518  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

lowed  at  the  next  session  of  Assembly,  the  said  judges  shall  re- 
ceive the  like  allowance  for  all  criminal  cases  that  shall  be 
tried  before  that  time. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  all  officers  that  have  received  money  for  the  colo- 
ny's use,  shall,  when  they  render  the  same  into  the  treasury, 
pay  all  the  Crown  Point  bills  that  they  received  amongst  said 
money,  and  had  in  their  hands  at  the  time  of  passing  the 
act  for  sinking  said  bills,  with  the  money  granted  to  the  colony 
for  His  Majesty ;  and  also  all  such  bills  as  they  shall  hereafter 
receive,  and  that  they  do  the  same  on  oath  or  solemn  affir- 
mation. 

Whereas,  John  Tirril,  a  subject  to  the  French  king,  now  con- 
fined in  His  Majesty's  jail,  in  Newport,  preferred  a  petition  un- 
to this  Assembly,  setting  forth,  that  although  he  is  a  French- 
man by  birth,  yet  he  was  educated  and  continues  to  be  a  Pro- 
testant, having  lived  more  than  five  years  among  the  English  ; 
that  at  present  he  hath  not  wherewithal  to  support  himself,  and 
therefore  prayed  liberty  to  sail  out  of  this  place  for  a  liveli- 
hood, as  he  hath  done  for  the  two  last  years,  or  at  least  grant 
him  an  allowance  sufficient  for  his  subsistence ;  on  considera- 
tion whereof, — 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  if  the  petitioner  will  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  unto 
His  Majesty  King  George  the  Second,  he  shall  be  discharged 
from  jail ;  that  otherwise,  the  committee  of  war  send  him  off  to 
some  neutral  port,  by  the  first  opportunity;  and  that  the 
sheriff  of  the  county  of  Newport,  make  inquiry  whether  the 
said  John  Tirril  has  any  estate,  and  if  he  has  not  sufficient  to 
support  himself,  that  he  be  supported  at  the  charge  of  the 
colony  until  he  makes  oath,  or  is  sent  off. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  following  articles  be, 
and  hereby  are,  made  the  heads  of  instructions  to  be  observed 
by  the  commissioners  appointed  to  go  to  Albany,  and  wait  upon 
His  Excellency  the  Earl  of  Loudoun  : 

1.     That  they  presept  an  address  to  His  Excellency,  in  be- 


1756.]  AND  PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  519 

half  of  this  colony,  assuring  him  of  their  readiness  to  obey  and 
fulfil  all  such  orders  and  directions  as  he  shall  honor  them 
with  for  His  Majesty's  service,  agreeably  to  the  abilities  of  this 
colony. 

2.  That  they  lay  an  exact  state  of  the  colony  before  His 
Excellency ;  as  to  fortifications,  cannon,  warlike  and  military 
stores,  the  number  of  inhabitants,  the  state  of  the  treasury, 
and  funds  for  supplying  it. 

3.  That  they  beg  His  Lordship  to  lay  their  defenceless 
condition  before  His  Majesty,  in  the  most  favorable  light. 

4.  That  they  pray  His  Lordship  to  afford  the  colony  such 
an  allowance  for  the  provisions  and  warlike  stores  furnished 
by  them,  to  the  provincial  forces  the  present  year,  as  may  be 
agreeable  to  His  Majesty's  gracious  intentions,  signified  to  all 
his  colonies,  by  his  secretary  of  state. 

5.  That  they  endeavor  to  prevail  with  His  Lordship,  to  set- 
tle and  ascertain  the  proper  and  equitable  proportions  and 
quotas  of  men  and  other  aids  that  each  colony  ought  to  fur- 
nish towards  the  common  cause  of  defending  their  country, 
that  on  future  requisitions,  His  Lordship  send  to  each  colony 
for  the  specific  number  their  duty  requires  them  to  send  ;  and 
that  the  commissioners,  at  their  return,  lay  His  Lordship's  de- 
termination before  the  General  Assembly,  for  their  approbation 
or  rejection. 

6.  That  they  treat  with  His  Lordship,  in  respect  to  hiring 
of  the  crown  a  sum  of  money,  in  case  the  colony  should  have 
occasion,  and  think  proper  to  hire  it. 

7.  That  the  committee  receive  a  commission  for  these  pur- 
poses, signed  by  the  secretary,  and  sealed  with  the  colony's 
seal,  by  order  of  the  General  Assembly. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor,  James  Honey- 
man  and  Daniel  Updike,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  ap- 
pointed a  committee,  to  prepare  a  bill  respecting  persons  dis- 
affected to  His  Majesty,  and  lay  the  same  before  this  Assembly, 
at  their  next  session. 

God  save  the  King;. 


520  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1T5G. 


H.  Fox,  to  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island:"^ 

Whitehall,  March  13th,  175G. 

Gentlemen  :— I  have  acquainted  you  in  my  other  letter  of  this  date,  with  the 
King's  having  appointed  the  Earl  of  Loudoun  to  be  commander  in  chief  of  all  His 
jNIajesty's  forces  in  North  America  ;  but  as  it  will  be  some  time  before  His  Lord- 
ship or  Major  General  Abercrombic  (who  is  to  be  the  next  in  command  to  him,) 
can  set  out  from  hence,  the  King  has  directed  Colonel  Webb  (who  will  forward 
this  letter  to  you,)  to  embark  immediately  for  North  America,  and  to  take  upon  him 
the  command  of  the  forces  there,  till  the  arrival  of  Lord  Loudoun,  or  Major  Gen- 
eral Abcrcrombie ;  you  will,  therefore,  correspond  with  Colonel  Webb,  and  give 
him  all  necessary  lights  and  assistances,  in  the  same  manner  you  were  directed  to 
do  to  the  late  General  Braddoi;k. 

It  having  been  represented  that  a  considerable  number  of  the  foreign  settlers  in 
America  mi»ht  be  more  willing  to  enter  into  the  King's  service,  if  they  were  com- 
manded by  officers  of  their  own  country,  an  act  of  Parliament  has  been  passed,  of 
which  I  send  you  enclosed  a  printed  copy,  enabling  His  Majesty  to  grant  commis- 
sions to  a  certain  number  of  German,  Swiss  and  Dutch  Protestants,  who  have 
served  as  oflicers  or  engineers ;  and  as  they  have  already  engaged,  they  will  embark 
with  all  expedition,  in  order  to  assist  in  raising  and  commanding  such  of  the  foreign 
Protestants  in  North  America,  as  shall  be  able  and  willing  to  serve  with  the  rest  of 
the  forces  upon  this  occasion  ;  and  it  is  the  King's  pleasure,  that  you  should  give 
any  of  the  said  officers  who  may  come  into  your  government,  all  the  assistance  in 
your  power,  in  the  execution  of  this  service. 

It  being  of  the  greatest  importance  that  His  Majesty  should,  in  the  present  situa- 
tion of  all'airs,  be  truly  and  exactly  informed  of  the  real  state  of  defence  of  all  his 
colonies  in  America,  as  well  in  relation  to  the  ordnance  and  stores  of  war,  which 
are  in  each  colony,  respectively,  as  to  the  forts  and  fortifications,  and  the  number 
of  their  inhabitants,  it  is  the  King's  pleasure,  that  you  should  prepare  and  transmit 
to  the  Earl  of  Loudoun,  or  the  commander  in  chief  of  His  Majesty's  forces,  for  the 
tiuie  being,  an  exact  and  particular  account  thereof,  with  respect  to  the  colony  un- 
der your  govervment,  in  which  you  are  to  express  the  present  actual  state  and 
quantity  of  the  cannon,  small  arms,  ammunition  and  other  ordnance  and  military 
stores,  belonging  to  the  said  colony,  either  in  the  public  magazines,  or  in  the  pos- 
session of  the  militia,  or  other  private  persons;  together  with  the  true  state  of  all 
l)laces,  either  already  fortified,  or  which  you  judge  forthwith  necessary  to  be  foTti- 
fied,  with  your  opinion  at  large  in  what  manner  His  Majesty  may  further  contrib- 
ute to  the  security  and  defence  of  the  said  colony  ;  and  also,  as  exact  an  account  as 
you  can  obtain,  of  what  number  the  militia  is  composed,  and  how  armed,  mus- 
lon;d  and  trained. 

I  am,  gentleman,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant,  H.  FOX. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 


*  This  letter,  with  those  which  follow,  to  that  of  the  13th  of  May,  nfjO,  inclusive,  were 
not  iliscovered  till  it  was  too  late  to  insert  them  in  that  part  of  this  volume  to  which  they 

tllOV   llcl. )!).'. 


1756.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  521 


Major  General  Johnson,  to  Governor  Hopkins 

« 

Fort  Johnson,  April  2d,  1756. 
Sir: — I  have  received    a    letter   from    Sir  Thomas  Robinson,  bearing  date  from 
Whitehall,  the  11th  November  last,  in  which  are  the  following  paragraphs,  which  1 
judge  it',my  duty  to  communicate  to  you. 

"  The  King  i^  pleased  to  order,  that  you  do  signify  to  the  officers  aud  pri- 
vate men  who  have  so  eminently  distinguished  themselves,  that  their  resolute  and 
undaunted  behaviour  has  given  His  Majesty  the  greatest  satisfaction. 

The  alacrity  and  despatch  with  which  these  reinforcements  were  raised,  is  greatly 
to  be  commended. 

The  colonies  which   have    so    readily  and  vigorously  exerted  themselves  on  this 
great  occasion,  will  always  find  favor  and  protection  from  His  Majesty." 
I  am,  most  respectfully,  sir, 

Your  obedient  humble  servant, 

\VM.  JOHNSOJJ. 
To  Governor  Hopkins. 

Memorial  of  Richard   Partridge,  Agent  for  Rhode  Island,  to  the 
Lords  Commissioners  for  Trade  and  Plantations. 

The   memorial  of  llichard  Partridge,  agent  for   the  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and 
Piovidence  Plantations,  in  New  England,  humbly  showeth : 

That  some  years  since,  the  said  colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Planta- 
tions directed  your  memorialist  to  apply  to  the  King,  and  to  represent  that  they  had 
built  a  fortification  at  the  entrance  of  the  harbor  of  Newport,  their  principal  town, 
which  cost  them  upwards  of  £10,000,  currency,  which  was  more  at  that  time  than 
£3,000,  sterling ;  and  had  purchased  twenty-four  cannon  for  the  same,  which  cost 
between  £600  and  £700,  sterling,  all  at  their  own  charge,  for  their  defence  against 
an  enemy. 

Whereupon,  your  memorialist  did  humbly  prefer  a  petition  to  the  King,  conform- 
ably thereto,  in  behalf  of  the  said  colony,  signifying  their  request  of  being  supplied 
with  twenty  cannon  more,  from  eighteen  to  twenty-four  pounders,  and  a  quantity 
of  shot  for  each  gun  ;  which  petition  was  referred  to  the  lords  commissioners  for 
trade  and  plantations,  who,  after  hearing  your  memorialist's  allegations,  in  behalf  of 
the  said  colony,  did,  on  the  14th  of  July,  1735,  make  their  report,  that  they  were 
of  opinion,  it  would  be  of  service  to  the  colony.  If  His  Majesty  would  be  graciously 
pleased  to  grant  their  request,  which  report  is  yet  lying  in  the  council  office. 

That  upon  further  application,  afterwards  made  by  your  memorialist,  to  the 
then  lords  committee  of  council,  they  were  pleased,  on  the  20th  day  of  September, 
1744,  to  refer  the  consideration  of  this  affair  to  the  Duke  of  Montague,  master  gen- 
eral of  the  ordnance,  and  in  case  he  had  no  objection  thereto,  that  then  he  should 
cause  an  estimate  to  be  prepared  of  the  expense  thereof,  and  report  the  same  to  the 
said  committee. 

That,  thereupon,  the  said  master  general  of  the  ordnance  caused  an  estimate  to 
be  made  of  the  said  twenty  pieces  of  cannon,  with   proper  stores  appertaining, 

VOL.  Y.  66 


522  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

amounting  in  the  whole,  to£l,812  14*-.;  and  on  the  Cth  of  November,  1744,  a  report 
of  the  same  was  signed  by  the  Duke  of  Montague,  and  sent  to  the  lords  committee 
of  council,  accordingly. 

That  the  said  lords  committee  did  afterwards,  viz. :  on  the  5th  of  February, 
1744,  take  into  consideration  the  report  of  said  estimate,  and  made  an  order  that 
your  memorialist  should  write  over  for  an  exact  plan  of  the  said  fort,  and  when  re- 
ceived, to  lay  the  same  before  the  said  lords  committee  of  council. 

That  your  memorialist  did  write  over  to  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island,  accord- 
ingly, and  received  from  thence  a  plan  of  their  fortification,  which  he  laid  before 
the  said  lords  committee,  agreeably  to  their  order  ;  but  this  matter,  notwithstanding 
your  memorialist's  endeavor,  (being  delayed)  nothing  has  ever  yet  been  obtained, 
in  consequence  of  the  aforesaid  application,  till  peace  was  concluded. 

That  your  memorialist  has  lately  received  advice  from  the  Governor  of  the  said 
colony,  dated  April  1 7th,  1 755,  intimating  that,  as  now  again  they  seem  to  be  threat- 
ened with  a  war,  and  have  been  strictly  commanded  by  His  Majesty  to  do  every 
thing  in  their  power  to  put  their  colony  in  the  best  posture  of  defence  they  can, 
and  that,  in  obedience  thereto,  they  have  ordered  their  fortification  to  be  repaired 
and  enlarged ;  and  have  again  directed  your  memorialist  properly  to  apply  for  such 
a  number  of  cannon  and  stores  of  such  sizes  as  may  render  their  fortification  com- 
plete, according  to  its  enlargements  now  making  ;  and  the  said  Governor  hath  also 
written  to  Sir  Thos.  Kobinson,  secretary  of  state,  thereabout,  and  sent  him  a  com- 
plete plan  of  their  fortification  ;  a  copy  of  the  Governor's  letter,  thereupon,  is  here- 
unto annexed 

That  the  General  Assembly  of  the  said  colony,  have  lately  granted  a  tax  on  the 
people,  of  £10,000,  currency ;  and  the  town  of  Newport,  in  the  said  colony,  £5,000 
more,  to  be  wholly  appropriated  to  the  repairing  and  enlarging  the  fort. 

That  Rhode  Island  is  situated  about  seventy  miles  from  Boston,  in  the  Massachu- 
setts Bay,  and  separated  from  the  main  land,  only  by  a  river  of  about  two  or  three 
miles  over ;  and  in  case  it  should  be  invaded  in  the  condition  it  is  at  present,  it  may 
become  (as  it  is  conceived,)  an  easy  prey  to  the  enemy  ;  in  which  case,  they  may 
cross  a  narrow  river,  and  march  an  army  into  the  heart  of  the  Province  of  tho 
Massachusetts. 

And  for  that,  as  your  memorialist  has  been  lately  advised  from  their  Governor, 
Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.,  of  the  10th  of  January  last,  that  in  the  late  expedition,  un- 
dertaken for  reducing  Crown  Point,  this  little  colony  has  already  expended  more 
than  £15,000,  sterling  ;  the  whole  of  which  sum  lies  as  a  debt  upon  it. 

'Iherefore,  in  regard  the  said  colony,  as  your  memorialist  apprehends,  hath  done, 
and  is  now  about  doing,  to  the  utmost  they  are  able,  in  building  and  repairing 
their  fort,  and  formerly  purchasing  the  said  twenty-four  cannon,  before  they  would 
become  chargeable  to  the  crown. 

Your  memorialist  most  humbly  prays,  that  you  would   be   pleased  to  advise  the 
King  to  grant  the  said  colonj'  such  a  number  of  cannon,  as  may  render  their  fortifi  . 
cation  complete, from  eighteen  to  twenty-four  pounders,  with  shot  for  each  gun,  and 
Dliier  stores  suitable  for  them.     All  which,  is  humbly  submitted. 

Lcii'l.n,  4th  mo.,  or  April  2d.  1755.  RICHARD  PARTRIDG  E. 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  523 


Governor  Shirley  to  Governor  Hopkins. 

« 

Boston,  April  4th,  1756. 

Sir  : — I  am  favored  with  Your  Honor's  letter,  of  the  2d  instant,  and  am  glad  to 
find  that  you  have  reason  to  be  fully  persuaded  that  the  colony  of  Rhode  Island 
will  augment  their  numbers  of  men  for  the  present  expedition,  in  proportion  to  the 
other  colonies  concerned  ;  and  I  can't  but  much  approve  of  the  prudent  method 
you  intend  to  observe  for  preventing  any  embarrassment  in  the  enlisting  the 
men. 

Four  companies,  consisting  of  two  hundred  men,  carpenters  and  axemen,  are 
gone  from  this  province  for  Albany  and  Fort  William  Henry  ;  the  committee  for 
forwarding  the  transportation  of  provisions  and  stores,  &c.,  set  out  for  Albany 
about  ten  days  ago.  In  their  way  to  Albany,  they  are  to  forward  to  Albany,  the  ox 
teams ;  and  the  sooner  the  carpenters,  guards,  and  ox  teams  of  your  colony  set  out 
for  the  same  place,  the  better. 

I  have  appointed  Major  General  Winslow,  to  the  chief  command,  which  I  hope 
will  be  agreeable  to  Your  Honor's  government. 

I  will  take  care  to  appoint  a  court  of  admiralty  for  the  trial  of  Joseph  Hughes,  as 
you  desire. 

I  am,  with  great  regard  and  esteem,  sir, 

Your  Honour's  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq. 

Sir  Charles  Hardy  to  Governor  Hopkins. 

Fort  George,  New  York,  18th  April,  1756. 

Sir : — I  have  your  favor  of  the  7th  instant ;  also  one  from  the  gentlemen  ap- 
pointed by  your  General  Assembly,  a  committee  to  transact  the  business  relative  to 
the  expedition  against  Crown  Point,  during  their  recess. 

I  am  extremely  glad  Your  Flonor  is  so  forward  to  think  of  sending  some  of  your 
companies  to  Albany  ;  but  I  must  acquaint  you,  that  there  is  a  very  small  propor- 
tion of  boards  in  that  city,  for  the  building  batteau.x  and  boats,  occasioned  by  the 
openness  of  this  wintsr, — there  has  been  no  sleighing,  to  draw  logs  to  the  saw  mills ; 
three  batteaux  I  am  now  building  for  the  use  of  the  forces  raising  in  the  pay  of  this 
Province,  for  this  expedition,  I  am  obliged  to  construct  in  this  city. 

The  measure  Your  Honor  proposes  for  the  transporting  your  provisions,  stores, 
&c.,  from  Albany  to  Lake  George,  is  well  judged  ;  the  Massachusetts  and  Connec- 
ticut propose  the  same  method  ;  the  northern  counties  of  this  Province  are  so  ex- 
hausted in  waggons,  from  last  year's  service,  that  they  cannot,  with  the  assistance  of 
the  lower  counties,  furnish  a  sufficient  number  for  the  service  against  Crown  Point, 
and  the  expedition  to  be  carried  on  by  His  Majesty's  troops  to  the  westward. 

The  Assembly  of  this  Province  are  to  meet  next  week,  when  I  shall  lay  before 
them  your  letter,  desiring  that  you  may  be  excused  paying  the  duty  for  rum  sent  to 
this  city,  to  be  sold  for  the  purposes  you  mention.  All  provisions  and  stores,  subject 
to  duties,  on  being  imported  into  this  Province,  that  are  designed  for  the  use  of 


524  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1756. 

the  forces  of  the  colonies  concerned  in  the  intended  expedition,  and  as  such  are  to 
be  sent  to  Lake  George,  arc  fiee  of  those  duties,  as  last  year  ;  but  I  cannot  give  you 
encouragement  to  expect  that  the  Assembly  will  consent  to  remit  that  duty  upon 
the  foot  that  you  desire  it. 

With  respect  to  the  particular  advantages  accruing  to  this  Province,  from  this 
intended  expedition,  its  situation  exposes  our  frontiers  to  the  open  incursions  of 
the  French  ;  and  the  encroachments  made  by  them  in  it,  I  cannot  but  look  upon  an 
a  national  and  common  cause ;  and  that  the  advantages  arising  from  our  success 
upon  the  present  undertaking,  is  equally  so.  These,  I  offer  to  you  as  my  thougbts» 
■without  having  regard  to  any  local  consideration  for  the  particular  interest  of  this, 
or  any  other  Province.  However,  you  may  be  assured,  I  shall  at  all  times  use  my 
endeavors  to  tender  you  mj'  best  services,  and  shall  take  the  sentiments  of  the  As- 
sembly, as  you  desire,  and  shall  communicate  to  you  their  determination  upon  it. 

Yesterday  I  received  several  letters  from  Albany,  and  Sir  Willian  Johnson,  en- 
closing me  copies  of  others,  from  Col.  Jlereer  and  Capt.  Williams,  at  the  Great 
Carrying  Place,  informing  me  that  a  body  of  French  and  Indians  have  posted 
themselves,  and  are  surrounded  with  pickets,  about  twelve  miles  to  the  eastward  of 
Oswego  :  and  that  Col.  IMercer  has  further  information  from  some  Indians,  that 
another  body  of  Indians,  &c.,  art!  on  their  march  from  Niagara;  which,  together 
with  the  first  mentioned,  are  to  form  an  attack  on  Oswego.  This  is  the  substance 
of  my  information,  with  respect  to  the  motions  of  the  enemy. 

General  Shirley's  absence,  and  great  distance  from  the  scene  of  action,  makes  it 
impossible  for  him  to  give  the  proper  orders  in  due  time  to  stop  the  progress  of  the 
t  nemy  in  that  quarter  ;  the  want  of  which,  enables  them  to  make  advances  that  I 
fear  will  tend  greatly  to  the  prejudice  of  His  Majesty's  service,  and  the  interest  of 
these  provinces. 

Under  these  circumstances,  I  have,  by  the  return  of  the  express,  offered  my 
thoughts  to  the  commanding  officers  at  the  head  quarters,  and  recommended  to 
them  to  pursue  such  measures  as  to  me  appears  most  proper  on  the  present  emer- 
gency. Col.  Bradstreet  is  set  off  with  a  very  considerable  number  of  whale  boats 
and  batteaux,  with  provisions  for  Oswego,  which  they  have  much  wanted.  I  wish 
he  may  arrive  safe  with  his  convoy.  I  think  his  voyage  will  be  hazardous,  if  the 
enemy  gets  footing  on  the  waters  leading  to  that  fort. 

In  short,  from  the  accounts  I  have  received,  things  do  not  appear  to  be  so  well 
regulated  as  they  necessarily  should  be  for  promoting  the  public  service ;  and 
)f  the  French  once  post,  it  will  cost  us  much  more  to  remove  them,  than  it  would 
to  have  prevented  their  gaining  any  such  advantage. 

P>y  my  letters  from  Sir  William  Johnson,  the  last  of  the  12th  instant,  which  I  re- 
ceived yesterday,  I  think  we  have  at  last  brought  about  an  accommodation  with  the 
Dclawares.    His  accounts  are  as  follows  : 

In  his  first  letter,  viz. ;  "  As  I  finish  my  letter,  two  one-eyed  Indians,  on  whom  i 
•;an  depend,  brought  me  an  account  that  the  delegates  sent  to  treat  with  the  Dela- 
wares,  were  returned,  and  say,  that  they  have  settled  that  unhappy  breach  between 
them  and  us;  they  are  to  be  here  in  two  or  three  days  (meaning  Fort  Johnson), 
when  I  shall  be  able  to  give  Your  Excellency  a  true  statement  of  their  proceedings 
Ht  that  meeting.  They  further  add,  that  the  Delawares  have  engaged  to  join  us, 
with  the  Five  Nations,  against  the  French." 

In  his  last  letter,  he  says,  "  This  evening,  some  of  the  delegates  sent  to  treai 
■•••ith  the  Delawares,  arrived  here,  (meaning  Mount  Johnson),  with  several   of  the 


1756.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  525 


Oneidas,  Tuscaroras,  Ononrlagoes  and  Mohawks.  I  have  only  time  to  tell  Your 
Excellency,  that  they  assure  me,  they  have  made  up  that  unhappy  affair,  and  that 
the  Delawares,  expect  those  of  their  people  who  may  be  prisoners,  to  be  delivered  up 
as  soon  as  possible  ;  and  then  they  promise  to  deliver  up  those  they  have  of  ours; 
they  say  they  will  join  the  Six  Nations  against  the  French,  it  they  desire  it.  I 
shall  write  Your  Excellency  more  about  it,  as  soon  as  I  hear  ail  they  have  to  say.'" 

Thus  far,  I  hope,  through  the  interposition  of  the  Six  Nations,  this  affair  is  in  a 
fair  way  of  being  brought  to  a  happy  issue.  The  Mohawks  have  sent  four  of  their 
sachems  to  invite  our  river  Indians  to  remove  to  their  castles,  and  I  hear  propose 
giving  them  a  portion  of  their  lands  to  settle  upon. 

The  trade  carried  on  by  the  colonies  to  the  Dutch  Islands,  &c.,  will  not  only 
amply  supply  the  French  Islands,  but  will  doubtless  encourage  them  to  attempt 
throwing  in  large  quantities  to  Louisbourg,  from  whence  Canada  may  easily  be 
furnished.  It  appears  to  me  absolutely  necessary  to  prevent  all  supplies  of  provi- 
sions going  from  these  colonies,  at  this  time  ;  and  the  only  method  to  answer  this 
good  purpose,  must  be  by  proper  laws  passed  in  the  provision  colonies,  prohibiting 
such  an  exportation. 

The  Assembly  of  this  Province  are  to  meet  soon,  when  I  shall  recommend  to 
them  to  pass  such  a  law,  which  if  they  should  come  into,  will  not  prevent  the  ene- 
my's being  supplied  in  the  manner  before  mentioned,  without  the  neighbouring 
governments  concur  in  the  same  measure  ;  I  have  made  this  proposition  to  them, 
and  beg  leave  to  recommend  it  to  your  consideration,  and  beg  your  thoughts  upon 
it,  and  the  resolutions  of  your  Assembly,  if  you  think  proper  to  recommend  it  to 
them.  I  must  beg  leave  to  make  this  addition  to  it,  that  if  the  Assembly  should  de- 
cline passing  the  necessary  laws  for  this  purpose,  that  the  governments  should 
aTee  to  lay  an  embargo,  which  will  most  effectually  answer  the  end  desired.  I 
shall  have  no  difficulty  in  this  measure  with  the  concurrence  of  the  neighboring 
governments,  and  think  I  can  answer  for  that  of  His  Majesty's  Council  of  this 
Province.  I  am,  with  great  regard, 

Your  Honor's  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

CHAS.  HARDY. 

To  the  Hon.  Governor  Hopkins. 

Governor  Shirk f/  to  Governor  Hopliins. 

Fairfield,  Connecticut,  April  2G,  175<i. 
Sir : — I  am  arrived  at  this  place,  in  my  way  to   New  York,  from  whence  I  pro- 
pose to  set  out  for  Albany  in  two  or  three  days. 

As  the  success  of  our  operations,  in  the  ensuing  campaign,  will  in  a  very  great 
measure  depend  on  our  troops  destined  for  Crown  Point,  taking  the  field  as  early 
as  may  be,  I  must  entreat  Your  Honor  to  forward  the  march  or  transportation  of 
your  colony's  forces  as  soon  as  possible. 

I  can't  but  hope  to  have  them  (the  whole  forces  of  all  the  colonies  concerned  in 
that  expedition,)  at  Lake  George,  by  the  middle  of  May,  at  furthest ;  and  that  three 
parts  of  them,  at  least,  will  be  removed  there  before  that  time. 

I  know  of  nothing  that  is  so  likely  to  prove  fatal  to  the  expedition,  as  a  late  cam- 
pai'i'n  would,  which  I  hope  every  government  will  consider. 
I  am,  with  great  regard  and  esteem,  sir. 

Your  Honor's  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant,     Vv .  SHIRLEY. 


52G  RECORDS    OF    THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

V.  S.  Your  Honor  will  be  pleased  to  excuse  the  hurry  and  paper  of  this 
letter. 

To  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Escj. 

General  Winslow  to  Governor  IlopJdns. 

Boston,  May  2,  1756. 

J,!]. ; — As  His  E.Kcellency  General  Shirley,  is  out  of  the  government,  I  thought  it 
niv  duty  to  inform  Your  Honor  how  affairs  are  circumstanced  in  this  Province,  in 
rcnard  to  the  Crown  I'oint  expedition,  which  I  am  pressing  forward,  and  flatter 
nivself  our  levies  are  complete.  We  have  twelve  companies  gone  forward  ;  the  re- 
mains of  the  thirty-five  hundred  men,  I  have  ordered  to  parade  here,  at  Springfield 
and  Worcester,  on  the  4th  instant,  and  shall  begin  to  march  on  the  6th.  Our  pro- 
visions, warlike  stores,  &c.,  are  chiefly  gone,  the  last  vessel  ready  to  sail ;  should  be 
r^lad  that  the  quota  furnished  by  the  government  under  Your  Honor's  command, 
may  be  forwarded  as  soon  as  possible,  with  provisions,  &c. 

As  I  look  upon  it,  our  success  greatly  depends  on  our  despatch,  have  enclosed  to 
Your  Honor  the  laws  passed  by  this  government,  with  relation  to  the  expedition. 
As  I  am  informed  there  was  a  dispute,  last  year,  among  the  officers,  with  regard  to 
the  government  of  the  army,  our  Province  thought  convenient  to  pass  the  act 
chapter  twentieth ;  would  submit  it  to  Your  Honor  and  the  colony,  whether  it 
would  not  be  best  for  the  whole  to  be  under  one  form  of  discipline  ;  and  should  this 
act  be  approved  of,  the  same  may  pass  into  a  law  in  your  government  also. 

I  would  further  inform  Your  Honor,  that  this  Province,  having  taken  into  con- 
sideration the  annual  pension  I  receive  from  the  crown,  which  entirely  depends  on 
my  life,  have,  besides  £300,  lawful  money,  advanced  for  my  table,  granted  me  £400^ 
same  currency,  in  case  I  arrive  at  Lake  George,  and  so  unfortunate  as  to  die  in  the 
.service  afterwards,  which  is  for  the  benefit  of  my  family  ;  and  if  approved  of  by 
the  colony,  it  would  be  a  satisfaction  to  me  that  a  grant  of  that  kind,  for  a  sum 
agreeable,  might  be  made,  as  every  one  should  be  careful  of  their  own  house. 

Am  determined  to  be  at  Newport,  the  11th,  at  Hartford,  the  15th  ;  where  I  hope 
to  consult  thoroughly  of  the  plan  of  operation  for  the  ensuing  campaign,  with  the 
gentlemen  of  your  government,  and  that  things  will  be  to  your  satisfaction;  and 
am,  with  my  best  regards, 

Your  Honor's  most  humble  servant,  JOHN   WINSLOW. 

To  the  Hon.  Stcplicn  Hopkins,  Es(|. 

Goi'crnor  SJurlef/  to  Governor  Hopkins. 

Boston,  May,  1 756. 
Sir: — Having  received  letters  from  Richard  Spry,  P^sq.,  commander  in  chief  of 
all  His  iMajesty's  ships  in  North  America,  concerning  the  distressed  condition  His 
Majesty's  shijjs  are  in  at  Halifax,  for  want  of  men,  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  acquaint 
you,  that  notwithstanding  the  pains  we  have  been  all  at  to  raise  seamen,  that  they  are 
still  three  hundred  .short  of  their  complements;  and  that  without  the  assistance  of 
the  governors  of  the  several  provinces,  in  raising  men,  it  will  be  impossible  for  His 
^L-ijesty's  ships  to  protect  these  colonies,  prevent  supplies  from  France  to  Canada, 
and  otli.r  pla'  ts,  or  block  up  Louisburg,  as  occasion  may  require. 


1756.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  527 


I  cannot  say  but  that  I  have  been  the  more  emboldened  in  taking  the  liberty  of 
troubling  you  in  this  manner,  by  the  knowledge  I  have  of  the  ready  assistance  you 
have  always  so  laudably  given  His  Majesty's  forces,  on  the  liKe  occasions,  by  land ; 
and  as  His  Majesty  has  been  graciously  pleased  to  give  a  bounty  of  thirty  shillings, 
sterling,  to  every  man  who  shall  voluntarily  enter  into  the  fleet,  by  your  makin"  it 
publicly  known,  may  probably  induce  many  to  come  Into  the  service. 

You'll  be  pleased,  in  your  answer,  to  mention  what  hopes  we  may  have  from  your 
assistance,  that  I  may  judge  whether  or  not  it  will  be  necessary  to  send  round  a 
man  ot  war  to  Newport. 

I  am,  with  the  utmost  respect,  sir, 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

To  Governor  Hopkins.  W.  SFIIRLEY. 

Governor  Shirley  to  Governor  HopMns. 

Albany,  12th  May,  1756. 

Sir: — Before  I  left  Boston,  the  Massachusetts  government  passed  an  act  of  As- 
sembly, to  subject  the  troops  raised  within  this  Province  for  the  expedition  against 
Crown  Point,  to  the  King's  articles  of  war,  a  copy  of  which  act,  I  have  ordered  the 
Province  secretary  to  send  Your  Honor ;  and  I  look  upon  this  point  to  be  so  essen- 
tial an  one  for  keeping  up  a  proper  command  and  discij)line  among  the  provincial 
troops,  as  well  as  regulars,  that  I  must  recommend  it  to  Your  Honor  in  the  strong- 
est terms,  as  I  have  to  all  the  other  governments  concerned  in  this  expedition,  to 
pass  a  like  act  with  regard  to  their  troops. 

The  season  of  the  year  for  opening  the  campaign,  is  now  far  advanced,  and  Your 
Honor  is  sensible  how  much  the  success  of  our  operation  against  the  enemy  de- 
pends upon  our  entering  early  upon  action. 

I  must  therefore  beg  you  would  hasten  the  march  of  your  troops  to  Albany,  as 
fast  as  possible ;  and  take  every  measure  for  immediately  completing  your  maga- 
zines of  provisions  and  stores,  at  Fort  Edward  and  Fort  William  Henry,  providing 
a  sufficient  number  of  oxen,  horses  and  carriages  for  transporting  them  to  the  latter 
of  these  two  forts,  and  of  batteaux  and  other  craft,  for  transporting  them  from  Lake 
George  to  Ticonderoga,  &c. ;  all  which  should  be  done  without  the  least  loss  of 
time.  I  am,  with  great  regard  and  esteem,  sir, 

Your  Honor's  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

VV.  SHIllLEY. 

To  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq. 

I.  West  to  Governor  IlopJcins. 

Treasury  Chambers,  13th  May,  175G. 

Sir : — You  receive,  enclosed,  a  copy  of  the  King's  warrant,  for  paying  the  £11  5,- 
000,  granted  by  Parliament  to  the  colonies  of  New  England,  New  York  and  New 
Jersey,  in  America,  as  a  free  gift  and  reward  for  their  past  services,  and  an  encour- 
agement to  them  to  continue  to  exert  themselves  with  vigor  in  the  defence  of  His 
Majesty's  just  rights  and  possessions. 

You  will  see,  by  the  warrant,  the  proportion  allotted  to  your  government,  which 


528  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

Messieurs.  Thomlinson  and  Hanburg  have  shipped  on  board  His  Majesty's  ship 
Sterling  Castle,  Captain  Cornish  ;  of  which  I  acquaint  you,  by  order  of  the  lords 
commissioners  of  His  ^lajesty's  treasury  ;  and  am,  sir, 

Your  most  humble  servant,  I.  WEST. 

To  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Secretari/  Fox  io  the  Governor  and  Compawj  of  Bhode  Island. 

Whitehall,  17th  May,  1750. 

Gentlemen  : — His  Majesty  having  found  it  necessary  to  declare  war  against  the 
French  King,  has  been  pleased,  in  a  council  held  this  day,  at  Kensington,  for  that 
purpose,  to  sign  the  enclosed  declaration,  and  to  order  that  the  same  be  published 
to-morrow,  by  the  heralds-at-arms,  in  the  usual  places,  and  with  the  accustomed 
formalities. 

I  am  commanded  to  signify  to  you,  the  King's  pleasure,  that  you  should  cause 
the  said  declaration  of  war  to  be  proclaimed  in  the  colony  under  your  government, 
that  His  Majesty's  subjects,  having  this  notice,  may  take  care  to  prevent  any  mis- 
chief which  otherwise  they  might  sufi'er  from  the  enemy  :  and  do  their  duty  in 
their  several  stations,  to  distress  and  annoy  the  subjects  of  France. 

And  His  Majesty  would  have  you  be  very  rigorous  and  severe  in  preventing  any 
ammunition  or  stores  of  any  kind,  from  being  carried  to  them  ;  and  you  are  to  use 
all  proper  methods  that  may  be  most  effectual  for  that  purpose. 

I  am,  gentleman,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant,  H.  FOX. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

r.  S.     His  Majesty  has  been  pleased   to  order  letters  of  marque,  or  commissions 
to  privateers,  to  be  granted,  in  the  usual  manner. 
I  have  received  your  letters  of  November  14th. 

General  Winslovj  io  Governor  Hopkins. 

Camp  at  Half  Moon,  June  14th,  175(>. 

Sir : — I  look  upon  myself  obliged  in  duty,  to  acquaint  all  my  constituents,  who 
liave  reposed  trust  in  me,  with  the  command  of  the  troops  raised  lor  the  reduc- 
tion of  Crown  Point,  to  give  a  particular  detail  of  affairs. 

When  inclination  joins  with  duty,  as  is  now  the  case  when  writinj;  to  Your 
Honor,  the  case  is  still  more  easy  ;  and  I  with  pleasure  collected  the  returns  en- 
iloscd,  and  give  you  joy  that  the  colony  under  your  command,  comes  nearest  up  to 
their  qjota,  and  hope  methods  will  be  taken  that  not  a  man  of  yours  will  be  want- 
ing, and  that  soon,  as  I  hope  our  provisions  will  be  up  in  all,  this  month  ;  and  am 
determined  not  to  be  idle,  be  our  forces  more  or  less  ;  have  no  time  to  write  the 
conmiittec  of  war.  Your  Honor  will,  if  you  think  proper,  communicate  to  those 
gentlemen.  Am,  sir,  with  regards. 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

JOHN  WIXSLOW. 
To  Governor  Hopkins. 

P.  S.  Col.  Harris  is  not  yet  arrived,  nor  is  the  act  on  which  your  troops  are 
raised,  ami  to  be  regulated  :  which,  in  changeable  times,  may  be  necessary. 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  529 


Secretary  Fox,  to  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

Whitehall,  June  18,  1756. 

Gentlemen  : — I  am  commanded  to  signify  to  you  the  Ejng's  pleasure,  that  in  case 
any  of  the  commanders  of  His  Majesty's  ships  shall  have  occasion  to  apply  to  you, 
to  set  on  shore,  in  the  colony  under  your  government,  any  French  prisoners,  you 
should  receive  and  treat  them  in  the  same  manner,  as  was  practiced  during  the  last 
war,  or  in  such  other  manner,  as  you  shall  think  most  conducive  to  His  Majesty's 
service.  I  am,  gentlemen,  your  most  obedient  servant,  H.  FOX. 

To  the  Governor  and  Company  of  Rhode  Island. 

JSir  Charles  Laiurence  to  Governor  IlopJdns. 

Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  1st  July,  175(1. 

Sir : — I  am  well  informed  that  many  of  the  French  inhabitants  transported  last 
year  from  this  Province,  and  distributed  among  the  diiferent  colonies  upon  the  con- 
tinent, have  procured  small  vessels  and  embarked  on  board  them,  in  order  to  return 
by  coasting  from  colony  to  colony  ;  and  that  several  of  them  are  now  actually  on  their 
way ;  and  as  their  success  in  this  enterprise  would  not  only  frustrate  the  design  of 
this  government  in  sending  them  away  at  so  prodigious  an  expense,  but  would  also 
greatly  endanger  the  security  of  the  Province,  especially  at  this  juncture  ;  I  think 
it  my  indispensable  duty  to  entreat  Your  Excellency  to  use  your  utmost  endeavors 
to  prevent  the  accomplishment  of  so  pernicious  an  undertaking,  by  destroying  such 
vessels  as  those  in  your  colony  may  have  prepared  for  that  purpose  ;  and  all  that 
may  attempt  to  pass  through  any  part  of  your  government,  either  by  land  or  water 
in  their  way  hither. 

I  would  by  no  means  have  given  Your  Excellency  this  trouble,  were  I  not  per- 
fectly well  assured  how  fatal  the  return  of  these  people  is  likely  to  prove  to  His 
Majesty's  interest  in  this  part  of  the  world. 

1  am,  sir,  Your  Excellency's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

CHAS.  LAWRENCE. 

To  Governor  Hopkins. 

Sir  William  Johnson  to  Major  General  Ahercrombie,  giving  an  ac- 
count of  the  treaty  with  the  Indians  ;  transmitted  by  Sir  Chas. 
Hardy  to  Governor  Hopkins. 

Fort  Johnson,  12th  July,  175G. 
Sir : — Last  night  I  concluded  all  matters  with  the  king,  or  head  of  the  Shawanese, 
and  with  the  king  or  head  of  the  Delaware  Indians,  who  live  on  the  Susquehanna  ; 
the  former  at  Wyoming,  the  latter  at  leaogo. 

The  Shawanese  chief  declares  that  none  of  his  people  were  concerned  in  any  of 
the  hostilities  committed  on  the  frontiers  of  the  southern  provinces;  that  they  have 
strictly  adhered  to  their  treaties  and  engagements  with   the  English,  and  are  de^ 
lermined  to  continue  acting  upon  the'  same  principles. 
VOL.  V.  07 


530  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

The  Delaware  chief  has  confessed  that  some  of  his  people,  deluded  by  the 
French  and  the  Indians  in  their  interest,  did  join  with  them  in  their  late  hostilities 
;ind  depredations,  on  the  frontiers  of  the  said  governments ;  that  they  have  seen 
their  error,  laid  down  the  axe,  and  do  repent  of  their  past  misconduct ;  will,  for  the 
future,  govern  themselves  by  the  example  of  their  uncle,  the  Six  Kations  ;  and  in 
conjunction  with  them,  will  take  up  and  use  the  hatchet  against  the  French,  and  all 
their  adherents.  This,  be  ratified  in  the  most  public  and  solemn  manner,  before  the 
deputies  of  the  Six  Nations,  who  were  present ;  and  engaged  thatall  the  English  pris- 
oners, who  had  fallen  to  the  share  of  his  people,  should  be  forthwith  delivered  up. 

I  presented  the  war  belt,  which  was  accepted  by  both  these  chiefs,  who  sung  the 
war  song  (which  is  a  sacred  engagement  amongst  the  Indians),  with  singular  zeal 
and  warmth. 

I  think  it  proper  to  lose  no  time  in  acquainting  Your  Excellency  with  the  happy 
issue  of  this  important  affair,  in  which  I  have  been  successful  beyond  my  ex- 
pectations: 

The  Delaware  chief,  who  was  the  principal  object,  has  also  promised  to  use  his 
utmost  endeavors  to  withdraw  those  of  his  nation  whom  the  French  have  seduced 
to  go  and  live  in  the  neighborhood  of  Fort  Du  Quesne. 

As  I  see  by  the  public  prints,  the  Governor  of  New  Jersey  hath  published  a 
declaration  of  war  against  the  Delaware  Indians,  which,  as  he  could  not  but 
know  they  were  expected  at  the  Onondaga  meeting,  with  the  hopes  of  bring- 
ing matters  to  an  accommodation,  was,  in  my  humble  opinion,  a  premature 
and  very  unadvised  measure  ;  and  the  Governor  of  Pennsylvania,  he  must  also 
liave  known,  had,  upon  this  account,  suspended  any  hostilities  in  consequence  of  his 
de<:laration  of  war,  some  time  ago  published. 

If  from  these,  or  any  of  the  colonies,  any  hostilities  should  be  first  committed 
against  those  said  Indians,  the  Six  Nations  will,  in  a  body,  resent  it,  and  all  our  In- 
dian affairs  be  put  into  a  fatal  confusion,  which,  I  believe,  no  person  will  be  able 
to  compose  ;  I  hope,  therefore.  Your  Excellency  will  judge  it  proper  to  communi. 
cati"  with  the  utmost  despatch,  the  general  account  which  I  have  now  given  you,  to 
the  southern  governments.  I  would  have  sent  the  same  to  Sir  Charles  Hardy,  in 
order  that  he  might  have  transmitted  it  to  the  neighboring  governments  to  the 
southward;  but  as  that  would  have  taken  up  more  time,  I  thought  it  best  to  refer  it 
to  Your  Excellency,  who,  I  hope,  will,  if  your  sentiments  correspond  with  mine, 
enforce  them  with  your  own  opinion. 

I  shall  only  add,  that  there  appears  every  kind  of  moral  evidence  to  believe  the 
uprightness  and  sincerity  of  the  promises  and  engagements  of  these  chiefs,  in  be- 
half of  their  people  ;  and  that  as  soon  as  a  copy  of  the  particular  proceedings  of  this 
(ongro.-s  can  be  got  ready,  I  shall  transmit  one  to  Sir  Charles  Hardy,  to  forward  to 
the  southern  governments. 

I  hope,  some  day  this  week,  to  have  the  honor  of  waiting  upon  you  ;  and  am, 
most  respectfully, 

Your  Excellency's  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

WILLIAM  JOHNSON. 

To  His  Excellency  Major  General  Abercrombie. 


1756.] 


AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  531 


Governor  Shirley  to  Governor  Hopkins. 


\ 


New  York,  July  13th,  1756. 

Sir : — Some  days  ago,  I  had  the  honor  to  receive  at  Albany,  two  letters  from 
the  Right  Honorable  Mr.  Fox,  one  of  His  Majesty's  princijial  secretaries  of  state, 
dated  the  13th  and  31st  March  last,  acquainting  me,  in  the  former,  with  His  Maj- 
esty's appointment  of  the  Earl  of  Loudoun  to  be  general  and  commander  in  chief 
of  his  forces  in  North  America  ;  and  in  the  latter,  signifying  to  me,  that  it  having 
been  represented  to  the  King,  that  my  presence  in  England  may  be  very  useful 
and  necessary,  to  give  many  lights  and  informations  relative  to  the  state  of  affairs 
in  North  America,  it  was  His  Majesty's  pleasure  that  I  should  repair  to  England 
with  all  possible  expedition  ;  and  that,  for  this  purpose.  His  Majesty  had  given  di' 
rections  to  the  lords  of  the  admiralty,  who  have  ordered  a  frigate  to  receive  me  on 
board,  and  to  proceed  with  me  directly  to  England. 

And  I  have  the  pleasure  of  being  acquainted  in  the  former  of  these  letters' 
"  that  the  disposition  His  Majesty  has  thought  proper  to  make  of  the  command  of 
his  forces  in  North  America,  is  not  owing  to  any  dissatisfaction  with  my  services  ; 
but  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  King's  intention  to  give  me  a  new  mark  of  his  royal 
favor." 

As  I  think  it  not  improper  for  me  to  give  Your  Honor  and  the  province  under 
your  government,  notice  of  my  departure  for  England,  so  I  am  desirous  of  taking 
this  opportunity  to  acknowledge  their  exertion  of  a  most  ready  spirit  for  the  de- 
fence of  His  Majesty's  just  rights  and  dominions,  against  the  encroachments  of  the 
French,  upon  this  continent,  ever  since  I  have  had  the  honor  to  have  any  share  in 
the  command  upon  it ;  to  assure  them  of  my  best  wishes  for  their  welfare,  and  that 
of  His  Majesty's  other  northern  colonies;  and  that  I  shall  think  myself  happy  in 
being  able,  upon  my  arrival  in  England,  to  give  such  lights  and  informations  rela- 
tive to  the  state  of  affairs  in  North  America,  at  this  most  critical  conjuncture,  as 
may  best  promote  His  Majesty's  service,  and  the  general  interest  of  his  subjects 
there.  I  am,  with  great  regard  and  esteem,  sir, 

Your  Honor's  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq, 

Lord  Loudoun  to  Governor  Hopldns. 

New  York,  23d  July,  1 756. 

Sir : — His  Majesty  having  been  graciously  pleased  to  appoint  me,  by  his  commis- 
sion, under  the  great  seal,  to  be  general  and  commander  in  chief  of  all  his  forces  in 
North  America,  1  take  this  first  opportunity  to  acquaint  you  of  my  arrival  this 
morning.  As  I  have  been  unfortunately  so  long  detained  in  my  passage,  I  find  it 
indispensably  necessary  that  I  go  immediately  to  the  army.  I  must  proceed  ac- 
cording! j'. 

I  herewith  send  Your  Honor  the  letters  of  Mr.  Fox,  His  Majesty's  secretary  of 
state,  and  of  the  Earl  of  Halifax,  His  Majesty's  first  lord  commissioner  of  the  board 
of  trade.    I  do,  from  your  zeal  and  attachment  to  His  Majesty's  service,  and  from 


532  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY   OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

the  loyalty  and  good  dispositions  of  your  people,  depend   upon   all   assistance  that 
the  state  and  circumstances  of  your  colony  is  able  to  give  me. 

I  will  beg  Your  Honor  to  assure  the  good  people  of  your  colony,  that  they  may 
depend  upon  my  protection,  and  my  utmost  care  to  avoid  and  remove  (as  far  as 
the  circumstances  of  a  country  become  the  seat  of  war,  will  admit,)  every  thing 
that  may  any  way  burthen  or  hurt  the  interest  of  any  individual. 

I  shall,  on  all  occasions,  and  in  every  thing  relative  to  the  service  and  interest  of 
the  colonies,  communicate  with  Your  Honor  ;  and  beg  at  all  times  to  be  favored 
from  you,  with  all  matters  of  advice  and  intelligence,  relative  to  the  same ;  and 
shall  impatiently  expect  the  returns  you  are  directed  to  send. 

I  beg  you  to  be  assured,  that  I  am,  with  the  highest  esteem,  sir. 

Your  Honor's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

LOUDOUN. 

To  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq. 

P.  S.  I  must  beg  Your  Honor  to  send  me,  forthwith,  copies  of  the  acts  or 
resolves  of  your  Assemblies,  by  which  the  ti-oops  that  are  to  act  against  Crown 
Point,  have  been  raised,  and  of  the  instructions  for  their  proceeding.  L. 

Gol.  Henru  Babcock  to  the  Committee  of  War,  Rhode  Island. 

Albany,  7th  August,  1756. 

Honored  Gentlemen  : — Some  time  last  month.  Gen.  Abercrombie  proposed  a 
question  to  Gen.  Winslow,  asking  him  what  would  be  the  effect,  if  the  regular 
troops  were  ordered  to  join  the  provincials,  on  their  intended  expedition  V 

Gen.  Winslow  told  Gen.  Abercrombie,  that  he  would  be  glad  if  such  a  junction 
could  be  made  ;  but  said,  that  he  imagined  it  would  be  almost  an  entire  dissolution 
of  the  provincial  forces  ;  that  it  would  not  be  in  his  power  to  restrain  them  from 
quitting  the  service,  but  said  that  he  would  choose  to  lay  it  before  his  council. 

He  accordingly,  when  he  arrived  at  Fort  Edward,  called  a  council  of  the  field 
ofliccrs,  and  laid  it  before  them. 

They,  after  reading  the  question,  chose  a  committee,  to  draft  an  answer  to  Gen, 
Abcrcrombie's  question,  of  which  I  happened  to  be  one.  Col.  Fitch  was  sent 
down  with  the  answer,  to  Gen.  Abercrombie.  My  Lord  Loudoun  arrived  at  Alba- 
ny before  Col.  Fitch  got  there ;  My  Lord  received  the  answer,  and  wrote  to  G«n. 
Winslow,  desiring  ot  him  to  come  to  Albany  and  confer  with  him.  Gen.  Winslow, 
who  was  at  Fort  Wm.  Henry,  did  not  come,  but  wrote  an  answer  to  His  Lordship's 
letter,  which  I  was  ordered  to  bring  to  My  Lord  Loudoun,  who  seemed  to  be 
somewhat  surprised  that  Gen.  Winslow  did  not  think  proper  to  confer  with  him. 

His  Lordship  told  me,  with  whom  I  was  a  good  while  alone  in  his  private  cham- 
ber, that  he  had  not  written  home  since  his  arrival ;  and  that  he  had  delayed  writ- 
ing, in  hopes  that  there  might  be  a  happy  accommodation  betwixt  the  regulars  and 
the  provincials.  He  further  told  me,  he  had  desired  Gen.  Winslow  to  come  down 
to  Albany,  and  that  he  did  not  at  all  doubt  but  that  in  half  an  hour,  he  would  ac- 
commodate affairs  to  his,  and  all  his  officers'  satisfaction. 

Cols.  (Jridley  and  Ruggles  are  both  at  the  lake,  who  are  very  averse  to  any 
junction,  even  upon  the  best  terms  that  could  be  proposed  ;  yet  they  arc  averse  to 
it,  and  say  it  publicly. 

I  imagine  that  they  advised  Gen.  Winslow  not    to   go   down,  expecting  that  My 


1756.] 


AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  533 


Lord  would  propose  such  a  junction,   that  Gen.  Winslovv  could  not,  in  honor, 
refuse. 

I  have  heard  that  Sir  Charles  Hardy  has  subjected  (or  intends  to  do  it,)  his 
regiment  under  the  immediate  command  of  My  Lord  Loudoun,  and  will  doubtless 
thereby  save  to  the  government  all  the  expense  of  his  provisions  and  the  transport- 
ing them,  which  I  imagine  would  be  the  best  thing  you  could  possibly  do  with  your 
regiment. 

Compliments  to  all  inquiring  friends. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  your  most  obedient  and  very  humble  servant, 

IIENRr  BABCOCK. 

To  the  Committee  of  War. 

Charles  Apthorp  &  Son  to  Governor  Ilophins. 

Boston,  31st  August,  1756. 

Sir : — Herewith  you  will  receive  a  packet  from  Messrs.  Thomlinson  &  Hanburg, 
enclosing  an  account  of  the  cost  and  charges  on  the  money  purchased  by  them  for 
the  grant  of  Parliament  to  your  colony,  and  shipped  by  the  Stirling  Castle  man  of 
war,  which  was  to  have  been  delivered  here ;  but  by  orders  from  the  lords  of  the 
admiralty,  the  captain  has  landed  it  at  New  Tork,  and  has  left  it  in  the  care  of  Sir 
Charles  Hardy,  to  whom  we  have  written,  and  desired  it  may  be  delivered  to  Mr. 
William  Bayard,  our  agent  there  ;  upon  application  to  whom,  and  the  delivery  of 
the  four  enclosed  receipts,  signed  to  him,  it  will  be  delivered  to  your  order. 

You  will  observe  Messrs.  Thomlinson  &  Hanburg,  out  of  a  sincere  regard  for  the 
interest  of  the  colonies,  have  generously  given  up  their  commissions,  and,  as  we 
have  an  equal  regard  for  them,  we  beg  they  will  also  accept  of  ours. 

Enclosed,  you  have  our  order  on  Mr.  Bayard,  for  six  chests  of  silver,  and  one 
chest  of  gold,  as  per  Messrs.  Thomlinson  &  Hanburg's  account;  amount  £6,684  12s 
3(/.,  sterling. 

We  arc.  Your  Honor's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servants, 

CHAS.  APTHORP  &  SON. 

To  the  Honorable  the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Governor  Shirley  to  Governor  Hopldns. 

Boston,  September  13,  175G. 

Sir : — I  hereby  acquaint  Your  Honor,  that  I  have  caused  to  be  raised  within  this 
Province,  six  hundred  men,  to  make  up  the  deficiency  that  happens  to  be  of  the 
number  of  troops  this  government  had  agreed  to  supply  for  the  army  of  the  provin- 
cial forces,  for  His  Majesty's  service,  against  Crown  Point,  which  are  now  actually 
on  their  march  ;  as  also,  that  I  have  issued  orders  for  one  thousand  men  to  be 
drawn  out  of  the  regiments  of  militia,  in  the  western  parts  of  this  Province,  to  hold 
themselves  in  readiness  to  march  forthwith  to  the  succor  of  the  provincial  forces,  on 
any  emergency,  and  advices  thereof  received  from  the  Right  Honorable  the  Earl 
of  Loudoun,  or  Gen.  Winslow,  agreeably  to  the  resolution  of  our  General  Court, 
copy  whereof,  you  have  herewith. 

And  I  would  earnestly  desire  Your  Honor  to  use  your  utmost  endeavors,  that 


534  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

vour  government  might/in  all  proper  ways,  without  delay,  do  every  thing  on  their 
part  to  answer  the  present  emergency  of  His  Majesty's  service,  and  the  especta 
tions  of  theJRight  Honorable  the  Earl  of  Loudoun,  signified  in  the  circular  letters 
to  the  several  governments  herein  concerned. 

I  am,  with  truth  and  regard,  sir, 

Your  Honor's  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  SHIllLEY. 
To  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq. 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemhli/,  held  for  the  Colomj  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  id  Newport,  the  \Mh  day 
of  October,  1756. 

The  Hon.  >^tcphen  Hopkins,  Governor. 
The  Hon.  John  Gardner,  Deputy  Governor. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  a  regiment  of  four  hundred  men,  including  the 
sixtv  ordered  to  be  raised  by  this  Assembly,  at  their  last  ses- 
sion, and  excluding  officers,  be  forthwith  raised  in  this  colony, 
and  sent  as  a  reinforcement  to  the  forces  already  raised  by  this 
colony,  and  gone  on  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point ;  and 
that  James  Honeyman,  Jeremiah  Lippitt,  Job  Randall  and 
John  Walton,  Esqs.,  with  Mr.  Samuel  Ward,  be,  and  they  are 
here1)y  appointed  a  committee,  to  prepare  a  bill  for  that  pur- 
pose, and  present  the  same  unto  this  Assembly,  as  soon  as 
may  be. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be,  and  he  is  hereby,  re- 
quested to  write  a  letter  by  the  next  post,  to  His  Excellency 
the  Earl  of  Loudoun,  informing  His  Lordship  of  the  true 
reasons  that  his  first  letter  to  this  government  was  not  an- 
swered. 

An  Act  for  raising,  subsisting  and  paying  four  hundred  men, 
to  be  sent  to  Albany,  as  a  reinforcement  to  the  army  gone 
uj)on  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point. 


1756.]  AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  535 

Whereas,  His  Excellency  the  Earl  of  Loudoun,  general  and 
commander  in  chief  of  all  His  Majesty's  forces  in  North 
America,  hath  demanded  an  aid  of  men  from  this  colony ;  and 
at  the  same  time  acquainted  the  government  that  he  hath  re- 
ceived information  that  a  large  body  of  French  troops  were  on 
their  march  towards  the  English  settlements ;  in  compliance 
with  His  Excellency's  demand,  and  to  the  and  that  every  thing 
in  the  power  of  this  colony  may  be  done,  for  the  defence  of  the 
country  ; — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and]  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  a  regiment  of  four  hundred 
effective  men,  exclusive  of  officers,  and  including  the  sixty 
lately  ordered  by  this  Assembly,  to  be  divided  into  eight  com- 
panies, be  forthwith  raised,  at  the  expense  of  the  colony,  and 
sent  to  Albany,  with  all  possible  despatch,  to  be  under  the 
command  of  His  Excellency  the  Earl  of  Loudoun;  and  to 
continue  in  the  service  for  a  term  not  exceeding  two  months 
from  the  time  of  their  enlistment,  unless  the  exigency  of  affairs 
may  make  their  longer  continuance  necessary. 

And  for  the  more  easy  and  expeditious  raising  of  said 
men, — 

Be.  it  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  His  Honor 
the  Governor,  forthwith  issue  his  warrants  to  the  proper  officers 
to  call  together  all  the  companies  of  horse  and  foot  in  this 
colony,  on  Thursday,  the  2Jst  of  this  instant  October,  in  order 
to  enlist  or  draught  out  of  them  a  sufficient  number  of  men,  to 
complete  the  aforesaid  regiment ;  and  that  all  male  persons, 
between  the  years  of  sixteen  and  sixty,  in  this  colony,  be,  upon 
this  occasion,  put  into  the  lists  of  the  several  companies  within 
the  district  of  which  they  respectively  dwell,  excepting  the 
Governor  and  Deputy  Governor,  assistants,  house  of  deputies, 
justices  of  the  superior  and  inferior  courts,  secretary,  general 
treasurer,  clerks  of  the  superior  and  inferior  courts,  sheriffs, 
town  council  men,  town  clerks,  justices  of  the  peace,  commis- 
sioned officers  in  the  several  troops  and  companies,  ministers 
of  the  gospel,  and  all  those  who  have  sustained  the  offices  of 
Governor,  Deputy  Governor,  and  assistants,  and  justices  of  the 


536  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

superior  courts,  together  with  all  those  who  have  made  or  shall 
make  oath  or  affirmation  that  it  is  against  their  conscience  to 
bear  arms. 

And  that  in  case  there  shall  not  be  a  sufficient  number  of 
men  enlisted  timely  on  Thursday,  the  commissioned  officers  are 
hereby  required  and  directed  immediately  to  make  up  the  said 
number  of  four  hundred  men,  by  impressing  or  taking  them 
by  lot,  out  of  the  several  companies,  according  to  the  following 
proportion,  that  is  to  say  : 

Out  of  the  town  of  Newport,  seventy-three  effective  men  ; 
Portsmouth,  ten  ;  Jamestown,  four ;  Middletown,  seven  ;  Tiver- 
ton, thirteen ;  Little  Compton,  twelve ;  Providence,  thirty- 
five  ;  Smithfield,  twenty ;  vScituate,  sixteen ;  Glocester,  six- 
teen ;  Cumberland,  ten  ;  Cranston,  sixteen  ;  Westerly,  twenty- 
four  ;  North  Kingstown,  seventeen ;  South  Kingstown,  sixteen  ; 
Charlestown,  eight ;  Exeter,  fourteen ;  Richmond,  nine  ;  Bris- 
tol, ten ;  Warren,  eleven  ;  Warwick,  nineteen  ;  East  Green- 
wich, fifteen ;  West  Greenwich,  twelve ;  and  Coventry,  thir- 
teen. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
all  the  companies  of  each  town  meet  in  one  convenient  place, 
to  be  appointed  by  the  field  officers,  or  one  of  them ;  and  that 
the  town  council  attend  the  muster  in  each  town,  and  ascertain 
the  number  each  company  shall  furnish,  agreeably  to  their  re- 
spective lists,  towards  their  town's  proportion,  as  stated  by  this 
act ;  and  tliat  it  shall  be  determined  by  a  plurality  of  voices  in 
each  company,  whether  its  proportion  of  men  be  taken  by  im- 
})ress  or  1)y  lot ;  and  if  an  impress  be  determined,  the  captain 
or  tlie  other  chief  officer  that  shall  preside,  shall  forthwith  im- 
press the  number  required  ;  but  if  it  be  determined  they  shall 
be  taken  by  lot,  every  person's  name,  in  the  list  of  the  compa- 
ny, sliall  be  written  on  a  scroll  of  paper,  which  being  rolled  up, 
sliall  be  put  into  a  hat  or  box  ;  and  the  number  required,  shall 
lie  lairly  drawn  out;  and  those  so  impressed  or  drawn,  shall  be 
the  men  to  go  in  this  service,  and  be  entitled  to  the  same 
liouiity  and  wages  as  those  that  voluntarily  enlist. 

And  be   it    fmllior  onacte.l  ])v  tlie  authoritv  aforesaid,  that 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  537 

the  field  officers  or  the  major  part  of  them,  or  in  their  absence, 
the  town  council,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  empowered  to  ex- 
cuse any  person  that  shall  be  impressed  or  taken  by  lot,  who 
is  really  unfit  for  duty,  or  hath  any  other  reasonable  excuse ; 
and  that  if  more  than  one  of  any  one  family,  shall  be  impressed 
or  taken  by  lot,  the  first  impressed  or  taken  by  lot,  shall  be 
retained,  and  the  other  dismissed  ;  and  the  field  officers,  or  the 
major  part  of  them,  shall  order  another  or  others  to  be  ira- 
pressed  or  taken  by  lot,  in  the  room  of  him  or  them  that  shall 
be  so  excused ;  and  that  where  any  shall  pay  the  fine  or  de- 
sert, the  company  out  of  which  such  person  was  taken,  shall  be 
ordered  by  the  field  officers  to  furnish  another  or  others  in  his 
or  their  stead. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
if  any  field  or  other  commissioned  officer,  shall  neglect  to  do 
his  duty  either  in  calling  the  company  together,  or  in  procur- 
ing the  number  of  men  he  is  ordered  to  procure,  he  shall  for- 
feit and  pay,  as  a  fine,  the  sum  of  £1,000,  old  tenor,  to  the  use 
of  the  town  in  which  he  resides,  to  be  levied  by  distraint  of  his 
goods  and  chattels,  as  is  usual  in  such  cases,  by  the  sherifi"  or 
one  of  his  deputies,  by  a  warrant  from  the  Governor,  Deputy 
Governor,  one  of  the  assistants,  or  judges  of  the  superior  or  in-  ' 
ferior  courts. 

And  that  if  any  person  who  shall  be  appointed  by  the  com- 
missioned officers,  to  warn  in  the  several  companies,  shall  neg- 
lect doing  his  duty,  he  shall  forfeit  and  pay  as  a  fine,  the  sum 
of  £500,  old  tenor,  to  and  for  the  use  of  the  town  in  which  he 
resides,  to  be  recovered  in  manner,  as  above  said. 

And  that  if  any  person,  being  duly  warned,  shall  not  make 
his  appearance,  he  shall  forfeit  and  pay  as  a  fine,  the  sum  of 
£100,  old  tenor,  which  shall  be  divided  among  the  soldiers  of 
the  company  to  which  the  offender  belongs,  who  shall  volun- 
tarily enlist  and  go  in  the  service. 

And  that  any  person,  who  being  impressed,  or  taken  by  lot 
out  of  any  of  the  companies,  shall  absent  himself,  or  refuse  to 
serve  in  person,  or  shall  not  procure  an  able  bodied  man,  to 
serve  in  his  room,  shall  forfeit  and   pay,  as   a   fine,  the  sum  of 

vor,.  v.  68 


538  RECOKDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OF   KHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

^100,  whicli  shall  be  immediately  levied  by  a  warrant  of  dis- 
tress on  his  estate,  as  aforesaid ;  and  shall  also  be  divided 
among  the  soldiers  of  the  company,  who  shall  voluntarily  enlist 
and  go  in  the  service  ;  but  if  the  estate  of  the  offender  cannot 
be  found,  he  shall  be  apprehended  as  soon  as  may  be,  and  sent 
up  to  the  army,  and  there  be  placed  in  the  room  of  an  invalid 
of  tliose  already  at  the  forts. 

•And  to  prevent  the  inconveniencies  which  may  arise  by  any 
of  the  officers'  not  having  taken  their  commissions, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  in  case  the 
captains  of  any  of  the  companies,  or  other  of  the  commissioned 
officers,  have  not  taken,  or  shall  not  take  their  commissions 
timely,  the  field  officers  may,  and  hereby  are  directed  and  re- 
quired, to  call  such  company  or  companies  together,  and  to  do 
the  duty  in  every  respect  which  ought  to  have  been  done  by 
said  captains  or  other  commissioned  officers. 

And  for  encouragement  to  all  persons  to  enlist  in  the  de- 
fence of  their  country, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  every  able 
bodied  man,  who  will  enlist,  shall  receive  as  a  bounty,  the  sum 
of  £'4  lOs.,  lawful  money,  on  his  enlistment,  and  thirty  shil- 
lings, lawful  money,  wages  per  month,  during  his  service  ;  and 
every  person  who  shall  enlist,  or  be  impressed  or  taken  by  lot, 
and  goes  in  this  service,  shall  be  exempt  from  all  arrests  while 
he  continues  therein,  except  for  some  criminal  offence. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  commissioned  officers  furnish  each  man  that  goes  from  their 
company,  and  into  the  service,  with  a  good  blanket ;  and  in 
case  a  sufficient  number  cannot  be  procured  by  purchase,  the 
deficiency  shall  be  made  up  by  an  impress ;  and  the  owners 
shall  bo  allowed  and  paid  by  the  committee  of  war,  fifteen  shil- 
lings, lawful  money,  for  every  such  blanket  purchased  or  im- 
pressed. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  conmiittee  of  war  furnish  the  officers  in  each  town,  with  as 
much  money  as  shall  be  necessary,  to  pay  the  bounties  to  the 
several  men  required  of  said   town  ;  and  also  furnish  money, 


1756.]  AND   BKOVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  539 

kettles,  powder  and  balls,  together  with  all  other  necessary 
stores  for  their  march  ;  and  also  provide  cloth  and  materials 
for  tents,  and  send  the  same  with  the  soldiers,  to  be  made  up 
into  tents  if  wanted ;  or  otherwise  to  be  sold  or  sent  back  ; 
and  that  the  committee  of  war  be  also  empowered  to  appoint 
officers  in  the  room  of  those  who  may  refuse  to  accept. 

Protest 

We  protest  against  the  within  act,  for  the  following  rea- 
sons, viz. : 

1.  To  the  method  of  raising  the  men,  namely,  by  draught- 
ing or  impressing,  because  unequal  and  confined  to  a  particular 
set  of  men. 

2.  To  the  exemptions  made,  because  those  therein  except- 
ed, ought,  in  our  opinions,  to  stand  the  same  chance  with 
others ;  and  more  especially  as  it  behoves  them  to  do  it  for 
example's  sake.  JOS.  WANTON,  JR., 

WM.  EARL. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  re- 
quested to  put  a  stop,  until  further  orders  from  this  Assembly, 
to  the  removal  of  a  number  of  arms,  which  they,  the  Assembly, 
have  been  informed,  are  in  the  town  of  Newport  •  one,  whereof, 
hath  been  shown  them,  as  a  sample. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  His  Honor  the  Governor,  be,  and  he  is  hereby  re- 
quested to  send  expresses  to  every  colonel  in  the  colony,  and 
with  each  of  those  expresses  a  copy  of  the  act  for  raising  a 
regiment  of  four  hundred  men,  to  go  as  a  reinforcement  unto 
the  troops  raised  by  this  colony,  and  already  sent  in  the  expe- 
dition against  Crown  Point ;  and  His  Honor  is  further  request- 
ed to  insert  the  purport  of  said  act  in  his  warrant. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  wages  of  all  the  soldiers. 


540  RECOKDS    OF    THE    COLO.NY    OF    RHODE    ISLAND  [1756 

now  in  the  service  of  this  colony,  be  altered  and  augmented, 
that  is  to  say :  each  soldier,  instead  of  £16,  old  tenor,  shall  be 
paid  the  sum  of  thirty  shillings,  lawful  money,  per  month. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  superior  court  of  judica- 
ture, court  of  assize  and  general  jail  delivery,  which  by  law 
was  to  have  been  begun  and  holden  at  East  Greenwich,  within 
and  for  the  county  of  Kent,  on  the  third  Tuesday  of  this  in- 
stant October,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby  adjourned  to  the 
first  Tuesday  in  November  next ;  whereof,  all  parties  con- 
cerned, are  to  take  notice,  and  govern  themselves  accordingly. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  committee  of  war,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  au- 
thorized and  fully  empowered  to  purchase  those  guns  that  His 
Honor  the  Governor,  hath  detained,  agreeably  to  the  request 
made  him  by  this  Assembly  for  that  purpose ;  and  if  there 
be  not  a  sufficient  number  of  said  guns,  that  the  committee 
purchase,  upon  the  best  terms  they  can,  the  number  that  shall 
be  wanted,  to  equip  the  troops  by  this  Assembly  ordered  to  be 
raised ;  and  in  case  said  committee  cannot  purchase  a  sufficient 
number,  that  then  they  be,  and  hereby  are,  authorized  and  fully 
empowered  to  impress  so  many  as  will  answer,  to  supply  the 
deficiency. 

Both  houses  being  resolved  into  a  grand  committee,  chose 
the  following  officers  to  command  the  regiment  by  this  Asseni- 
l)ly  ordered  to  be  raised  : 

Tlis  Honor  the  Governor,  colonel. 

Benjamin  Wickham,  Esq.,  lieutenant  colonel. 

Joseph  Champlin,  Esq.,  major. 

Caleb  Harkcr,  Esq.,  adjutant. 

Joseph  Belcher,  captain  of  the  fourth  company. 

Wm.  Eichmond,  Jr.,  '•         ''       fifth         "• 

Joseph  Winsor,        «         "       sixth 

Joseph  Coggeshall,  "         '•       seventh   ^• 

James  Angel,  first,  and  Isaac  Olney,  second  lieutenant  of  the 
colonel's  companv. 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  541 

Augustus  Johnston,  first,  and  Benjamin  Thayer,  second  lieu- 
tenant of  the  lieutenant  colonel's  company. 

John  Taylor,  of  South  Kingstown,  first,  and  Henry  Shear- 
man, second  lieutenant  of  the  major's  company. 

Benjamin  Dunham,  first,  and  Josias  Rogers,  second  lieuten- 
ant of  Capt.  Belcher's  company. 

Wm.  Gardner,  Jr.,  first,  and  Jeremiah  Briggs,  second  lieu- 
tenant of  Capt.  Richmond's  company. 

Stephen  Arnold,  first,  and  Benjamin  Butler,  second  lieuten- 
ant of  Capt.  Windsor's  company. 

Moses  Warren,  first,  and  Thomas  Bathbune,  3d,  second  lieu- 
tenant of  Capt.  Coggeshall's  company. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  officers  of  the  regiment  to 
be  raised,  in  consequence  of  the  act  of  this  Assembly,  passed 
for  that  purpose,  shall  have  and  receive  monthly  wages,  in 
lawful  money,  as  followeth  : 

The  colonel,  £16  ;  the  lieutenant  colonel,  £11  55. ;  the  ma- 
jor, £9  lbs. ;  and  the  wages  of  the  commissioned  officers  and 
adjutant,  shall  be  the  same  in  this,  as  in  the  regiment  now  in 
the  field ;  and  six  shillings,  lawful  money,  shall  be  added  to 
the  wases  of  all  the  subaltern  officers. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly,  at  two  of  their  late  sessions, 
ordered  the  sum  of  £6,000,  lawful  money,  in  bills  of  public 
credit,  to  be  struck  off",  to  defray  the  charges  of  the  expedition 
against  Crown  Point ;  £2,000,  whereof,  and  no  more,  hath  yet 
been  struck  off", — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  remaining  £4,000 
be  immediately  struck  off^,  for  the  purpose,  aforesaid. 

Whereas,  Benjamin  Wickham,  Esq.,  who  was  appointed  one 
of  the  directors  of  the  lottery,  for  raising  a  sum  of  money 
towards  building  the  fort,  hath  been  chosen  lieutenant  colonel 
of  the  regiment  to  be  raised  and  sent  as  a  reinforcement,  &c. : 

This  Assembly,  therefore,  do  choose  and  appoint  Mr.  Henry 
Ward,  and  he  hereby  is  chosen  and  appointed  a  director  of  said 
lottery,  in    said    Mr.  Wickham's    room ;    he,  the    said    Henry 


542  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE  ISLAND  [1756. 

Ward,  o-iviuo-  such  a  bond  for  his  faithful  discharge  of  the 
trust  committed  to  him,  as  is  required  of  the  other  directors. 

Whereas,  Thursday  next  hath  been  appointed  for  the  as- 
sembling of  all  the  companies,  or  trained  bands  in  the  colony, 
in  order  to  tlie  enlistment  of  soldiers,  for  the  regiment  now  or- 
dered to  be  raised,  and  no  provision  hath  been  made  in  case  of 
foul  weather, — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by 
the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  if  said  day  shall  hap- 
pen to  be  a  rainy  day,  that  the  companies  meet  on  the  next 
day,  being  Friday ;  and  if  Friday  prove  a  rainy  day,  also,  that 
then  the  same  be  deferred  until  the  Monday  following. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  assistant  and  deputies  in 
the  county  of  Kent,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  authorized  and 
fully  empowered,  to  choose  and  appoint  a  captain ;  and  also 
the  first  and  second  lieutenants,  for  the  eighth  company  of  the 
regiment  to  be  raised  in  this  colony,  as  a  reinforcement  to  the 
army  gone  against  Crown  Point. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  secretary,  on  the  18th  day  of  this  instant  Oc- 
tober, publish,  in  the  town  of  Newport,  by  beat  of  drum,  all  the 
acts  and  orders  made  and  passed  at  this  session ;  and  send  a 
copy  of  the  same  to  each  town  clerk  in  the  colony,  within  three 
days  after  the  rising  of  this  Assembly,  which  is  hereby  ad- 
journed, without  day. 

God  save  the  Kins. 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  543 


Proceedings   of  the   General  Assemhly  held  for  the    Colony  of 
I     Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Plantatioris,  at  Providence,  the 
last  Wednesday  in  October,  1756. 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 
The  Hon.  John  Gardner,  Deputy  Governor. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Joseph  Nichols,  Esq.,  Col.  Benoni  Waterman,  Peter 
Bours,  Latham  Clarke,  Job  Randall  and  Thomas  Greene.  Esqs., 
be,  and  they  are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  draw  a  bill 
to  prevent  the  further  depreciation  of  the  currency  of  this 
colony,  and  present  the  same  unto  this  Assembly  at  their 
present  session. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Benjamin  Wickham,  George  Brown,  Othniel  Gor- 
ton, Jeremiah  Niles  and  Nathaniel  Fales,  Esqs.,  be,  and  they 
are  hereby  appointed  a  committee,  to  proportion  unto  the  sev- 
eral counties  in  this  colony,  the  rate  ordered  to  be  assessed  and 
levied  on  the -inhabitants  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  their 
session  holden  in  i^ewport,"  the  fourth  Monday  in  August  las*, 
and  make  report  unto  this  Assembly,  before  their  rising. 

Whereas,  John  Hull,  of  Jamestown,  in  the  county  of  New- 
port, merchant,  preferred  a  petition,  and  represented  unto  this 
Assembly,  that  there  is  a  ferry  set  up  at  the  Long  Wharf,  in 
the  town  of  Newport,  which  hath  no  mate  boat ;  and  thereupon 
prayed  the  liberty  of  setting  up  a  ferry  on  the  east  side  of 
Jamestown,  aforesaid,  for  the  transportation  of  men,  women, 
creatures  and  every  thing  else,  from  his  wharf,  in  said  James- 
town, to  Newport ;  on  consideration  whereof, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
ty thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  prayer  of  the  said  John  Hull, 
in  his  aforesaid  petition   made,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby 


544  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1T5G 

granted ;  provided,  he  will  set  up  said  ferry  upon  the  same 
terms  as  are  granted  to  Thomas  Haszard,  for  setting  up  a  ferry 
from  the  Long  Wharf,  aforesaid. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  all  the  soldiers  enlisted  at  Fort  George,  excepting 
four,  be  discharged  by  the  captain  of  the  fort,  as  soon  as  he 
can  do  the  same  conveniently ;  and  the  said  captain  is  hereby 
directed  to  remove  all  the  powder  he  has  in  said  fort,  save  four 
barrels,  and  place  the  same  in  the  magazine  of  the  town  of 
Newport. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  regiment  of  four  hundred  men,  lately  raised  by 
this  colony,  in  order  to  reinforce  the  army,  gone  against  Crown 
Point,  do  not  march  until  His  Honor  the  Governor,  by  advice  of 
the  committee  of  war,  shall  give  further  orders  ;  and  His  Honor 
the  Governor  is  hereby  requested  to  send  an  express  with  the 
utmost  despatch,  unto  His  Excellency  the  Earl  of  Loudoun,  in- 
forming him  v^diat  this  government  hath  done  with  regard  to 
raising  men  ;  and  that  this  Assembly  being  informed  that  the 
small  pox  is  rife  at  Albany,  it  is  apprehended  that  the  march- 
ing said  regiment  at  this  juncture,  will  be  attended  with  the 
utmost  danger ;  and  therefore  desire  to  know  what  His  Excel- 
lency thinks  best  to  be  done  respecting  the  same ;  and  that 
said  letter  be  laid  before  this  Assembly. 

Whereas,  a  majority  of  the  committee  that  was  appointed  in 
the  former  part  of  this  session  of  Assembly  to  proportion  unto 
the  several  counties  the  rate  or  tax,  ordered  in  August  last,  to 
bo  assessed  and  levied  on  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  having 
])orformed  that  service,  presented  this  Assembly  with  the  fol- 
lowing report,  endorsed  on  a  copy  of  the  vote,  whereby  they 
were  appointed  to  that  service : 

"  Wc,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  a  committee,  by  the 
General  Assembly,  as  appears  by  the  within  vote,  to  proportion 
the  rate  now  to  be  assessed  on  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony, 
liavc  ni^Tced  on  the  following  proportions,  viz. : 


1756.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  546 

Old  tenor.  Lawful  money. 

£        s.  £        s. 

Newport   20,304  12 1,532  9 

Providence    12,525  10 945  7 

Kings 12,275  10 926  6 

Bristol 2,602  10 196  9 

Kent 5,291  18 399  9 


£53,000  00  £4,000  0 

BENJ.  WICKHAM,  NATHANIEL  BATES, 

JER.  NILES,  OTHNIEL  GORTON." 

And  now,  this  Assembly  having  taken  the  said  report  into 
consideration, — 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
same  be,  and  is  hereby  accepted  in  every  respect,  save  that 
the  sum  taken  off  from  the  county  of  Kings  county,  shall  be 
divided  between  the  counties  of  Providence  and  Kent,  in  pro- 
portion to  the  rates  to  be  assessed  on  the  two  counties  last 
mentioned. 

God  save  the  King. 

Lo?'d  Loudoun  to  Governor  Hopkins. 

Fort  Edward,  October  30tb,  1750. 

Sir: — I  this  moment  had  the  favor  of  yours  of  October  23d,  with  an  account  of 
the  quotas  your  government  had  voted,  for  the  assistance  of  the  troops  at  Lake 
George. 

As  the  different  governments,  who  had  voted  men,  on  the  20th  August,  delayed 
so  long  in  coming  to  a  resolution,  and  then  appointed  them  to  be  raised  in  a  shape 
that  it  was  impassible  for  them  to  arrive  in  time  here,  to  be  of  use,  I  immediately 
wrote  to  them,  to  prevent  their  marching,  as  that  could  have  no  effect,  but  puttmg 
the  colonies  to  expense,  I  must  likewise  beg,  that  you  will  stop  your  people  like- 
wise from  marching. 

I  find  the  express  is  just  setting  out,  which  obliges  me  to  cut  this  short ;  but  can- 
not end,  before  I  beg  you  will  return  my  hearty  thanks  to  your  Assembly,  as  I  do 
sincerely  to  you. 

I  am,  with  great  regard,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant,  LOUDOUN. 

To  Governor  Hopkins. 

VOL.  V.  69 


546  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF  RHODE  ISLAND  [17  56. 

Order  from  the  King,  to  Governor  of  Rhode  Island. 

Whitehall,  October  9th  1756. 
Gentlemen:— It  having  been  represented  to  His  Majesty,  that  the  several 
islands  and  colonies,  belonging  to  the  French,  in  America,  have,  in  times  of  war, 
been  frequently  supplied  with  provisions  of  various  kinds,  by  means  of  the  trade 
carried  on  from  His  Majesty's  islands  and  colonies,  to  the  colonies  and  settlements 
l)elonging  to  the  Dutch,  and  other  neutral  powers  ;  it  is  His  Majesty's  pleasure, 
that  you  do,  forthwith,  upon  the  receipt  of  this  order,  give  immediate  directions  that 
nn  embargo  be  laid,  during  His  Majesty's  pleasure,  upon  all  ships  and  vessels 
clearing  out  with  provisions,  from  any  port  or  place  within  your  government,  ex- 
cept those  which  shall  be  employed  in  carrying  provisions  to  any  other  of  His  Maj- 
esty's colonies  and  plantations ;  which  ships  or  vessels  are  to  be  allowed  to  sail  from 
time  to  time,  provided,  that  the  masters  or  owners  do,  before  they  are  permitted  to 
take  any  provisions  on  board,  enter  into  bonds  (with  two  sureties,  of  known  residence 
there,  and  ability  to  answer  the  penalty,)  with  the  chief  officers  of  the  customs  of  the 
ports  or  places  from  whence  such  ships  or  vessels  shall  set  sail,  to  the  value  of  £  1,000, 
if  the  ship  be  of  less  burthen  than  one  hundred  tons,  and  ofthe  sum  of  £2,000,  if  above 
that  burthen,  that  the  cargoof  such  ships  or  vessels,  the  particulars  of  which  are  to  be 
i.-xpressed  in  the  bond,  shall  not  be  landed  in  any  other  ports  or  places  than  such  as 
belong  to  His  Majesty,  or  are  in  possession  of  His  Majesty's  subjects ;  and  that  they 
will,  within  twelve  months  after  the  date  thereof,  the  danger  of  the  seas  excepted, 
produce  certificates,  under  the  hands  and  seals  of  the  principal  oflicers  of  the  cus- 
toms, at  such  ports  or  places  for  which  such  ships  or  vessels  cleared  out,  that  the 
said  cargoes,  (expressing  the  particulars  thereof,)  have  actually  been  landed  there. 
And  when  there  shall  be  cause  to  suspect  that  such  certificates  are  false  and  coun- 
terfeit, you  shall  take  especial  care  that  such  security  be  not  cancelled  or  vacated, 
until  you  shall  have  been  informed  from  the  said  principal  oflicers  of  the  customs, 
that  the  matter  and  contents  thereof,  are  just  and  true;  and  in  case  the  masters  or 
owners  of  such  ships  or  vessels  shall  not  produce  the  said  certificates,  within  the 
time  limited,  you  are  to  attest  the  copies  of  such  bonds,  under  your  hands  and  seals, 
;ind  to  cause  prosecution  thereof;  and  you  are  also  to  give  directions,  that  no  per- 
son be  admitted  to  be  security  for  another,  who  has  bonds  standing  out  undis- 
rharged,  unless  he  be  esteemed  responsible  for  more  than  the  value  of  such 
bonds. 

And,  in  order  the  more  fully  to  answer  His  Majesty's  intention  of  distressing  the 
enemy,  and  to  render  his  orders  herein,  the  more  eS'ectual,  you  are  to  take  care,  m 
case  the  masters  or  owners  of  any  ships  or  vessels,  having  cleared  out  from  that 
colony  under  your  govenment,  laden  with  provisions  for  any  of  His  Majesty's  other 
colonies  or  islands,  shall  be  detected  in  causing  collusive  captures  to  be  made  ofthe 
cargoes,  that  the  severest  penalties  be  inflicted  upon  the  offenders,  which  the  laws 
will,  in  such  case,  allow  of. 

"We  are,  gentlemen. 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

DUNK  HALIFAX, 
ANDREW  STONE, 
To  the  Governor  ami  Company  of  Rliole  I<lan(l.  JAMES   OSWALD, 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  547 


Proceedings  of  the  General  Assemblf/,  held  for  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  at  Providence,  the  third 
Monday  in  November,  1756. 

The  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Governor. 
The  Hon.  John  Gardner,  Deputy  Governor. 

j.\n  Act  for  proportioning  unto  the  several  towns,  the  rates  or 

dered  by  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session  in  Newport, 

on   the  fourth  Monday  of  August  last,  to  be  assessed  and 

levied  on  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  session,  holden  at 

Newport,  on  the    fourth   Monday  of  August  last,  made  and 

passed   an  act   for  assessing   and   levying    a   rate  or  tax  of 

£4,000,  lawful  money,  on  the  inhabitants  of  this  colony,  to  be 

burnt ;  and  also   a  rate   or  tax  for   the  sum  of  £53,000,  old 

tenor,  for  supplying  the  general  treasury ;  to  be  assessed,  levied 

and  collected  on  or  before  the  last  day  of  February  next^  neither 

of  which  rates  or  taxes  hath  been  yet  proportioned  ; — 

Be  it  therefore  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and 
by  the  authority  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  said  rates 
shall  be,  and  hereby  are,  proportioned  unto  the  several  towns, 
as  followeth,  to  wit : 

Lawful  money.  Old  tenor. 

£     s.  d.  £        s.  d. 

Newport 800  00  00 10,602  00  00 

Portsmouth 180  00  00 2,383  00  00 

New  Shoreham.. .    77  00  00 1,021  00  GO 

Jamestown 90  00  00 1,193  00  00 

Middletown 123  00  00 . 1,631  00  00 

Tiverton 132  04  06 1,750  12  00 

Little  Compton. ..  130  04  06 •  1,724  00  00 


£1,532  09  00  £20,304  12  00 


548  RECORDS   OP  THE   COLONY   OP   RHODE  ISLAND  [1756. 


Lawful  money.  Old  tenor. 

£       S.   d.  £          S.   d. 

Providence 292  07  00 3,874  00  00 

Smithfield 223  16  00   2,965  08  00 

Scituate 98  18  00 1,310  08  00 

Glocester 98  18  00 1,310  08  00 

Cumberland 64  10  00 854  00  00 

Cranston 149  03  00 1,977  00  GO 


£927  12  00  £12,291  04  00 

Westerly 229  00  00 3,024  19  00 

North  Kingstown  177  03  00 2,350  00  00 

South  Kingstown  297  00  00 3,938  00  00 

Charlestown 82  02  00 1,086  11  00 

Exeter   84  00  00 1,117  00  00 

Richmond 57  01  00 759  00  00 


Bristol . .    . 

£926  06  00 
.      ..104  08  00 

£12,275  10  00 
1,383  06  00 

Warren  .  .  . 

..    ..   92  01  00 

1,219  04  00 

£196  09  00 

£2,602  10  00 

AVarwick    183  13  00 2,432  00  00 

East  Greenwich.  .  102  17  00 1,363  18  00 

West  Greenwich  .   65  07  00 865  03  00 

Coventry 65  07  00 865  03  00 


£417  04  00  £5,526  04  OG 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
all  the  lawful  money  sliall  be  paid  in  the  bills  that  bear  date  in 
the  month  of  February,  1756  ;  or  in  silver  or  gold,  according 
to  the  face  of  said  bills. 


1756.]  AND   PKOVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  649 

And  it  is  further  enacted,  that  the  assessors  or  rate  makers, 
shall,  upon  their  assessing  or  apportioning  the  aforesaid  rates 
or  taxes,  return  a  true  bill  or  list  of  the  same,  unto  the  clerk 
of  the  town  to  which  they  respectively  belong,  within  forty 
days  after  the  rising  of  this  Assembly  ;  and  that  said  town  clerk 
send  a  copy  thereof,  unto  the  general  treasurer,  in  four  days  ; 
who,  upon  receipt  thereof,  shall  issue  his  warrants  in  four  days 
unto  the  several  collectors  of  rates  of  the  respective  towns,  requir- 
ing them  in  His  Majesty's  name,  to  collect  the  several  sums  to 
them  respectively  committed,  in  lawful  money,  or  in  silver  and 
gold,  or  old  tenor  bills,  agreeably  to  this  act,  by  the  last  day  of 
February,  as  aforesaid,  and  pay  the  same  unto  the  general  treasu- 
rer, or  to  his  successors  in  said  office,  for  the  uses,  aforesaid. 

And  be  further  enacted,  that  each  respective  town  shall  pay 
all  the  charges  and  fees  that  shall  arise  in  or  upon  the  assess- 
ing and  collecting  its  part  of  the  aforesaid  rate  or  tax. 

And  it  is  further  enacted,  that  the  poll  money,  in  assessing 
this  rate,  be  six  pence  per  £1,000. 

And  that  the  secretary,  send  by  express,  a  printed  copy  of 
this  act  unto  every  town  clerk  in  the  colony,  within  eight  days 
after  the  rising  of  this  Assembly,  to  be,  by  said  town  clerk,  im- 
mediately delivered  unto  the  assessors  or  rate  makers,  of  his 
town.  • 

Protests. 

I  protest  against  the  proportion  of  the  town  of  Portsmouth,  for  the  followin"-  rea- 
son :  because  too  large  in  proportion  with  Newport  and  Tiverton,  and  therefore  un- 
equal. WILLIAM  EABX. 

We,  the  subscribers,  dissent  from  this  vote,  for  the  following  reasons,  viz. : 
1.  Because  we  are  of  opinion  that  the  rates  of  the  several  towns  in  the  county 
of  Kings  county,  instead  of  being  equally  and  justly  proportioned,  as  all  rates  should 
be,  will,  according  to  the  above  proportion,  be  extremely  unequal ;  and  think  it 
will  fully  appear  ;  for  according  to  that  estimation,  the  town  of  Westerly  is  to  pay 
above  £6,000,  old  tenor  ;  and  the  town  of  North  Kingstown,  not  £5,000  ;  whereas, 
there  are  more  inhabitants  in  North  Kingstown  than  in  Westerly' ;  the  soil,  in  our 
opinion,  better,  besides  the  great  benefit  of  being  nearer  the  market. 

We  are  of  opinion  that  the  inequality  of  the  above  proportion,  will  further  ap- 
pear, by  comparing  the  towns  of  South  Kingstown  and  Westerly  ;  for  South  Kmgs- 
tovvn  contains  near  as  much  land  as  Westerly  ;  the  soil  beyond  comparison  better, 


550  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

mucli  nearer  to  market,  the  inhabitants  possessed  of  many  slaves  ;  and  being  the 
county  town,  it  draws  a  good  deal  of  money  out  of  the  rest  of  the  county  ;  and  upon 
all  those'accounts,  ought  to  pay  near  as  much  again  as  Westerly. 

And  we  imagine  the  inequality  will,  further  appear,  by  comparing  Charlestown 
and  Richmond  ;  for  according  to  the  best  judgment  we  can  form,  the  town  of  Rich- 
mond contains  more  inhabitants  than  Charlestown,  and  ought,  therefore,  to  pay 
near  as  much  as  Charlestown;  instead  of  which,  they  will  not  pay  so  much,  by 
above  £G,00,  old  tenor. 

It  is  said  in  the  report,  that  all  reasonable  arguments  -were  used  to  convince  us 
of  the  equity  of  their  proposal,  when  no  one  argument  was  offered  that  appeared  to 
us  to  be  reasonable ;  for,  though  they  offered  that  a  sum  should  be  taken  off 
Charlestown  and  Westerly,  yet,  as  that  sum  was  not  any  way  equal  to  the  burthen 
which  was  laid  upon  us  in  the  last  rate  (for  proof  of  which,  we  appeal  to  the  pro- 
portion of  the  rate  of  £35,000),  we  thought,  injustice  to  our  constituents,  we  could 
not  comply  with  it. 

JOSHUA  CLARKE,  CHRISTO.  CHAMPLAIN. 

SAMUEL  WARD.  GIDEON  HOXSIE. 

I  report  against  the  proportion  of  the  town  of  Jamestown,  for  the  following  rea- 
son, to  wit :  that  I  think  that  town  is  greatly  over-proportioned,  according  to  sev- 
eral other  towns  in  the  county  of  Newport.  RICHARD  STEERE. 

We,  the  subscribf  rs,  do  dissent  from  the  above  vote,  for  the  reasons  following  :' 
for  that  the  town  of  West  Greenwich  was  very  much  burthened  with  a  heavy  tax 
before;  and  our  conference  with  our  brethren  of  the  county  of  Kent,  was  wrongly 
represented  to  the  lower  house,  by  one  of  the  members;  and  the  representatives 
of  the  south  county  were  all  out  of  the  house  ;  so  that  the  whole  of  the  tax  the  south 
county  was  disburthened  of,  was  laid  on  Coventry  and  West  Greenwich ;  which  is 
a  grievous  hardship  for  West  Greenwich  to  bear  ;  for  that  we  think  that  Warwick 
and  East  Greenwich  in  justice  ought  to  have  taken  their  proportionable  part,  ac- 
cording to  the  former  tax  ;  which  we  humbly  submit  to  your  honors  to  consider. 

PRESERVED  HALL, 
SAMUEL  DYRE. 

We,  the  subscribers,  beg  leave  to  dissent  from  the  within  vote,  for  the  county  of 
Bristol,  as  to  the  proportions  of  the  towns  of  Warren  and  Bristol,  for  the  following 
reasons,  viz. : 

1.  We  look  uj)on  the  town  of  Warren  to  be  equal  in  value  to  the  town  of 
Bristol. 

2.  As  it  was  a  tie  vote  in  the  lower  house,  and  the  speaker  turned  the  vote  in 
fivor  of  the  town  of  Warren;  but  upon  the  best  information  he  could  get  after- 
wards, was  of  opinion  that  the  town  of  Bristol  was  over-proportioned. 

THOMAS  GREENE, 
NATHANIEL  FALES. 

I,  the  subscriber,  do  protest  against  the  proportion  of  the  several  towns  in  the 
county  of  Newport,  for  the  following  reasons  : 

I.     Because  there  is  a  considerable  sum  taken  olf  New  Shoreham,  and  added  to 


1756.]  AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  551 

Little  Compton,  to  the  amount  of  almost  £400,  over  and  above  the  last  proportion 
to  said  town. 

2.     That  the  above  sum,  or  the    major  part  thereof,  should  have  been  put  to 
some  of  the  other  towns,  and  to  the  town  of  Newport,  in  particular. 

THOMAS  CHURCH. 

Whereas,  the  following  report  was  presented  unto  this  As- 
sembly,— 

The  Colony  of  Rhode  Island, 

With  Jonathan  Nichols,  Thomas  Cranston  and  Peter  Bours,  of  the 
committee  of  war,  on  account  of  the  expedition  designed  against 
Crown  Point,  Dr. 

£         s.   (1. 

To  the  amount  of  an  account  with  sundry  persons,  audited  August 
15,  1755,  by  Joseph  Lippitt,  James  Sheffield,  Joseph  Russell 
and  Obadiah  Brown,  Esqs 20,957  11  lOj 

To  the  amount  of  an  account  with  Thomas  Cranston,  Esq.,  audited 

August  15th,  1755,  by  the  above  gentlemen 1,695  04  00 

To  the  amount  of  an  account  with  Peter  Bours,  Esq.,  audited  Au- 
gust 15,1 755,  by  the  above  gentlemen 78G  08  05 

To  the  amount  of  an  account  with  sundry  persons  audited  October 

31st,  1755,  by  Obadiah  Brown  and  James  Sheffield,  Esqs 36,497  15  00 

To  the  amount  of  His  Honor,  the  Deputy  Governor,  Jonathan 
Nichols,  Esq.,  his  account,  audited  October  31st,  1755,  by  the 
above  gentlemen 17,803  05  08 

To  the  amount  of  Thomas  Cranston,  Esq.,  his  account,  audited  Oc- 
tober 31st,  1755,  by  the  above  gentlemen 3,704  15  00 

To  the  amount  of  Peter  Bours,  Esq.,  his  account,  audited  October 

31,  1755,  by  the  above  gentlemen 2,960  10  00 

To  the  amount  of  an  account  with  sundry  persons,  audited  March 

11,  1756,  by  J.  Sheffield  and  J.  Russell,  Esqs 18,412  00  05 

To  the  amount  of  muster  rolls,  audited  March  11,  1756,  by  J.  Shef- 
field and  J.  Russell,  Esqs 17,012  10  07 

To  the  amount  of  Thomas  Cranston,  Esq.,  his  third  account,  audit- 
ed March  11,  1756,  by  the  above  gentlemen 3,399  17  00 

To  Peter  Bours,  Esc|.,  the   amount    of  his   third   account,  audited 

March  11,  1756,  by  the  above  gentlemen 1,320  13  09 


£124,611  18  08i 

Cr. 

By  our  orders,  drawn  on  the  general  treasurer,  from  time  to  time  £124,611  18  08J 

We,  the  subscribers,  being  appomted  by  The  Honorable,  the  General  Assembly 
to  audit  the  accounts  of  the  committee  of  war,  in  the  expedition  designed  against 
Crown  Point,  do  make  report  : 

That  we  have  examined  the  accounts  exhibited  to  us  by  Jonntlicin  Nichols,  Tlios. 


552  KECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY   OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

Cranston  and  Peter  Bours,  members  of  the  said  committee,  and  find  them  well 
vouched  ;  and  that  the  account  of  the  other  side  of  the  sums  expended  by  them,  is 
what  we  have  audited  agreeably  thereto.  JOSEPH  RUSSELL 

JAMES  SHEFFIELD, 
O.  BROWN. 

And  this  Assembly,  having  taken  the  said  report  into  con- 
sideration,— 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
same  be,  and  is  hereby  accepted. 

Whereas,  this  Assembly  hath  been  informed,  that  Samuel 
Thayer,  of  Providence,  hath  grossly  abused  them, — 

They  therefore  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  said  Samuel  Thayer  be  immediately  brought 
before  this  Assembly,  to  answer  for  his  said  misdemeanor  ;  and 
that  the  secretary  forthwith  issue  a  warrant,  directed  unto  the 
sheriff  of  the  county  of  Providence,  or  his  deputy,  for  that 
purpose. 

Whereas,  the  General  Assembly,  at  their  last  session,  passed 
a  vote,  resolving  that  the  committee,  or  the  major  part  of  them, 
that  were  appointed  to  audit  the  account  of  the  grand  commit- 
tee, be  directed  to  burn  all  the  bills  of  credit  collected  for  the 
last  rate,  which  at  that  time  were  in  the  general  treasury,  ex- 
cepting those  called  lawful  money,  and  make  report  unto  this 
Assembly;  in  consequence  whereof,  what  follows,  was  soon 
livesented, 

Hejjort  of  the  Committee. 

We,  the  subscribers,  being  appointed  by  the  General  Assembly,  a  committee  to 
rce<Mvc  o  Thomas  Richardson,  Esq.,  general  treasurer,  the  rate  money  in  his 
hands,  and  (a  burn  the  same,  except   such   part  thereof,  as  is  in  lawful  money,  do 

That  we  hav-e  received  of  said  Thomas  Richardson,  Esq.,  £G6,1G2  4..  Id.,  old 
cuor  ;  o  wluch,  we  have  burnt  £52,271  17..  5cZ. ;  the  remainder,  being  £  1,041 
l...Y;cl.,  aw  ul  money;  and  calculated   as   it   now  passes,  is,  in  old  tenor,^£l3,890 

;;     ;-,r'";V'"  ^T"^"^"^''^  '"   '^''   ^^^"^^  °f  '^^'^'^   Thomas  Richardson 
J->q.,  till  further  orders  from  the  General  Assembly. 


f.^lf^-T'l'^T  '!'r  "  '""  '"  '''  ^°''^^'^^'  -<^  P-^l  -'°  t'-  treasurers 
^,  ^.^,s..,  1....  1 1,/.,  old  tcnor,  to  make   up    ,he  £70,OuO,  the  amount  of  the  r 


of- 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  553 

ordered  by  this  Assembly  to  be  assessed  and  levied   oa   the  inhabitants  of  this 
colony,  as  appears  by  the  list  herewith  presented.        THOMAS  CRANSTON, 

PETER  BOURS, 
Newport,  November  12th,  1756.  JAMES  SHEFFIELD. 

N.  B.     £18,430  3s.,  Crown  Point  money. 

Unto  which  report,  the  committee  subjoined  the  following 
account : 

Colony  Dr.  To  our  time  and  trouble,  five  days £45 

THOMAS  CRANSTON,  JAMES  SHEFFIELD. 

PETER  BOURS. 

And  this  Assembly  having  taken  said  report  into  consid- 
eration,— 

Do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  resolved,  that  the 
same  be,  and  hereby  is,  accepted  ;  and  that  the  foregoing  ac- 
count of  £45,  be  allowed,  and  paid  unto  the  aforesaid  Thomas 
Cranston,  Peter  Bours  and  James  Sheffield,  Esqs.,  out  of  the 
general  treasury. 

What  follows,  is  a  true  copy  of  the  list  referred  to  in  the 
the  foregoing  report,  made  by  Messrs.  Cranston,  Bours  and 
Sheffield. 

Report. 

Memorandum  of  the  several  towns  in  this  colony,  that  have  paid  their  proportion  of 
the  £70,000  colony  rate,  into  the  treasury,  and  those  that  are  wanting,  viz. : 

Wanting. 
£        .9.   d.  £     s-   (i- 

Newport    14,000  00  00 

Middletown 2,140  00  00     10  00  00 

Portsmouth 3,206  04  06     9  15  06 

Jamestown 1,338  00  00     bond  of  D.  Weeden's,  262  00  00 

Cranston 2.500  00  00 

Warwick 3,213  00  00 

Little  Compton    2,051  00  00 

South  Kingstown 5,200  00  00 

Westerly 4,730  00  00 

Richmond 1,003  00  00 

Smithfield 3,750  00  00 

Warren 1,580  02  01     291711 

Gloccster    1,680  JO  00 

VOL.  V.  TO 


554  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

Wanting. 
£         s.  d.  £    s.    d, 

Charlestown 1,700  00  00 

Scituate    1,475  00  00     158  00  00 

North  Kingstown  3,105  00  00 

Cumberland 1,080  00  00 

Tiverton 2,200  00  00 

Providence 4,600  00  00     

West  Greenwich 1,039  19  00     

Bristol 1,7810111     

New  Shoreham 1,582  00  00     

Exeter 400  00  00     

Coventry 807  OG  70     

East  Greenwich 


£66,162  04  01 
Balance  due  to  the  colony,  3,837  15  11 


300  00  00 

29  11  00 

45  18  01 

18  00  00 

1,075  00  00 

99  13  05 

1,800  00  00 

£3,837  15  U 

£70,000  00  00 

Both  houses  being  resolved  into  a  grand  committee,  Samuel 
Thayer  was  brought  before  them  in  consequence  of  a  warrant 
issued  against  him  by  the  secretary,  pursuant  to  vote  of  this 
Assembly ;  and  the  said  Samuel  confessing  that  he  had 
damned  this  General  Assembly, — 

It  is  therefore  ordered,  that  he,  the  said  Samuel  Thayer,  be 
forthwith  committed  to,  and  closely  confined  in  His  Majesty's 
jail,  at  Providence. 

Whereas,  it  is  feared  that  there  are  some  persons  in  this 
colony,  dangerous  and  disafiected  to  Ilis  Majesty's  person  and 
government,  who  not  only  having  thrown  off  all  duty  and 
allegiance,  themselves,  are,  by  secret  acts  and  practices,  daily 
I'odcavoring  and  attempting  to  alienate  the  minds  and  affec- 
tions of  others,  Ilis  Majesty's  subjects,  from  that  duty  and  alle- 
giance which  they  justly  owe  to  their  lawful  and  rightful  sover- 
eign ;  which  practices,  if  continued,  may  prove  of  fatal  conse- 
quence ;  for  preventing  whereof,  for  the  future, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  authori- 
\\  thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  from  and  after  the  publication  of 
tliis  act,  it  shall,  and  may  be  lawful  for  His  Honor  the  Gov- 
ernor, His  Honor  the  Deputy  Governor,  any  assistant  or  judge 
cither  of  the  superior  or  inferior  courts,  or  any  of  His  Majesty's 
jiisticf's  of  iho  ])ea('o.  in  tondor  the  oaths  of  allegiance  and  ab^ 


1756.]  AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  555 

juration  unto,  and  cause  the  same  to  be  taken  and  subscribed^ 
according  to  the  form  of  the  statute  in  that  case  made  and  pro- 
vided, by  any  person  or  persons  whatsoever,  whom  either  of 
the  officers  above  mentioned,  shall  suspect  to  be  dangerous  or 
disaffected  to  His  Majesty's  person  or  government ;  and  if  any 
such  person  or  persons,  shall  refuse  to  take  and  subscribe  the 
oaths,  aforesaid,  the  officer  that  tendered  the  same,  shall  certify 
the  refusal  thereof  unto  the  next  court  of  general  sessions  of 
the  peace,  that  may  be  holden  in  the  county  where  the  offence 
shall  happen ;  and  if  he,  she  or  they  shall  there  also  refuse, 
such  refusal  shall  be  recorded  in  the  public  book,  to  said  court 
belonging ;  and  all  persons  so  neglecting  or  refusing  to  take 
and  subscribe  the  oaths,  aforesaid,  shall  be  adjudged,  upon  such 
last  neglect  or  refusal,  as  popish  recusant  convict ;  and  be  pro- 
ceeded against  as  such,  for  the  forfeiture  of  his  or  her  goods, 
and  chattels,  and  lands,  and  tenements,  to  and  for  the  use  of 
the  colony. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
all  and  every  of  the  officers  above  mentioned,  may,  by  writing 
under  his  hand  and  seal,  summon  any  person  or  persons,  sus- 
pected, as  aforesaid,  to  appear  before  him,  at  such  time  and 
place  as  he  shall  see  cause  to  appoint,  then  and  there  to  take 
and  subscribe  the  oaths,  aforesaid ;  which  summons  shall  be 
served  on  such  person  or  persons,  or  left  at  his,  her,  or  their 
house  or  usual  place  of  abode,  with  one  of  the  family  ;  and  if 
such  person  or  persons  do  not  appear,  according  to  summons, 
then,  on  oath  made  that  said  summons  was  served,  in  the  afore- 
said manner,  the  officer  who  issued  the  same,  shall  make  a  cer- 
'  tificate  thereof,  unto  the  next  court  of  general  sessions  of  the 
peace,  in  the  county  where  said  summons  was  granted,  there 
to  be  entered  in  the  book  of  records,  to  said  court  belonging ; 
and  if  such  person  or  persons  shall  not  make  his,  her  or  their 
appearance,  at  the^  said  session,  and  then  and  there  subscribe 
and  take  the  oaths,  aforesaid,  his,  her  or  their  name  or  names 
shall  be  publicly  read  at  the  first  meeting  of  the  said  session ; 
and  he,  she  or  they  shall  be  esteemed  a  popish  recusant  con- 
vict or  convicts ;  and  forfeit  all  his,  her  or  their   goods  and 


556  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

cliattels,  lands  and  tenements,  accordingly,  to  and  for  the  colo- 
ny's use. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority,  aforesaid,  that  if 
any  person  or  persons  shall,  from  and  after  the  publication  of 
this  act,  maliciously  or  directly  by  writing,  printing  or  speak- 
ing, declare,  maintain  or  affirm  that  His  present  Majesty,  our 
sovereign  lord,  George  the  Second,  is  not  the  lawful  and  right- 
ful King  of  Great  Britain,  with  the  dominions  and  territory 
thereunto  belonging,  or  that  the  pretended  Prince  of  Wales, 
who  now  styles  himself  King  of  Great  Britain,  by  the  name 
of  James  the  Third,  hath  any  right  or  title  to  the  crown  of 
Great  Britain,  or  that  any  other  person  or  persons  hath  or 
have  any  right  or  title  to  the  same,  otherwise  than  according  to 
the  several  laws  and  statutes  made  for  declaring  the  rights 
and  liberties  of  the  subject,  and  settling  the  succession  of  the 
crown,  or  that  the  Kings  and  Queens  of  Great  Britain,  with 
and  by  the  authority  of  Parliament,  are  not  able  to  make  laws 
and  statutes  of  sufficient  force  and  validity  to  limit  and  bind 
the  crown  of  Great  Britain,  with  the  dominions  thereof,  and  the 
descent,  limitatioD,  inheritance  and  government  of  the  same, 
all  and  every  such  person  and  persons  being  of  such  oflence 
lawfully  convicted,  shall  incur  the  danger  and  penalty  of  a 
pncmunire,  according  to  the  statute  of  praemunire  made  in  the 
sixteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  King  Richard  the  Second. 

Provided  always,  and  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority 
aroresaid,  tliat  no  person  shall  be  prosecuted  by  virtue  of  this 
act,  lor  any  words  spoken,  unless  the  information  of  such  words 
being  spoken,  be  given  upon  oath,  within  three  days  after 
their  being  spoken,  and  the  prosecution  for  such  offisnce  be 
within  six  months  after  the  information ;  and  that  no  person 
or  persons,  shall  be  convicted  ])y  virtue  of  this  act,  from 
any  such  words  spoken,  luit  by  the  oaths  of  two  credible  wit- 
nesses. , 

Whereas,  this  Assembly,  at  their  last  session,  appointed  a 
committee  to  prepare  a  bill  to  prevent  the  further  depreciation 
of  the  paper  -currency  of  this  colony,  wdiich  oommittee  could 
not  aizree  about  the  matter. — 


1756.]  AND  PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  557 

This  Assembly,  therefore,  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted 
and  resolved,  that  another  committee  shall  be,  and  hereby  is 
appointed  for  the  purpose,  aforesaid,  to  wit :  James  Iloneyman, 
Jeremiah  Niles,  Esqs.,  Mr.  Samuel  Ward  and  Lieut.  Col.  Ben- 
jamin Wickham ;  and  that  they,  or  the  major  part  of  them, 
make  report  unto  this  Assembly,  at  their  next  session. 

Whereas,  the  greater  part  of  the  money  granted  by  His 
Majesty  to  this  colony,  consists  of  pieces  of  gold,  of  the  coin  of 
Portugal,  each  of  the  value  of  thirty  six  shillings,  sterling, — 

This  Assembly,  therefore,  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is 
voted  and  resolved,  that  the  general  treasurer  shall  reckon 
and  deliver  out  the  aforesaid  pieces  of  gold,  at  eight  Spanish 
milled  dollars,  each. 

Whereas,  His  Excellency  the  Earl  of  Loudoun,  hath  sent  His 
Honor  the  Governor,  a  letter,  directing  that  the  regiment  of 
four  hundred  men,  lately  raised  by  this  colony,  for  His  Majes- 
ty's service,  do  not  march,  as  the  season  is  so  far  advanced 
that  they  cannot  be  of  any  service  this  year  ;  and  whereas.  His 
Honor,  in  conformity  to  the  directions  of  His  Lordship,  gave 
public  notice  to  all  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  regiment, 
aforesaid,  that  they  might  repair  unto  their  respective  homes 
and  occupations  ;  and  should  receive  wages  and  billeting  no 
longer  than  the  Sth  day  of  this  instant  November :  which  being 
duly  considered, — 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  notice  of  His  Honor, 
given,  as  aforesaid,  shall,  and  hereby  is  declared  to  be  a  full 
and  final  discharge  of  all  and  every  the  above  mentioned  offi- 
cers and  soldiers ;  and  that  the  same  be,  and  hereby  is  approved 
of,  by  this  Asscsmbly. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  the  bill  brought  in  and  now  lying  before  them,  en- 
titled '•  An  act  to  regulate  the  manner  of  making  up  judg- 
ments in  the  several  courts ;  and  also  to  ascertain  the  value  of 
the  bills  of  public  credit  of  this  colony,"  be  put  into  print,  by 
the  secretary,  and  sent  to  each  town  clerk  in  tlie  government. 


558  RECORDS    OF   THE    COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

that  the  same  may  be  made  public  in  every  town ;  so  that  all 
the  inhabitants  may  be  made  acquainted  therewith. 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  all  collectors  of  rates  in  this 
colony,  who  have  been  deficient  in  their  duty,  shall  be  prose- 
cuted b}^  the  general  treasurer  unto  final  judgment  and  execu- 
tion ;  and  that  all  those  who,  having  been  by  him  already  sued, 
are  liable  to  executions,  shall  be  immediately  served  with  exe- 
cutions of  the  judgments  obtained  against  them,  respectively, 
and  committed  to  jail,  and  there  remain  confined  until  such 
time  as  they  pay  what  is  due  from  them,  respectively ;  and  in 
such  payment,  render  and  give  up  all  Crown  Point  bills,  so 
called,  that  they  received  in  collecting  the  rate  or  tax,  and 
have  not  paid  into  the  general  treasury. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
all  the  collectors  of  the  last  rate  or  tax,  who  did  not  pay  into 
the  general  treasury  before  the  2Sth  day  of  August  last,  the 
whole  of  what  they  were  to  collect,  shall  be  forthwith  called 
before  a  committee  or  committees,  to  be  by  this  Assembly 
appointed ;  which  committee  or  committees  shall  be,  and  here- 
by are,  empowered  to  call  such  collectors,  and  every  of  them, 
to  take  an  oath  or  engagement,  in  the  following  form,  to  wit: 


'&"»" 


You ,  do  solemnly  swear  [affirm],  that,  to  the  best  of 

your  knowledge,  you  have  not,  since  the  28th  day  of  August, 
1756,  passed  away  or  parted  with, or  kept  back,  any  bills  or  bills 
of  credit  of  this  colony,  called  Crown  Point  bills,  which  you  re- 
ceived of  any  person  or  persons,  for  his,  her  or  their  rate  or 
rates,  before  or  since  the  said  28th  day  of  August,  17r>6. 

And  in  case  any  of  the  collectors  shall  refuse  to  take  said 
oath  or  affirmation,  that  then  he,  or  they,  so  refusing,  shall  de- 
clare, upon  oath  or  engagement,  what  sum  or  sums  of  said 
Crown  Point  bills,  he  or  they  received,  as  aforesaid ;  and  upon 
a  refusal  to  do  the  same,  that  tlie  said  committee  or  commit- 
tees, so  to  lie  appointed,  sliall  be,  and   hereby    are,  authorized 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  559 

and  fully  empowered  to  commit  him  or  them  to  close  prison, 
there  to  remain  until  he  or  they  shall,  make  or  give  such  oath 
or  engagement. 

And  if  the  said  collectors,  or  either  of  them,  hath  parted 
with  any  of  the  said  Crown  Point  bills,  collected  as  aforesaid, 
unto  any  other  person  or  persons,  besides  the  general  treasurer, 
that  they,  and  every  of  the  said  collectors  shall  procure,  for  the 
colony,  so  much  in  value  of  said  Crown  Point  bills,  as  he  or 
they  have  parted  with,  as  aforesaid ;  and  for  want  of  the  same, 
silver  or  gold,  to  the  value  thereof,  at  the  rate  of  £4,  old 
tenor,  for  a  dollar,  or  gold,  at  its  proportionate  value;  and 
shall  also  render  an  account,  upon  oath,  or  engagement,  who 
the  person  or  persons  is  or  are,  unto  whom  such  collector  or 
collectors  passed  the  same. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority,  aforesaid,  that 
no  person  or  persons,  who  hath  or  have  received  any  of  the 
said  Crown  Point  bills,  from  any  collector  or  collectors  of  rates 
or  taxes,  shall  be  permitted  to  receive  any  thing  of  the  general 
treasurer  for  the  Crown  Point  bill  or  bills,  so  clandestinely  ob. 
tained,  save  old  tenor  bills,  equivalent  thereto,  at  the  nominal 
value. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
such  committee  or  committees  as  shall  be  appointed  to  exam- 
ine the  collectors  of  rates  or  taxes,  pursuant  to  this  act,  shall 
forthwith  give  in  a  list  or  lists  of  the  names  of  all  such  persons 
as  have  received  any  of  the  said  Crown  Point  bills  frflm  such 
collector  or  collectors;  and  that  the  general  treasurer  do  not  give 
out  any  silver  or  gold  for  such  bill  or  bills  as  may  be  presented, 
to  be  exchanged  by  any  person  or  persons,  named  in  such  list 
or  lists,  delivered,  as  aforesaid  ;  or  to  any  other  person  or  per- 
sons whatever,  until  he,  she  or  they  have  made  oath  or  affir- 
mation that  the  bill  or  bills  offered  to  be  exchanged,  hath  or 
have  not  been  received  from,  or  been  in  the  hands  of,  any  of 
the  persons  named  in  such  list  or  lists,  as  aforesaid,  since  the 
]  5th  day  of  this  instant  November ;  nor  to  his,  her  or  their 
knowledge,  since  the  28th  day  of  August  last. 

And  for  effectually  carrying  this  act  into  execution,  this  As- 


560  RECORDS    OP   THE    COLONY    OP   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

sembly  do  choose  aud  appoint  the  gentlemen  whose  names 
immediately  follow,  a  committee,  for  the  purposes  herein  before 
mentioned,  viz.  : 

Lieut.  Col.  Benjamin  Wickham,  Capt.  William  Mumford  and 
Mr.  AVilliam  Bailey,  for  the  county  of  Newport. 

Capt.  David  Whipple,  Lieut.  Col.  John  Andrews  and  Mr. 
Christopher  Waterman,  for  the  county  of  Providence. 

Latham  Clarke,  James  Ilelme  and  Samuel  Albro,  Esqs.,  for 
the  county  of  Kings  county. 

Nathaniel  Fales,  Thomas  Greene  and  Joseph  Russell,  Esqs., 
for  the  county  of  Bristol. 

Othniel  Gorton,  Esq.,  Mr.  John  Spencer  and  Col.  Benoni 
Waterman,  for  the  county  of  Kent. 

And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that 
the  major  part  of  each  of  the  said  committees,  shall  be,  and 
hereby  is,  constituted  a  quorum,  with  power  to  act  as  fully  and 
effectually,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  as  if  the  whole  of  such 
committee  were  personally  present,  and  joined  therein. 

Protest 

We,  the  subscribers,  beg  leave  to  dissent  from  the  vote  re- 
lating to  the  calling  the  collectors  of  rates  in  the  colony,  to 
account,  with  regard  to  the  last  £70,000  tax,  for  the  following 
reasons  : 

L  As  the  vote  is  to  call  a  part  of  the  said  collectors  to  ac- 
count fcTi-  their  conduct,  and  not  all ;  which  we  apprehend, 
ought  to  be  general. 

2.  We  apprehend  the  collectors  were  sufficiently  warned 
liy  the  vote  passed  at  the  February  session,  when  the  tax  was 
;iUored,  in  order  to  redeem  the  Crown  Point  bills. 

3.  We  apprehend  the  putting  of  said  time  to  the  fourth 
Monday  of  August,  will,  in  no  shape  answer  the  design  intend- 
ed by  the  above  vote. 

TIIO.AIAS  GREENE,  WILLIAM  BAILEY, 

THOMAS  llOWLAND,  NICHOLAS  BROWN. 

OTHNIEL  GORTON,  WILLIAM  MUMFORD. 
NovembiM-  ISlb.  A.  I).  175(5. 


1756,]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  561 

Be  it  enacted  by  this  General  Assembly,  and  by  the  au- 
thority thereof  it  is  enacted,  that  the  committee  of  war  be,  and 
they  are  hereby  authorized  and  fully  empowered,  to  discharge 
or  retain  some,  or  all  of  the  troops  by  this  colony  raised,  last 
spring,  and  sent  in  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point ;  said 
committee  regulating  their  conduct  in  that  respect  by  such  ad- 
vice and  directions  as  they  shall  receive  from  His  Excellency 
the  Earl  of  Loudoun. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  in  case  the  silver  and  gold  by  His  Majesty  granted 
unto  this  colony,  which,  by  an  act  of  the  General  Assembly, 
is  to  be  appropriated  towards  exchanging  the  Crown  Point 
bills,  so  called,  shall  not  be  sufficient  to  answer  that  pur- 
pose, all  persons  who  shall  bring  any  of  said  bills  unto 
the  general  treasurer,  after  the  silver  and  gold  is  exhausted, 
shall  receive  notes  of  them  for  silver,  at  £4  per  dollar :  or 
gold,  in  proportion,  to  be  paid  on  or  before  the  22d  day  of  De- 
cember next,  with  lawful  interest,  from  the  day  of  the  date  of 
said  notes. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  His  Honor  the  Governor  be,  and  hereby  is,  request- 
ed to  procure,  upon  the  best  terms  in  his  power,  a  sufficiency 
of  silver  and  gold  to  refund  what  he  borrowed  for  the  use  of 
the  colony,  and  draw  money  out  of  the  general  treasury  to  pay 
for  the  same. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Mr.  Christopher  Hall  be,  and  he  hereby  is,  chosen 
a  committee  man,  for  the  town  of  West  Greenwich,  in  the  room 
of  Mr.  John  Greene,  deceased. 

This  Assembly  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted  and  re- 
solved, that  Mr.  Robert  Haszard,  of  South  Kingstown,  and 
Capt.  John  Reynolds,  of  Exeter,  be,  and  they  are  hereby  ap- 
pointed a  committee  to  run  the  dividing  line  between  the 
towns  of  South  Kingstown  and  Exeter ;  that  they  erect  proper 
monuments  therein,  and  make  report  unto  this  Assembly,  at 
their  next  session  ;  and  that  the  charge  of  doing  the  same,  be 
equally  paid  between  the  said  towns, 

VOL.  V.  71 


562  RECORDS   OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE  ISLAND  [1756. 

Whereas,  the  sum  of  £33,841  145  .5c?.,  in  bills  of  public 
credit,  of  the  old  tenor,  was  lately  burnt  in  the  general  treas- 
ury, through  a  mistake, — 

This  Assembly,  therefore,  do  vote  and  resolve,  and  it  is  voted 
and  resolved,  that  a  like  sum  of  the  same  sort  of  bills,  be  taken 
out  of  the  grand  committee's  office,  and  placed  in  the  general 
treasury,  in  lieu  of  what  was  burnt,  as  aforesaid  ;  and  that  the 
same  be  deemed  burnt  in  the  grand  committee's  office,  as  so 
much  paid  in  for  tenths  ;  which  aforesaid  sum,  together  with 
£1,041  15s.  Qcl,  lawful  money,  now  in  the  general  treasury, 
and  deposited  there  by  the  committee  that  burnt  said  old 
tenor  bills,  shall  be  appropriated  towards  paying  off  the  sol- 
diers returning  from  the  expedition  against  Crown  Point. 

P?vtest. 

The  subscriber  dissents  from  the  above  vote,  for  the  follow- 
ing reasons,  viz. : 

1.  Because  I  think  the  burning  of  that  money  was  no  mis- 
take, and  ought  to  have  been  done  long  ago. 

2.  Because  I  think  the  appropriating  money  paid  into  the 
grand  committee's  office,  to  the  use  of  the  colony,  is  a  viola- 
tion of  the  act  of  Parliament,  and  a  breach  of  the  faith  of  this 
government.  SAMUEL  WARD. 

God  save  the  King. 

Public  Ads  passed  during  the  year  1756. 

[Tie  following'  Public  Acts,  passed  during  the  year  175C,  are  not  printed  in 
these  Records,  but  will  be  found  in  the  volume  of  Public  Laws,  printed  in  the 
year  1767.] 

An  Act  in  addition  to,  and  in  amendment  of  the  several  acts  regulating  the  militia. 
(February.) 

An  Act  to  prevent  shrievcs,  deputy  shrieves,  and  jail  keepers  being  chosen  mem- 
bers of  the  General  Assembly.     (February.) 

An  Act  for  altering  the  time  for  choosing  town  ofllcers  in  .Tamestown;  (Feb- 
ruary.) 

An  Act  for  naturalizing  Nicholas  Battar.     (May.) 

An  Act  for  naturalizing  John  Amicl.     (June.) 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  663 

An  Act  for  empowei'ing  the  Governor  to  license  vessels  to  go  to  the  neighboring 
governments  for  flour.     (June) 

An  Act  for  the  relief  of  insolvent  debtors.     (June.) 

An  Act  for  the  more  effectual  obstructing  the  transportation  of  provisions  and  war- 
like stores  out  of  the  colony.     (June.) 

An  Act  empowering  the  general  treasurer  to  call  special  courts  for  the  recovery 
of  any  sum  or  sums  of  money  which  ought  to  be  gathered  and  paid  into  the 
general  treasury.     (June.) 

An  Act  for  naturalizing  Guillaume  Albrespy,  a  subject  of  the  French  King. 
(August.) 

An  Act  increasing  the  allowance  to  the  keepers  of  His  Majesty's  jails  in  this  colo- 
ny, for  their  support  of  poor  prisoners,  committed  at  the  King's  suit.     (August.) 

An  Act  for  opening  and  setting  up  a  public  lottery,  to  raise  the  sum  of  £10,000, 
towards  building  Fort  George,  on  Goat  Island,  in  the  township  of  Newport. 
(August.) 

An  Act  regulating  the  prices  of  ferriage  at  the  ferries,  commonly  called  Cook's 
or  Fogland  Ferry,  Howland's,  Anthony's,  Bristol  and  Warren  Feri'ies, 
(September.) 

An  Act  to  postpone  the  drawing  of  the  first  class  of  the  lotteiy  opened  in  this 
colony,  to  raise  £10,000,  old  tenor,  towards  building  Fort  George,  etc.  (No- 
vember.) 


MISCELLANEOUS  CORRESPONDENCE,  CHIEFLY  RELATING 
TO  THE  FRENCH  WAR. 

Governor  Hi^kins  to  Governor  Shirk?/. 

Newport,  March  11,  1756. 

Sir  : — The  General  Assembly  of  this  colony  met  the  23d  of  February  past,  and  I 
laid  before  them  the  determinations  of  the  general  council  of  war,  held  at  New 
York,  by  Your  Excellency  ;  I  also  then  laid  before  them  your  letter  of  the  20th  of 
February,  accompanied  with  the  act  of  the  Great  and  General  Court  of  the  Prov- 
ince of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  for  raising  three  thousand  men  for  the  Crown  I'oint 
expedition,  the  ensuing  campaign ;  a  letter  from  Sir  Charles  Hardy,  and  the  re- 
solve of  the  General  Assembly  of  the  colony  of  New  York,  for  raising  one  thousand 
men  for  the  same  service,  was  then  also  laid  before  them. 

After  full  consideration  of  these  matters,  the  Assembly  here  came  to  a  resolution 
to  raise  and  furnish  five  hundred  men  for  the  aforementioned  expedition,  and  have 
made  the  necessary  provisions  for  raising,  subsisting  and  paying  that  number  of 
men  ;  being  of  opinion  that  five  hundred  is  as  large  a  proportion  for  this  colony, 
considering  their  ability,  and  number  of  inhabitants,  as  three  thousand  is  for  the 
Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  or  one  thousand  for  the  colony  of  New  York  ; 
and  do  not  think  themselves  obliged  by  any  means  to  follow  the  unequal  propor- 
tions raised  by  the  several  colonies  the  last  year,  at  the  beginning  of  this  enterprise  5 
however,  they  seem  to  be  willing,  and  1  dare  venture  to  pass  my  word  for  them, 
that  they  shall  cheerfully  undertake  to  bear  an  equal  share  of  the  expense  of  reduc- 


504  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

ing  Fort  St.  Frederic,  and  tbe  whole  Lake  Champlain,  with  its  appendages,  to  the 
obedience  of  His  Majesty,  in  proportion  to-  their  abilities,  when  truly  compared 
with  the  other  colonies  concerned  in  that  enterprise  ;  but  what  methods  may  be 
come  into  for  settling  such  proportions  among  the  colonies  concerned,  seems  yet  to 
be  very  uncertain  ;  and  the  less  to  be  depended  on,  as  the  Massachusetts  absolutely 
refused,  when  earnestly  pressed  thereunto,  by  Your  Excellency,  to  nominate  and 
authorize  any  commissioners  for  such  a  purpose,  the  preceding  year. 

As  to  the  conditional  acts  of  Assembly,  in  the  Province  of  the  Massachusetts,  and 
in  the  colony  of  Connecticut,  for  raising  men,  I  am  persuaded  they  can  be  of  very 
little  service  to  the  common  cause. 

The  instructions  framed  by  your  General  Court,  to  be  given  to  their  committee, 
placed  at  and  near  at  Albany,  for  carrying  their  resolutions  into  execution,  and  a 
copy  of  which  Your  Excellency  has  been  kind  enough  to  communicate  to  me,  I  have 
shown  to  the  committee  of  war,  for  the  colony,  with  whom  powers  are  lodged  for 
the  like  purposes,  and  are  fully  approved  of  by  them ;  and  full  powers  immediately 
will  be  given  to  some  proper  person  or  persons,  in  behalf  of  this  colony,  to  repair  di- 
rectly to  Albany,  and  to  act  there  in  concert  with  the  gentlemen  appointed  by  your 
Province,  for  carrying  all  the  matters  mentioned  in  those  instructions  into  execu- 
tion ;  and  I  shall  be  glad  to  be  informed  what  number  of  troops  will  be  sent  by  the 
Province  of  the  Massachusetts,  for  transporting  and  guarding  the  provisions  and 
stores  in  their  passage  from  Albany,  to  Fort  William  Henry,  and  at  what  time 
they  will  be  sent  awa}',  that  I  may  order  a  proportionable  number  to  join  them  in 
season,  for  that  purpose,  which  I  shall  not  fail  to  do. 

The  list  of  ordnance  stores  prepared  by  the  commanding  officer  of  the  detach- 
ment of  the  royal  regiment  of  artillery,  and  communicated  to  me  by  Your  Excel- 
lency, as  needful  to  be  provided  by  the  colonies,  for  the  ensuing  expedition,  I  have 
also  laid  before  our  committee  of  war,  who  agree  that  this  colony  ought  to  pay  their 
proportion  toward  the  expense  of  it ;  and  will  do  it  in  such  manner  as  may  be  pro- 
posed by  Your  Excellency,  or  others  principally  concerned  in  that  matter  ;  or 
otherwise,  if  their  proportion  can  be  set  off  to  tifem,  it  shall  be  forthwith  pro- 
vided, and  sent  forward,  as  shall  be  ordered, — this  colony  and  all  employed  by  them 
for  this  expedition,  being  fully  determined  that  whatever  part  this  colony  under- 
takes in  it,  shall  be  executed  without  any  kind  of  delay. 

Tiie  committee   of  war  here   have  given  me  a  list  of  sundry  articles  they  would 
willingly  furnish  towards  the  train,  if  it    be  agreeable,  with    such  others  as  might 
make  up  their  full  proportion,  if  those  should  fall  short  of  it. 
With  the  greatest  respect, 

I  am  Your  Excellency's  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

STEPH.  HOPKINS. 

To  His  Excellency  William  Shirley,  Esq. 


Governor  Hopkins  to  the  Committee  of  War,  of  Massachusetts. 

Providence,  July  16,  1756. 
Gentlemen  ; — As  I  had  given   orders  to  my  son,  who  is  commissary  for  this  colo- 
ny, at  Albany,  to  concert  measures  with  those  gentlemen  who  might  represent  the 
Province  of  the  Massachusetts,  and  the  colony  of  Connecticut   there,  for  the  con- 
veyance of  letters,  and  keeping  up  a  weekly  correspondence  between  the  colonies 


1756.] 


AND   PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  565 


and  the  camp  ;  but  he  now  writes  me,  that  persons  are  employed  for  that  purpose, 
by  the  committee  of  war,  in  each  of  the  said  colonies  ;  and  that  it  was  not  in  his 
power  to  enter  into  any  agreement  for  that  end,  at  Albany,  for  affecting  a  matter 
so  necessary  for  the  public  service  ;  I  now  apply  to  you  to  permit  us  to  receive  the 
benefit  of  your  carrier,  upon  our  paying  a  proportionable  part  of  the  charge  which 
I  am  freely  willing  to  do,  at  such  times,  and  in  such  manner  as  you  shall  direct. 

Our  letters  for  Albany  I  can  send  to  Boston,  by  the  post  (postage  paid  here)  un- 
der cover  to  you,  to  send  along  by  your  messenger ;  and  such  as  may  come  from 
thence,  for  any  persons  in  this  colony,  you  will  be  kind  enough  to  put  under  one 
cover,  directed  to  me,  and  deliver  them  to  the  post  rider,  whom  I  will  order  to  call 
for  them.  I  shall  esteem  it  as  a  favor  if  you  will  give  yourselves  the  trouble  to 
write  me  on  this  affair,  by  the  return  of  the  post ;  and  much  more  so,  if  you  will 
send  along  the  letters  to  Albany,  which  accompany  this,  some  of  them  being  of 
great  importance. 

My  son,  and  other  of  our  officers,  by  the  letters  I  last  received,  inform  me  they 
had  sent  divers  letters  by  your  carrier,  to  Boston,  for  me,  but  I  have  never  received 
any  of  them  ;  should  be  glad  you  would  inquire  of  him,  concerning  them. 
With  great  esteem  and  respect,  , 

I  am,  gentleman,  your  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 

STEPH.  HOPKINS. 

To  tiie  Hon.  the  Committee  of  War,  at  Boston. 

Rufus  Hopkins  to  the  Earl  of  Loudoun. 

Albany,  12th  September,  175G. 
My  Lord : — I  am  appointed  by  the  government   of  Rhode  Island,  to  supply  the 
forces  raised  in  conjunction  with  the   other   northern  colonies,  with  provisions  and 
transportation. 

I  have  sent  to  Fort  William  Henry  the  greatest  part  of  the  provisions,  and  the 
most  of  the  Rhode  Island  regiment  are  posted  at  Fort  Edward. 

Your  Lordship's  proposal  of  yesterday,  to  take  on  yourself  the  victualling  the 
jtrovincials,  and  making  yourself  accountable  for  the  value  of  the  remaining  provi- 
sions, is  a  measure  I  not  only  am  satisfied  with,  but  think  absolutely  necessary  ; 
and  had  you  not  made  the  proposal,  I  should  have  thought  myself  obliged  to  make 
application  to  Your  Lordship  for  that  purpose.  I  will  immediately  give  orders  for 
the  delivery  of  the  provision  belonging  to  Rhode  Island,  to  your  order,  and  supply 
the  extraordinary  above  the  King's  allowance,  until  I  receive  orders  from  home,  for 
my  conduct. 

I  am,  with  the  greatest  respect. 

Your  Lordship's  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

RUFUS  HOPKINS. 
To  the  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Loudoun. 

Governor  Shirley  to  Governor  Hopkins. 

Boston,  September  20,  175C. 
Sir  : — I  have  but  a  few  moments'  time  before  the  post  will   go  out  for   the  last 
time  before  I  embark  for  England,  to   desire  Your   Honor   to   let   me  know  by  a 


566  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND  [1756. 

letter  to  be  transmitted  to  me,  in  England,  under  cover,  to  Messrs.  Thomlinson  & 
Trecothick,  merchants,  in  London,  how  your  Assembly  and  people  would  stand 
aflected  towards  an  expedition  against  Cape  Breton,  early  in  the  spring,  in  case 
that  should  be  proposed  from  England,  with  an  assurance  of  the  places  bhiing  kept, 
and  with  proper  arrangement. 

I  am,  with  great  regard,  &c.,  &c.,  W.  SHIRLEY. 

To  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq. 

Lord  Loudoun  to  Governor  Hopldns. 

Albany,  September  30,  1756. 
Sir  : — As  I  have  received  no  answer  from  you,  about  the  aid  I  demanded,  and, 
as  by  the  information  I  received  from  Mr.  Winslow,  the  enemy  are  moving  towards 
us,  with  not  only  all  their  regular  forces,  but  all  the  men  they  can  collect  in  Cana- 
da, capable  of  bearing  arms  ;  I  must  repeat  my  demand,  and  acquaint  you  that  the 
utmost  despatch  and  expedition  is  necessary,  in  whatever  you  intend  to  do. 

Yours,  &c.,  LOUDOUN. 

To  Governor  Hopkins. 


Lieut.  Isaac  ParJcer  to  Col.  Israel  Williams 

Charlestown,  N.  Hampshire,  October  Sd,  1756. 

Col.  Williams.  Sir: — This  day  arrived  here,  a  little  before  sunset,  one  Enos 
Bishop,  an  English  captive,  from  Canada,  who  was  taken  from  Contoocook,  up- 
wards of  two  years  agone.  He  left  Canada  six  and  twenty  days  ago,  in  company  with 
two  other  English  captives,  viz. :  one  William  Hair,  who  of  late,  belonged  to 
Brookfield,  but  had  listed  himself  in  Gen.  Shirley's  regiment,  and  was  taken  at 
Oswego.     The  other  was  taken  from  Pennsylvania. 

They  left  Canada  without  any  gun,  or  hatchet,  or  fireworks,  and  no  more  than 
three  loaves  of  bread,  and  four  pounds  of  pork  ;  so  that  they  suflfered  much  for 
want  gf  victuals,  so  that  through  hunger  and  fatigue,  the  two  men,  his  companions, 
were  not  able  to  travel,  and  he  was  obliged  to  leave  them  the  last  Sabbath  day,  a 
little  on  this  side  of  Conwass,  without  any  sustenance,  except  a  few  berries  ;  so 
that  he  fears  they  are  perished  in  the  wilderness.  I  immediately  this  evening  sent 
out  six  of  our  men  to  look  for  the  men,  and  to  help  them  to  come  in,  if  they  are 
living. 

1  interrogated  the  man  concerning  the  ail'airs  at  Canada;  he  tells  me  he  was  at 
Montreal  when  the  French  army  returned  from  Oswego ;  that  the  F.re'nch  gen- 
eral made  his  return  to  the  governor  that  he  had  taken  eighteen  hundred  prisoners 
(but  others  say  there  were  not  so  many)  ;  and  that  he  killed  six  men,  and  wound- 
ed eight  in  the  capture  of  the  fort. 

He  tells  me  that  the  prisoners  who  were  taken  from  thence,  informed  him  that  it 
was  only  the  Canadians  that  attacked  the  first  fort  they  came  at,  viz. :  Fort  Pep- 
pcrcll — who  fouglit  three  days  with  their  small  arms.  Col.  Mercer,  who  was  in  an- 
other fort,  waved  the  colors  three  times  to  the  oflicer,  who  was  in  said  fort,  as  a  sig- 
nal for  them  to  leave  the  fort ;  but  the  officer  would  not  obey  the  signal ;  then  Col. 
Mercer  sent  an  order  to  the  officer  of  said  tort,  that  when    he  should  throw  a  bomb 


1756.] 


AND   PROVIDENCE  PLANTATIONS.  567 


over  the  fort,  that  then  he  should  plug  up  the  cannon  that  were  in  said  fort,  and 
destroy  the  ammunition  that  was  in  the  fort,  and  leave  it ;  accordingly  they  left 
that  fort,  and  retired  to  the  next  fort. 

Then  the  enemy,  in  the  evening,  began  to  intrench  in  sight  of  our  men,  who 
would  have  fired  upon  them,  but  were  not  allowed,  till  they  had  planted  six  can- 
non ;  then  our  gunner  fired  and  dismounted  four  of  their  cannon.  Col.  Mercer  sent 
for  all  his  captains,  and  had  a  paper  in  his  hand,  supposed  to  be  some  articles  of 
capitulation  ;  while  he  held  the  paper  in  his  hand,  there  came  a  cannon  shot  and 
tore  out  his  bowels.    This  was  in  the  evening. 

The  next  morning,  after  the  French  had  fired  two  cannon,  the  English  hoisted 
their  flag  for  a  capitulation. 

He  further  informs,  that  there  is  a  great  army  gone  to  Crown  Point,  consisting 
of  (as  the  French  tell  him)  thirteen  thousand  regular  troops,  besides  Indians  ;  the 
Canadians  are  to  join  them,  at  a  minutes's  warning,  if  wanted  ;  the  general  set  out 
from  Canada,  last  Thursday  ;  was  a  month  for  Crown  Point.  They  tell  him  they 
have  undermined  Crown  Point  fort,  in  order  to  blow  it  up,  in  case  the  English 
should  get  into  it. 

The  French  tell  him  their  general  has  orders  to  take  the  forts  at  or  near  Lake 
George  ;  then  to  proceed  to  Albany,  and  when  they  have  taken  that,  to  advance 
further  into  the  country,  even  to  Boston,  if  time  and  the  season  will  allow. 

Thus,  sir,  I  thought  it  necessary  to  send  you    this   intelligence,  desiring  if  Your 

Honor   shall   think  it  needful,  to  communicate  to  such  persons  and  places  as  you 

shall  think  proper  to  be  informed  thereof. 

I  am,  sir,  with  all  due  regards. 

Your  Honor's  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

ISAAC  PARKER. 
To  Col.  Israel  Williams. 

Governor  Phips  to  Governor  Hopkins. 

Boston,  October  8th,  175G. 
Sir  : — Having  received  intelligence  of  a  very  large  armament  of  French  regulars 
and  others,  coming  from  Canada,  to  attack  our  forts,  upon  Lake  George,  and  the 
English  army  encamped  there ;  and  upon  their  success  in  this  attempt,  to  fall  upon 
some  of  the  frontiers  in  this  part  of  the  English  colonies,  I  have  thought  it  neces- 
sary to  communicate  it  to  Your  Honor,  as  you  will  find  it  contained  in  the  enclosed 
copy  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Isaac  Parker,  of  Charlestown,  in  the  Province  of  New 
Hampshire,  to  Col.  Israel  Williams,  of  Hatfield,  which  I  received  yesterday. 
I  am,  with  great  respect,  sir, 

Your  Honor's  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

S.  PHIPS. 
To  the  Hon.  Governor  Hopkins. 

Lord  Loudoun  to  Governor  HopJdns. 

Albany,  November  5th,  1756. 
Sir  : — Last  night  I  was  favored  with  yours  of  Oct.  31st.     As  my  letter  from  Fort 
Edward,  would  in  the  main  answer  this  letter,  as  to   the  marching  of  the  men,  the 
province  has  now  raised,  for  the  support  of  their  brethren  at  the  lake,  I  shall  only 


568  RECORDS    OF   THE   COLONY    OF   RHODE   ISLAND         [1756. 

add,  that  as  the  season  is  now  so  far  advanced,  I  am  now  drawing  off  the  troops 
from  the  frontier,  and  sending  home  the  provincials ;  so  that  I  desire  your  people 
may  now  be  dismissed,  as  being  of  no  use  to  us. 

I  am  extremely  sorry  to  learn  from  you,  that  the  colony  has  been  at  so  great  ex- 
pense, in  the  raising  of  those  men  ;  but  that  is  no  fault  of  mine  ;  for  had  any  of 
your  people,  during  your  illness,  given  me  any  information  of  what  was  going  on, 
I  would  have  iuimediately  written  to  you,  to  put  a  stop  to  that  expense  ;  but  from 
the  time  you  informed  me  of  your  having  sent  to  Boston,  to  consult  how  to  proceed 
as  I  very  well  knew  what  the  nature  of  any  advice  you  would  get  there  at  that 
time,  would  be,  I  laid  aside  all  expectation  of  any  assistance  from  your  province 
that  could  be  of  any  use  this  campaign  ;  and  you  see  I  have  not  been  mistaken  ; 
for  in  consequence  of  what  you  learned  there,  your  first  aid  you  voted,  was  so 
small,  and  both  your  resolutions  so  late,  that  they  could  not  arrive  in  time  to  be  of 
any  use,  except  it  was  to  be  in  readiness  to  defend  your  frontiers,  in  case  we  had 
been  beaten  at  the  fort,  for  want  of  a  timely  assistance. 

As  to  the  small  pox  in  this  town,  I  do  not  find  it  has  been  in  more  than  seven 
families,  in  one  of  the  outskirts  of  the  town  ;  nor  do  I  find  that  any  person  has 
been  seized  with  it  for  near  a  month  ;  and  I  hope  the  cold  weather  will  put  a  total 
stop  to  it. 

As  to  the  report   of  its  having  got  into  the  troops  at  the  fort,  it  was  raised  by 
some  ill-designing  people,  to  make  both  the   New  England  troops  and  the  Indians 
leave  us  and  go  home  ;  but  it  had  not  the  effect  intended,  and  I  now  hear  no  more 
of  the  small  pox,  than  if  there  were  no  such  thing  in  the  country. 
I  am,  with  sincere  regard  and  esteem,  sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant,  LOUDOUN. 

To  Governor  Hopkins. 

llichard  Partridge,  Agent  for  Rhode  Island,  in  London,  to  Gov- 
ernor Hopkins. 

London,  November  5,  1756. 

Governor  Hopkins :— I  lately  wrote   to   the  Deputy  Governor,  per  Capt.  Wan-  i 
ton,  for  Rhode  Island,  who  sailed  through  the  Downs  the  23d  ult.  ' 

As  to  public  news,  the  war  continues  without  any  present  prospect  of  accommo-  I 
dation.     Several  of  our  merchant  ships  have   of  late  been  taken  by  the   enemy. 
Admiral  Hawks  continues  with  his  squadron  in  the  Mediteranean,  and  Boscowen  is 
yet  blocking  up  the  French  fleet  at  Brest. 

The  Parliament  which  was  to  meet  the  18th  inst.,  is  now  prorogued  to  the  2d  of 
next  month  ;  against  which  time,  there  are  likely  to  be  some  considerable  altera- 
tions in  the  ministry  ;  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  the  first  lord  of  the  treasury,  having 
(as  is  said)  already  resigned.  People  here  are  greatly  alarmed  and  shocked  at  the 
loss  of  Oswego,  by  the  enemy ;  dreading  the  consequence. 

Our  Kmg,  at  this  time,  is  much  distressed  on  the  present  posture  of  affairs,  and 
the  ministry  greatly  embarrassed  ;  for  the  rest,  I  refer  to  the  magazine  and  the 
prints,  now  sent  thee,  to  be  forwarded  by  Andrew  Oliver,  of  Boston,  per  a  private 
hand  ;  and  I  remain,  Thy  assured  fiiend, 

KICHARD  PARTRIDGE. 

Tn  tho  Governor  of  Rhode  island. 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE   PLANTATIONS.  569 


Governor  HopMns  to  Lord  Loudoun. 

Providence,  November  13,  1756. 

My  Lord  : — I  have  received  your  letters  of  the  30th  of  October,  and  the  5th  of 
November ;  and  agreeably  to  your  directions,  have  dismissed  the  four  hundred  men 
last  raised  by  this  colony. 

As  you  are  pleased  to  inform  me  that  you  are  withdrawing  the  troops  from  the 
field,  for  this  season,  and  I  suppose  those  from  this  colony,  who  have  been  in  the 
service,  will  return  home,  I  beg  you  to  give  me  directions  whether  they  shall  be 
discharged  from  or  retained  in  the  service,  to  be  used  again  another  summer  ;  as  I 
make  no  doubt  this  colony  will  cheerfully  conform  to  Your  Lordship's  directions  in 
that,  and  all  other  things  that  concern  His  Majesty's  service,  and  will  not  again  of- 
fend, in  consulting  their  neighbors,  to  know  if  they  also  will  obey. 

Permit  me,  sir,  to  inquire  whether  you  intend  to  have  any  meeting  with  commis- 
sioners of  the  several  colonies,  this  winter  V  and  if  not,  where,  and  at  what  time 
those  appointed  some  time  past  by  this  colony,  may  have  leave  to  wait  upon  you. 

I  wish  for  an  opportunity,  when,  with  more  than  words,  I  may  assure  you  of  be- 
ing sincerely,  Your  Lordship's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

STEPHEN  HOPKINS. 

To  the  Right  Honorable  the  Earl  of  Loudoun. 

Lord  Loudoun  to  Governor  IlopJcins. 

Albany,  November  21st,  1756. 

Sir: — Last  night  I  had  the  favor  of  yours,  of  the  13th,  by  the  Boston  post,  ac- 
quainting me  that  you  had  dismissed  the  four  hundred  men,  you  had  been  so  good 
as  to  assemble,  to  reinforce  the  troops ;  and  at  the  same  time,  desiring  my  opinion 
as  to  keeping  in  pay,  or  dismissing  during  the  winter,  the  troops  you  had  at  the 
lake. 

This  part  of  the  letter,  I  am  a  little  difliculted  how  to  answer,  for  fear  of  "ivin<T 
offence  to  your  people  ;  the  case  of  the  other  provinces,  so  far  as  I  know,  is  this  : 

New  York  has  reduced  the  regiment  they  furnished,  to  eight  hundred  men, 
whom  they  propose  keeping  up  during  the  winter;  New  Jerseys  propose  keeping 
up  the  remains  of  their  regiment ;  those  two  I  have  assigned  posts  to,  lor  the  se- 
curity of  the  provinces. 

All  the  New  England  governments,  so  far  as  has  appeared  to  me,  mean  to  dis- 
charge their  men  so  soon  as  they  arrive  at  home  ;  and  I  do  not  see,  till  I  have  the 
pleasure  of  meeting  with  you,  and  concert  the  measures  for  the  next  campaign, 
how  I  can  enter  into  that  negotiation  ;  so  in  this  I  must  leave  it  to  your  own  opin- 
ion, which  will  be  most  for  the  colony's  interest,  to  keep  them  up  from  this  time,  or 
dismiss  them  now,  and  fix  the  method  of  raising  them  next  year  ;  which  I  should 
hope  might  be  done,  so  as  to  make  a  saving  for  the  province,  and  at  the  same  time 
more  serviceable  to  the  public. 

Perhaps  I  go  too  far  in  saying  raise  them  against  next  year  ;  all  I  mean  by  that, 
is,  that  I  hope  the  province  will  agree  to  send  out  a  force  next  year,  to  aid  in  set- 
tling the  future  quiet  of  this  country. 
VOL.  V.  72 


570      RECORDS  OF  THE  COLONY  OF  RHODE  ISLAND      [17*56. 

I  propose  having  a  meeting,  with  the  Governors  of  the  difierent  Mew  England 
governments,  this  winter,  at  Boston,  and  such  other  people,  as  the  governments  shall 
think  proper  to  send  ;  it  is  not  yet  in  my  power  to  tell  the  time  I  shall  be  there, 
as  that  depends  on  letters  gone  to  the  south.  If  I  can  by  those,  settle  the  business 
there,  I  shall  come  first  to  you ;  it  not,  I  must  go  south  first,  as  the  business 
there  will  not  permit  of  any  delay.  The  minute  1  can  fix  a  time,  I  shall  acquaint 
vQu,  and  hope  I  shall  have  the  pleasure  of  meeting  you  at  Boston  ;  where  1  hope 
we  shall  be  able  to  settle  all  matters  for  carrying  on  the  next  campaign,  in  a  unani- 
mous, and  I  hope,  successful  manner. 

I  ever  am,  with  great  regard,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

LOUDOUN. 

Secretary  William  Pitt,  to  the   Governor  and   Compamj  of  Rhode 

Island. 


Whitehall,  7th  December,  1756. 

Gentlemen  : — The  King  having  been  graciously  pleased  to  appoint  me  his  princi- 
pal secretary  of  state  for  the  southern  department,  in  the  room  of  Mr.  Fox,  I  am  to 
desire  that  you  would,  for  the  future,  address  your  letters  to  me,  which  1  shall  not 
fail  to  lay  regularly  before  His  Majesty,  and  to  transmit  to  you  such  orders  and  in- 
structions as  the  King  shall  think  proper  for  your  guidance  and  direction. 

You  will  see  His  Majesty's  sentiments  on  the  present  situation  of  public  affairs, 
in  the  enclosed  most  gracious  speech,  with  which  the  King  opened  the  Parliament 
on  Thursday,  the  ■2d  instant.  I  also  enclose  you  the  address  which  the  Elouses  have 
presented  in  answer  thereto. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  your  most  obedient  servant,  W.  PITT. 

To  the  Governor  and  Compan)'  of  Rhode  Island. 

Lord  Loudoun  to  Governor  IIopMm. 

New  York,  "iid  December,  1  756. 

Sir: — I  did  propose  to  have  been  at  Boston,  on  the  6th  of  January,  but  the 
l)ublic  business  here  has  kept  mc  longer  than  I  expected,  which  has  obliged 
me  to  defer  it  till  Thursday,  January  13th,  at  which  time,  1  desire  that  a  meeting 
may  be  held  there,  of  the  Governors  and  commissioners  of  the  several  New  Eng- 
land govcnmienls. 

For  several  reasons.  I  s!i;ill  not  have  it  in  my  power  to  communicate  the  whole 
of  my  plan  fjr  tiie  next  caiu[)aign  ;  ami  a  very  material  one  of  these  reasons  is,  that 
I  have  some  time  ago  transmitted  my  plan  for  His  Majesty's  approbation,  so  that 
the  principal  point  which  I  propose  to  settle  with  the  governments,  is,  what  aid 
they  will  afford  me  in  the  next  campaign,  for  the  general  service. 

This  point,  I  hope  you  will  not  scruple  fully  to  empower  your  commissioners  to 
agree  to,  without  making  any  return  to  their  constituents  for  confirmation  ;  and  I 
am  hopeful  you  will  do  it,  as  otherwise  we  shall  not  be  ready  early  enough  in 
the  spring;  the  consequence  of  v.hich,  you  must  know,  from  the  experience  of  the 
last  two  years. 


1756.]  AND    PROVIDENCE    PLANTATIONS.  571 

At  the  same  time,  I  think  it  necessary  that  whilst  we  are  in  conference,  the  As- 
semblies should  also  be  sittinfr,  and  as  near  to  the  town  of  Boston  as  the  situation 
of  each  colony  and  the  rules  of  the  governments  will  permit,  as  things  may  occur 
which  will  require  having  recourse  to  them ;  yet  I  should  hope  the  powers  they 
will  give,  may  prevent  any  necessity  for  that  delay,  as  the  different  things  I  have  to 
settle,  and  the  distance  of  the  places  where  those  things  are  to  be  done,  hardly 
leaves  it  in  my  power  to  finish  the  whole  before  the  campaign  must  begin. 
I  have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  regard,  sir. 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

To  the  Hon.  Stephen  Hopkins,  Esq.  LOUDOUN. 


a  E  N  F.  R  A  I.     I  N  n  K  X 


Abbott,  Daniel    G,  43,  35 

Abercrombie,  General  Sir  R.  letter 

to,  from  Sir  W.  Johnson 529 

proposes  to  unite  the  regular  and 

provincial  troops 532 

Actions,  acts  relative  to  proceedings 

in  trials  in 99,  317 

act  directing  proceedings  in 378 

Adams,  James 298 

John 328,  345 

Adultery,  acts  against 279,  403 

Aherson,  \Vm.,  Jr 487 

Ailesworth,  Thomas 165 

Albany,  act  appointing  commission- 
ers to  meet  at 384 

Report  of"  commissioners,  at 393 

Albrespy,  Guillaume,  naturalized. .  .563 

Albro,  John 43 

Maturin Ill 

Samuel 110,  489,  560 

Alcock,  Nathaniel 212 

Aldrich,  James 44,  51 

Jonathan 110 

John 265,  327,  345,  428 

Noah 83 

Peter,  Jr 488 

Samuel,  son  of  Samuel 82,  83 

Silvanus 82 

Allegiance,  oath  of,  to  be  required.  .5i4 

Allen,  Caleb 82 

Christopher 495 

John 63,  165,  265,  297,  344,  369 

Jonathan    20,  82 

Mathew 206,  215,  246 

Samuel 84 

Thomas 112,  489 

Almy,  Job 81 

Job,  of  Portsmouth 164 

Joshua 313 

Alverson,  John 164, 

William 164 


Amiel,  John,  naturalized 502 

Amory,  John 81 

Anderson,  Benj 165 

Andrew,  Benj m 

James no 

John Ill,  297 

Andrews,  Col.  John 560 

Angel,  Abiah 20 

Ezekiel 82 

James 540 

John 245,488 

John,  3d 42 

Jeremiah 85,  488 

Jere.,  Jr 488 

Nathan 109 

Oliver 109 

Samuel 484 

Annapolis  Royal,  troops  to  be  sent 

to 193,  195 

Anthony,  David 245 

Isaac 54 

VVm.,  Jr..  .44,  64,  344,  369,  382,  428, 
447,  489 

Aplin,  John 82,  276 

Appeals,  acts  for  hearing  and  deter- 
mining 24,  41,    56,    212,  227,  310, 
316,  365 

Appleby,  James,  Jr 488 

Apthorp,  Chas.  &  Son,  letter  trans- 
mitting money  from  England..  .533 

Arnold,  Amos 

Benj 82,  344,  370,  382 

Caleb    164 

Edward 432 

Elisha 20,  164 

Enoch 488 

Israel,  son  of  Elisha 164 

James  44,  65,  85,  109,  159,  163,  246, 
328,  346 

James,  Jr 164 

Jonathan 214,  245,  382,  428 


Oi 


GENERAL    INDEX. 


Arnold,  .Tercnnali 165 

("apt.  Josiiili 44,  251 

Joviali,  Ji- 10  J.  345,  382 

ivl'uses  to  sell  '•  Beaver  Tail  "...  .402 

Josei)h    43,488 

Jolm 382,428 

Nathan 188  I 

Nathaniel 1 C  t 

Noah    83 

Oliver  ... 19,  488 

Philip   19,  44,  Go  I 

Stephen    541 

Stukelev 488 

Thomas" 1G4,  297,  32  7.  341,  382 

•    Thomas,  Jr 112 

William 51,  109 

Arwell,  Amos 

Assessini;  persons,  not  inhabitants, 

act  relative  to 317 

Atbcrton,  John 43 

Attorney  jzeneral,  to  sue  for  bonds 

and  mortgages 16 

Atwood,  Charles 19 

Auetioneers,  act  establishing 41 

Austin,  Robert 105 

Autunes,  Joseph 317 

Aylesworth,  Arthur 42,  03 

Arthur,  son  of  John 83 

Chad ;    S3 

David 83 

Jonathan 488 

Philip 488 

Ayraidt,   David 312 

'Stephen G2,  312 

Ayre,  Capt.  Win.,  thanks  voted  to.  .479 

Babeock,  David 83 

David,  Jr 488 

Col.  Henry,  letter  to  com.  of  war.  532 

Henry..  . ." 419,484 

Isaac 164 

Ichabod,  Jr 419 

Joshua 214,  245,  265,  344 

John 488 

Oliyer 344 

William    84 

Batrgs,  John 487 

Bailey,  Constant 163 

Richard 115 

William 560 

Baker,  Benj HO 

John 62 

Samuel HI 

Silas 82 

Balclij  Timothy 487 

Baldwin,  Ebenezer 81 

Ballard,  Jeremiah 488 

Ballon,  Bellow,  Jonathan 110 

Maturin,  Jr 82 

Peter,  Jr 110 

Barber,  Daniel 1G5 


Barber,  Moses 1G5 

Moses,  Jr 83 

Nicholas 83 

Samuel 165 

William Ill,  341 

Barden,  Charles 39 

Jonathan G2,  81 

Barker,  Abraham 298 

Isaac 487 

John 370,  382,  432 

Peter 327 

Peleg 454 

Peter 488 

Robert    200 

Bastardy,  act  relative  to 74 

act  regulating  proceedings  in  .  . .  .305 

Bartlet,  Abner T 43 

Job 110,  206,  215,  240,  260,  345 

Joseph 164 

John 488 

Samuel 215,  513 

Barton,  Andrew 43 

Benjamin 246,  298,  383 

Rufus,  Jr 109 

Samuel   108,  245 

Bassett,  Samuel 165 

Bateman,  Daniel 62 

Bates,  James,  Jr 488 

Caleb 488 

Battar,  Batter,  Nicholas 562 

Benjamin 488 

Battey,  Hugh 28 

John 109 

Joseph 105 

Nicholas 164 

William 82 

Baylev,  Capt.  Richard 246 

Beagle,  Caleb 61 

Beale,  Richard  

Beard,  John 180,  312,  429 

Beauharnais,  Marquis  de 274 

Beaver  Tail  light  house,  act  to  build. 2  78 

committee  to  build 384 

report  of  committee  on 391 

land  to  be  purchased  near 432 

expenses  of  building 484 

Bedford,  Duke  of,  letter  announcing 

peace  with  France 247 

peace  with  Spain 250,  255 

Beers,  Charles 43 

Beet,  John 

Belcher,  Joseph 487,  540 

Bclitho,  John     81,  312 

Bell,  Joshua 82 

Nebemiah,  Jr 82 

Bennett,  Christopher 19 

Daniel 03 

Job    297 

Job,  Jr 126,  344,  369,  427 

Josiah G3,  82 

Nathan 110 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


575 


Bennett,  Samuel ■ 63 

Thomas,  Jr 20 

William 43 

Benson,  Wm 43 

Bent,  John 62 

Bentley,  Benjamin    Ill 

Bei-ry,  Joseph 20 

iv'athaniel 82 

Bertrand,  Joshua 33 

Bicknell,  Peter 298 

Bill,  Joshua 20,  419 

Bills  ot  credit,  petition  to  the  King 

relative   to,  to  prevent   farther  , 

issues  of 311 

report  on  said  petition 330 

apportioning,  to  towns 321 

act  for  emitting,  to  defray  expens- 
es of  Canada  expedition  .  .433,  482 
see  also  paper  money. 

Bishop,  Edward 110 

Bissell,  Thomas 110 

Blanchard,  Benjamin ; 43 

Moses 19 

Blancher,  Wm.,  Jr 110 

Bliss,  Henry 62 

Block  Island,  act  for  the  better  se- 
curity of 22 

see  also  New  Shoreham. 

Board  of  trade,  queries  from 257 

Boone,  James 82 

Borden,  Abraham 19 

Benjamin 62 

John 109 

Joseph 84,   112 

Reynolds 1G4 

Richard 487 

William 19 

Boscowen,  Admiral 154 

Boss,  Peter 164 

Richard 110 

Bosworth,  Benj 484 

Daniel 454,  485 

Bourn,  Tlieajashub 428 

Bours,  Peter  5,  15,  44,  65,  81,  109,  163, 
246,  266.  344,  369 

Bowdoin,  Peter 42 

Bowen,  Aaron 43,  246,  428 

Esek Ill 

Col.  Jabez  20,  64,   84,   94,   298,  328, 

370 

Isaac 62 

Israel 488 

Braddock's  defeat,  notice  of 440 

Brayton,  Baulston   82 

Francis 42,  111 

Israel 493 

Thomas   82 

Breman,  Benj 110 

Brenton,  Ebenezer 462 

Jahleel 39,  189,  313,  443 

Brewer,  John 42 


Brewer,  Thomas ; . .  19 

Bribery,  act  for  preventing 213 

Briggs,  Benj.,  Jr 110 

Caleb 110 

Jeremiah 541 

John,  Jr 109 

Peleg 495 

Robert 83 

Thomas,  son  of  Benj 488 

William 82 

Bristol,  act  for  incorporating  town  of  204 
Bristol  county,  act  for  incorporating.  208 

Brown,  Andrew    345,  382 

Allen 98 

Beriah 297,  344,  428 

Benjamin 56,  82,  360,  478 

Christopher 164,  488 

Charles,  Jr 82 

David    63 

Clark 164 

Elisha    214,287,344,369,489 

George,  16,  33,  112, 166, 197,  214,  249 

427 

Jeremiah 110,  313,  432 

James 164,  383,  428 

John,  of  Newport 39,  189 

son  of  Samuel    81 

John 110,  313 

Joshua 485 

Nicholas 62,  427,  489,  560 

Obadiah 401,427 

Peleg 39 

Pbineas 19 

Samuel 62,  164 

Stephen    488 

William    56,62 

Brownell,  Charles 327 

Joseph,  Jr 84,  112,  427 

Stephen 21,  84,  167,  246,  328 

Thomas 82,  297,  327,  382 

Browning,  Isaac 495 

Jeremiah 82 

Samuel 495 

Thomas   42 

William,  Jr 165 

Wilkinson    488 

Bruce,  Joseph 313 

Bucklin,  Jonathan 81 

Budlong,  Daniel 82 

John    488 

BulTum,  Benjamin 20 

Joseph 20 

Bull,  Henry 15,  313 

Joseph 81 

Bumpus,  George 82 

Burden,  Capt.  Thomas 143 

Burdick,  Benjamin 42 

Ebenezer 164 

Ezekiel 164 

Jonathan 110 

Simeon , 488 


576 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Burket,  Thomas    419,  484 

Burlingame,  Jonathan 164 

John Ill 

Moses,  Jr 81 

Koger ." 83 

Samuel 109 

William 183 

Burlino;son,  Jtihn Ill 

Burrell,  Joseph 487 

Burton,  John    429 

John,  Jr 84,  495 

William 43,  G5,  81,  85,  246,  391 

Butler,  Benjamin 515,  540 

Butts,  Wm 62,  109 

Buxton,  Benj 83 

iSamuel 82 

Cahoone,  Ebenezer Ill,  454 

James 

Callender,  John 70,  125 

Calverson,  Edward 493 

Campbell,  George 488 

Canada  expedition,  acts  for  raising 

troops  for 172,  187 

act  to  prevent  the  rescue  of  sol- 
diers enlisted  for 1 74 

votes  and  proceedings  relative  to,  177, 
178,  180,  181,  182,  184,  193,  194, 
221,  243,  247,  256,  261,  269,  290. 

troops  for,  to  be  discharged 226 

letter  from  Gov.  Shirley  and  Ad- 
miral Knowles,  relative  to 227 

corespondence  relative  to,  230  to.  .240 

officers  and  men  to  be  paid 243 

muster  rolls  of,  to  be  sent  to  Eng- 
land   256 

proclamation  of  Gov.  Shirley  and 

Com.  Knowles,  relative  to 257 

letter  from  Gov.  Fhips,  relative  to,  293 

report  on  the  exj)ense  of 337 

act  for  raising  four  companies  for, 

1755,  418 
act  lor  defraying  expenses  of,  1755, 

432 
hce  also  Cro^vu  I'oint. 
Cape  Breton,  acts  f()r  fitting  out  ex- 
pedition against,  ion,  i(c2,  ](»5,  113, 
117,   127,  130,  152 
votes   relative   to,  107,  116,  120,  121, 
123,  125,  182,  188,  201,  202,  218 
correspondence  relative  to,  132  to  151 

expense  of  expedition  paid 212 

act  to  restrain  the  sending  of  pro- 
visions and  warlike    stores    to,  424, 
434,  442 
(jov.  Shirley  proposes  a  new  ex- 
pedition against 563 

Cappel,  Stephen 83 

Card,  Elisha 66 

Joseph 43 

Joshua 1 65 


Card,  Philip   42 

Carr,  Caleb 19,  167 

Edward 297 

Edward,  Jr 110 

.  Joh.i 43,  63 

Peleg 19 

Samuel,  son  of  Samuel 81 

Thomns 166,  214 

William 110 

Cannon,  petition  to  the  King  for,  87,  93 

Carpenter,  Benj Ill 

Colonel 110 

.     Hezekiah    5 

Joseph,  Ji- 4g8 

Nathan 81 

Jeremiah 488 

Joseph 43,  82,  109 

Ohver 109 

Othniel  62 

Robert 83 

Timothy 83 

Carter,  Robert 62 

James 487 

Thomas 339 

Case,  Daniel 63,83 

Edward 42 

John,  Jr 83 

John,  son  of  John,  son  of  Joseph. .  1 1 1 

Sanfbrd 110 

William 110 

Casey,  Edward 164 

John Ill 

Samuel,  Jr Ill 

Silas    488 

Castendel,  Plubert   445 

Caston,  Adam .83 

Caswflj,  Jared 163 

William 488 

Cattle,  act  for  impounding 156 

Chace,  Peleg 165 

Samuel 82,  287,  429 

Scth 487 

Chadsey,  Jabez 62 

Richard 495 

Chad  wick,  John 164 

Chalonnr,  Walter  . .  .189,  197,  214,  245 
Champlain,  Lake,  expedition  to.  ..  .480 

act  to  raise  forces  for 500 

Champlin,  Andrew 82 

Capt.    Christopher,    44,    64,  85,  327, 
428,  484,  550 

John 82,  83 

Joshua 51,  127 

Joseph 540 

Samuel 110, 164 

William,  Jr 21,  44 

Chandler,  Col.  John 323 

Channing,  John 163,  214,  245 

Chapman,  Israel 19 

John 1 09 

Peleg 42 


GENERAL    INDEX. 


577 


Charter  privileges  to  be  defended  . .  .97 

Chase,  Benj 62 

John 24 

Oliver   110 

Samuel 109 

Chebucto    195 

Chesebrough,  David 39 

Child,  Oliver 109 

Chilson,  John 110 

Chipman,  John    24 

Handley 370 

Choate,  John 466 

Cholette,  Lawrence 396 

Church,  Caleb 297,  327 

Charles 488 

Edward 19 

Nathaniel 20 

Thomas 490,550 

Champlin,  Samuel 485 

Clarke,  Benj 42,  82 

Cornelius Ill 

Ebenezer 109 

Gamaliel 488 

Hutchinson   110 

Ichabod 110 

James 164 

Jeremiah 164 

John 19,  43 

Joseph 21,  112,  265,  327,  370 

Joshua 3  70,  382,  550 

Latham 164,  350,  560 

Peleg 81 

Samuel    15,  82,  85 

Sherman 

William 20 

William,  Jr 215,  490 

Clerks  of  courts  allowed  to  surrogate,  279 

Clerks'  fees,  act  relative  to 100 

Clinton,  Gov.  Geo.,  letters  from.  . .  .133 

letter  to  be  written  to 156 

Closson,  Ichabod 83 

Coddington,  Col.  John 32 

John,  son  of  Nathaniel 164 

Nathaniel 39 

William 313 

Codner,  Samuel 166 

Cod  fishery,  act  to  encourage.  .318,  340 

Coffin,  Abner 19 

Coggeshall,  Daniel,  44,  55,  65,  81,  109, 
161,  246,  313,  381 

John,  son  of  Abraham 81 

Josias,  Jr 109 

Joshua 62,345 

Joshua,  Jr 428 

Joseph 540 

William,  Jr 19 

Nathaniel 297,  326 

Peter  , 84 

Coggswell,  John 376 

Cole,  Captain 181 

Edward 110,  158,  189,  312,  419 

VOL.  Y.  73 


Cole,  John 313,  327 

Colegrove,  Jeremiah 82 

Thomas *.  ...  1 64 

Collins,  Eliza,  Jr 110 

Eliezer 488 

Henry 39,  312 

Hezekiah 110,  428 

James 487 

William    20,  110 

Colony  sloop,  acts  for  equipping  and 

sending  out 16,  40 

Colvin,  Benj •  .83 

Caleb Ill 

Daniel 63 

James 266 

Joseph Ill 

Moses 488 

Stephen    83 

Colwell,  John 42 

Robert 110 

Comings,  Benj 165 

Commissioners  at  Albany,  report  of.  393 

Comstock,  Anthony 82 

David 61,64,  166 

John 167 

John,  Jr 165 

Joseph 109 

William 298 

Congdon,  James 246,  266,  297 

Ja'mes,  Jr 345,  432 

John 427,  487,  489 

Joseph,  Jr 495 

Stukely 63 

William : 83 

William,  son  of  Joseph 164 

Conklin,  Jonathan 19 

Connecticut  boundary  marks  of,  to 

be  examined  ....    6 

report  of  the  commissioners  on,  34,  59 
commissioners  to  erect  monument.  .45 

Cook,  James 82 

John 313 

•    Samuel 82 

Cooke,  Elisha 63 

Nicholas 346,  371,  427,  489 

Seth 63 

Samuel 43 

Samuel,  Jr 43 

Silas    484 

Coombs,  Charles 81 

Cooper,  Clement 28 

Manser Ill 

Samuel 298 

Thomas 82 

Corey,  Anthony .• 63,83 

Benjamin 81 

Caleb 487 

John 62 

Jonathan 110 

Cornell,  Benj 487 

Clark 109 


578 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Cornell,  George,  Jr 19 

George,  son  of  ^Villiam 42 

Gideon 19,113,  163,  197 

Richarrl 109 

Cornet,  Peter     109 

Cornwaliis,  Lord 351 

Coroners,  act  appointing 227 

Corp,  Corpe,  Abiah 495 

John lt»9 

Nicholas 328 

Samuel,  Jr .  .83 

AVilliani 109 

Corton,  Benj Ill 

Cotterell,  Nathaniel 82 

Stephen,  Jr 42 

Thomas 110 

Counterfeiting,acts  to  prevent,73,403,472 

note  relative  to  the  extent  of 73 

report  relative  to 503 

Court  of  common    pleas   may  hold 

special  courts 305 

Court  of  equity,  act  appointing. .  .22,  40 

act  to  repeal 76 

Courts  martial,  act  appointing 41 

of  judicature,  a(.'t  to  establish 220 

act  to  prevent  falling  through.  ...  307 
of  trials  acts,  to  prevent  delay  in..  317 
Coventry,    act   to    incorporate    the 

town  of 20 

report  on  boundary  of. 36 

Co  wen,  James 83 

Cozzens,  Joseph    493 

Mathew 493 

Cozens,  Peter 164 

Crandall,  John 62 

Peter 19 

Cranston,  Benj 81 

Col.  John.  .5,  43,  64,  84,  98,  126,  106 

Samuel 

Thomas,  160,  214,  245,  2G5,  297,  326, 
369,  382,  427,  489 

Walter 39,  312 

William,  Jr 109 

Cranston,  act  for  incorporating  the 

town  of 388 

Creman,-  Thomas 163 

Cross,  P.cleg Ill 

Crown  Point   expedition,  votes  and 

proceedings  relative  to.  ...  183,  207 
letter  from  Gov.  Shirley,  relative 

to " 209,  210 

letter  from  Sir  W.  Johnson,  rela- 
tive to 210 

letter  from  (xov.  Greene,  relative  to, 211 
troops  to  be  rai.sed  for  expedition 

against,  1755 438,  440 

protests  against 438 

orders  relative  to,  447,  448,  468,  491, 
500,  544,  558 
acts  relative  to  expedition  aaainst 
449,452,470,479,492,500,514,534 


Crown  Point  expedition.  Gov.  Shir- 
ley to  Sir  W.  Johnson,  rela- 
tive to 455,  459 

Gov.    Shirley    to    Gov.    Hopkins 

relative  to.  .460,  473,  523,  525,  527 
Lt.  Gov.  Phips  to  Gov.  Hopkins, 

relative  to     466 

Sir   Charles  Hardy  to  Gov.  Hop- 
kins, relative  to 476 

bills  to  be  emitted  on  account  of,  482 

502 

tax  to  defray  the  expense  of, 507 

letters  of  Gen.  Winslow,  relative 

to 526,  52S 

letters  from    Sir   Charles  Hardy 
and  Gen.  Winslow,  relative  to,  523, 
526,  528 
letter  from  Lord  Loudoun,  rela- 
tive to 545,  563  to  566 

account  from  com.  of  war,  of  the 

expense  of. 551 

Crown  Point  bills,  act  relative  to..  .  .558 

Cruif,  Thomas,  Jr 98 

Cruisers,  act  relative  to 40 

Crumb,  William,  Jr 82 

Cuba,  act  for  raising  recruits  for 30 

letter  from   T.  Wentworth,  rela- 
tive to 30 

act  to  raise  money  to  defray  ex- 
penses of  expedition  to 41,48 

other  references  to 108 

Cumberland,  act  to  incorporate  the 

town  of 205 

annexed  to  Providence  co 209 

Curry,  Samuel 42 

Cursing  and  swearing,  act  to   pre- 

velit 260 

Curtain,  John 42 

Cutter,  Beach 488 

Jonathan 83 

Daley,  David 20 

Samuel    105 

Darling,  Ebenezer 83 

Davenport,   Charles 19 

Thomas 42 

Davis,  Aaron 109 

Benjamin 4  95 

James 122 

John 83 

Joseph 484 

Simon 370 

Thomas 42 

William 488 

William,  Jr 82 

Dawley,  Daniel Ill 

John 42 

Nathaniel Ill 

Dean,  Elijah 42 

Seth..  .' 81 

Debts,  small,  act  for  the  recovery  of,  378 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


579 


Decatur,  Stephen,  act  to  naturalize. 367 

Decotay,  Ami,  naturalized 403 

Defences  of  the  colony,  acts  for  pro- 
viding  3,  40,  88,  148 

Defiance,  brigantine 170,  176 

Dehane,  Jacob ,312 

DeLancey,  Governor,  letter  to  Gov- 
ernor Greene,  relative  to  build- 
ing forts 383 

letter  relative  to  the  Six  Nations,  385 

Dennis,  John 42,  170,  313 

Deputy  sheriffs,  act  relative  to 156 

Deputies,  act  for  choosing 99 

Derby,  Roger ." 82 

Depositions,  act  relative  to 156 

Dexter,  Diivid 419 

Edward 487 

John 19,  44,  65,  298,  345,  490 

John,  Jr 82,  110,  164 

Joseph 109 

Knight    487 

Dickens,  Samuel 165 

Thomas 84 

Die,  Daniel 109 

Dixon,  Anthony    164 

DodLie,  John 112,  327 

Joseph S3,  111 

Nathaniel 82 

William 110 

DcUiver,  Joseph 83 

John      Ill 

Douglas,  James 82 

Thomas 495 

Downing,  Valentine 419 

Drake,  George     110 

Draper,  Thomas 43 

Thomas,  Jr 105 

William 20 

Drown,  Solomon 432 

Dunbar,  John    109 

Col.  Thomas,  note  relative  to 406 

Dun,  Samuel 19 

Dunham,  Benjamin 540 

Durfee,  Durfey,  Eliakim 165 

Gideon 113,  163.  215 

Robert 180 

Samuel 327,  370,428 

Richard 495 

Dyno,  Samuel 312 

Dyer,  Dyre,  Edward 245 

Edward,  Jr .214 

Samuel 490,  550 

Samuel,  Jr 493 

William 82,  126 

Earle,  Benjamin 112 

David    , 82 

Oliver 245,  265 

William 428,  489 

Vvllliara,  Jr 42 

Eastern  boundary,  see  Massachusetts. 


East    Greenwich,   lottery  for  com- 
pleting the  court  house  in 376 

Easton,  Jonathan 19,  266,  298 

Nicholas.  .43,  265,  369,  427,  488,  489 

Peleg 

Samuel 66 

Samuel,  Jr ....163 

Walter    Ill 

Eddy,  Azariah 63 

Eiiphalet 83 

Joshua 83 

Edmonds,  Joseph 215 

Thomas 109 

William 19 

Edwards,  Joseph 165 

Nicholas 165 

William ....165 

Eldred,  James ••••....  83 

John    20,  166,  245 

Randall 163,  180 

Thomas    20 

Flections,  acts  and  orders  relative  to. .57 

EUerton,  John 382 

EUerv,  Benj 19 

William 5,  44,  65,  85,  109 

deputy  governor 246,  266 

Elliot,  Robert 

Ellis,  Benj 82 

Gideon 165 

Jeremiah 246,  266,  327,  345,  490 

Jeremiah,  Jr 83 

Capt.  Jere 112,  215 

Embargo,  acts  laying 18,  40,  101 

England,   statutes   in   force   in  the 

colony    289 

Engs,  Samuel 312 

Enos,  John,  Jr 165 

John,  3d 165 

Benjamin 488 

Joseph,  Jr 328,  370 

Equity  courts,  acts  relative  to.  ...  22,  40 

repeal  of 76 

Estates    of    deceased   jjersons,   act 

relative  to 157 

Estes,  Richard 109 

Evans,  David,  Jr 110 

Exeter,  act  incorporating 57 

dividing  line  between,  and  South 

Kingstown,  to  be  run    561 

Fales,  Nathaniel 490,  543 

Fees,  act  relating  to 317,  365 

Fences,  act  for  regulating 378 

Fenner,  Arthur,  Jr 164 

Richard 19,  44,  65,  85 

Richard,  Jr 19 

Thomas 19 

Ferrari,  Francis 340 

Ferriage,  act  relating  to 74 

Ferries,  act  for    regulating,    227,    317, 

365,  278,  563 

report  on  tlie  sale  of 309 


580 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Ferries,  to  be  leased 505 

Field,  Silas ' 19 

Thomas 43 

Thomas,  3d .  ..164 

Fines,  act  to  prevent  the  detaining 

of    365 

of  delinquent  jurors,  act  relative 

to 378 

Finney,  Jeremiah 313 

Samuel 109 

Fish,  Benjamin 82 

Daniel 164 

Fisheries  in  Pawcatuck  River 57 

Fish,  John 214,488 

Jeremiah 

Noah   83 

Flagg,  Ebenzer 313 

Flax  and  wool,  act  to  promote  the 

raising  of. 318 

Flour,  vessels  licensed  to  procure.  .  .363 

Flowers,  Robert 79 

Fones,  Capt.  Daniel 116,265 

letter  to  Gov.  Wanton 140,  141 

Fort  George,  act  relating  to,  40,  46,  156, 

168,  189,  563 

votes  relating  to,  51,  86,  89,  98,  117, 

132,''153,  216,  251,    268,   393,  398, 

409,  411,  469,  483,  498, 511 

report  on  the  stores  at 387 

lottery  granted,  to  build 505 

Forts  Edward  and  William  Henry, 
in  New  York,  to  be  garrisoned 

by  Rhode  Island  troops 470 

Fort  St.  Frederic,  to  be  defensible.  .416 

Foster,  Card 164 

Foster,  John 487 

Fourtane,  Daniel 63,  487 

Fowler,  James 42,  165 

Samuel .125 

Fox,  H.,   secretary,   letters   to   the 

Governor  and  Company..  .485,  529 

relative  to  Lord  Loudoun 520 

announces  war  with  France 528 

France,  peace  with 247 

war  announced  with,  1 756 528 

see  also  French. 

Francis,  Abraham 419 

Franklin,  Ann 122 

Abel 04,  113,  265,  309,  327 

Abel,  Jr 82,  327 

George 165,  245 

Jonathan 83 

Fi  eebody,  John 312 

John,  Jr 39,  312 

Samuel 164,  312 

Thomas 42.  313 

Freeborne,  Benjamin 82 

Gideon 21,214 

Gideon,  Jr.   ..  .84,  112,  265,  344,  370 

Joseph 62 

Jonathan 166,  245,  489 


Freemen  voting,  act  relative  to   57 

act  relative  to  the  admitting     . . .  .213 
French  prisoners,  votes  relative  to, 

92,  122,  124,  131,446 
French,  act  prohibiting   trade   and 

commerce  with 516 

order  from  George  2d,  relative  to 

trade  with 546 

report  relative  to  furnishing  pro- 
visions to . .  -. 446 

commissioners  to  consider  the  en- 
croachments of 462 

act  appointing  commissioners  rela- 
tive to 463 

French  forts  on  Lake  Champlain, 
act  to  raise  men  for  the  reduc- 
tion of 480 

Frenchmen,  act  to  take  up  and  se- 
cure   425 

Frost,  Miller 181 

Fry,  Frye,  John 44,  49,  64,  345 

Joseph 85 

Thomas 49,  166 

Thomas,  3d    110,  165 

Thomas,  Jr 166 

Fryers,  John 312 

Gallom,  Daniel 488 

Gaming,  act  to  prevent 279,  378 

Gardner,  Benoni.  . .  .215,  266,  313,  490 

Benjamin 63 

Caleb 110 

Caleb,  Jr 

Ephraim 63,  163,  215 

Edward      164 

George    42,  246,  266,  297,  327 

George,  Jr 484 

Henry 21,  64,  165,  382,  489 

James 63 

Jeremiah,  Jr 20 

Job    164 

John,  5,   65,   98,   113,   167,  189,246, 

381 
John,  Deputy  Governor,  to  Gov. 

Shirley 405,  409 

John,  son  of  Ezekiel   495 

John,  son  of  Samuel 110 

John,  Jr Ill 

John,  schoolmaster 82 

Joshua Ill 

Joshua,  of  Exeter Ill 

Nathan 63 

Nicholas 167,  370,  488 

Samuel 83 

Thomas 164,  490 

Wm.  Thurston 499 

William,  Jr 541 

Gavitt,  Samuel 62 

Thomas 62 

Gaskill,  Wm 488 

Gazan,  John 445 


GENERAL    fNDEX. 


581 


General  Assembly,  act  for  the  pro- 
tection of  members  of 156 

General  treasurer,  act  relative  to.  . . .  99 
report  of  com.  on  accounts  of  .  . .  .552 
George    2d,  order  from,  relative  to 

trade  with  the  French 546 

order,  relative  to  allegiance  to.  . .  .556 

Gerrald,  James ....    ,..81 

Gertrude,  sloop,  seizure  of 78 

letter  to  Duke  of  Newcastle,  rela- 
tive to 79 

Gibbs,  George 19,  313 

Israel     42 

Robert 20,  16  7,  ISO,  246,  249 

William ' 81 

Gibson,  James Ill 

Gidley,  John    , 60 

Gilson,  James 110 

Gleasier,  B.  letter  to  Gov.  Hopkins. .472 
Glocester    and    Scituate,    dividing 

line  between,  to  be  run 4  70 

Goat  Island,  fort  erected  on 189 

see  Fort  George. 

Goddard,  Daniel 131 

John    19 

John,  son  of  Daniel 109 

Nicholas 63,  81 

Goif,  Anthony 19,  111 

Abner   Ill 

Nathan Ill 

Gooch,  William 68 

Gorham,  Uenjamin    81 

Gorton,  John" 488 

Othnicl 543 

Samuel 61,  166 

William 110 

William,  Jr 487 

Gould,  Adam 62 

Daniel 20,  43,  64,  84,  85 

Daniel,  Jr Ill 

James   312 

John 55,488 

Thomas 43,  382,  428,  490 

Goulding,  George 20,  43,  1 09 

Grafton,  Nathaniel 109 

Grant,  Patrick 164,  313 

Seuton    39 

Gray,  lid  ward 419 

Greene,  Amos 20 

Barlow 56,64 

Benjamin 62,82 

Benjamin,  son  of  William 164 

Daniel Ill 

Henry Ill 

Caleb 165,  345,  490 

David 159 

Benjamin,  son  of  James 488 

Increase    42 

Isaac 165 

James 17,63,163 

James,  Jr 83 


Greene,  Job 490 

John    15,  21,  214,  265,  344 

John,  Jr 83 

Jonathan,  of  Warwick    62 

Jonathan,  of  Jamestown 63 

Mathew 62 

Philip 63,  65,  167,  265,  382,  428 

Robert 44,  112,  167 

Samuel 245 

Stephen 109 

Thomas,l  11,164,215,246,298,  382,550 

William,  Deputy  Governor.  .3,  18,  35 

Governor,   65,  84,  16  7,  214,  246,  266, 

328,  345,  370,  381 

letter  to  I  )uke  of  Newcastle 79 

to  Sir  P.  Warren 183,  187,  192 

to  Gov.  Shirley 192 

to     "         "        relative  to  Crown 

Point  expedition 211 

to  Richard  Partridge   .  .l->70,  315,  359 
to  Gov.  Phips,  relative  to  Canada 

expedition 294 

to  the  King,  relative  to  the  north- 
ern boundary 367 

Wm.,  of  C])arlestown 488 

Greenhill,  Richai'd    3-)  5.  3  70 

Greenman,  Silas 51,  74,  166,  265 

Grenvillc,  J 350 

Gridley,  John 39 

Griffith,  John 109 

Grover,  Fnos 165 

John 83 

Joseph 165 

Gauging 340,  365 

Gunpowder,  act,  exportation  of  ....  156 

Hadsall,  William no 

Hake,  John 165 

Halifax,  Dunk 350,  355,  546 

Halket,  Sir  Peter,  note  relative  to.  .406 

Hall,  Abraham 80 

Benjamin 62,  76,  84,  478 

Benoni 112,  327 

Christopher 164 

David 488 

(Tcorge    327 

Henry 3  70 

John Ill 

Preserved 382,  550 

Robert 51 

Samuel ill 

William 68,  111,  246,  345 

William,  Jr 62,  488 

Italia  way,  Joseph 165 

Hammond,  Amos 382,  428,  485  . 

Gideon 297 

John 164 

Jonathan 81 

William 110 

Hai'dy,Sir  Chas.,let.  to  Gov.Hopkins,473 
relative  to  Crown  Point  expedition, 523 


582 


GENEIkAI.    INDEX. 


Harrrill,  Christopher 454,  485 

Harker,  Caleb 540 

Harris,  Christopher 64,  297,  327 

colonel 419,484 

Charles 151,  245,327 

David    82 

Ephraim 81 

Gideon    490 

Henry 166,  245,  255,  427 

John 63 

Joseph    429,490 

Toleration 164 

mill  of,  exempted  from  tax 4  72 

Harvey,  Seth 118,  169 

Harrison,  Joseph,  109,    131,    189,    281, 
325,  512 

Peter 131,  189,  312 

plate  to  be  presented  to 153 

Hassard,  Benjamin 85,  1 09 

Benjamin,  Jr 163 

Benjamin,  son  of  George 110 

Fones    109 

Georcre,  son  of  George 164 

Jonathan T 44,  297 

Robert 21,  64,  84,  112,  166,  214 

Deputy  Governor 298 

Stephen,  Jr 164 

Tliomas 42,  112 

William    42 

Haszard,  Ephraim 495 

JeofiVey   42,  345,  370 

Jeremiah 495 

James 4  79 

Joseph 489 

llobert    560 

William 490,499 

Hazard,  Benjamin 215,  245 

Tbomas.  .245,  339,  345,  370,  427,  489 
Havana,  American  prisoners  in, 170,  176 

Havens,  Alexander 63 

Joseph 164 

llobert 63 

Tl'.omas 1 1 1 

Hawkes,  Admiral 564 

Hawkins,  Isaac 109 

Job    164 

Luther 487 

Healey,  Andrew 313 

Hearne,  Samuel 484 

Heath,  Jonathan 164 

Hellerman,  Isaac' 109 

Job 164 

William,  Jr 163 

Ileginbotham,  Charles Ill 

llehne,  Benedict 110 

James 479,  560 

House 21,  44,  65,  81 

House,  Jr 21)5 

IIi'uip,  bounty  on,  taken  off loii 

llmrv,  .lames 187 

li(  reiidon,  John,  Jr 83 


Herendon,  Richard 43 

Richard,  Jr Ill 

Thomas   488 

William 83 

Hern,  William 64,  112,  166 

Herrington,  Job,  Jr 165 

Hicks,  Benjamin 214,  297 

Isaac 165 

John 55 

Joseph 112 

Hishwavs,    act   for   regulating;,  40,  156, 
227,  365,  472 

in  Smitlifield,  report  on 53 

in  North  Kingstown,  report  on.  . .  .55 

Hill,  Caleb : 370 

Daniel,  Jr Ill 

Ebenezer 488 

James 164 

John 164 

Preserved 370 

Thomas,  letter   from,  relative    to 

iron 314 

Thomas   257 

Thomas,  Jr 110 

Hiscox,  Joseph 164 

Thomas 21 

Hogs,  to  be  prevented  from  running 

at  large 279 

Holden,  Anthony 82 

Charles 166 

John 164,  214,  344 

John,  son  of  Randall 488 

Joseph 84 

William 21,  53,  297 

Holdernesse,  Earl,  letters  from,  350,  355, 

380,  397 

to  the  board  of  trade 353 

Holmes,  James 62,  248 

report  on  the  taking  of  a  prize  by 

him 253 

John 63 

Samuel 313 

Hopkins,  Charles 165 

David Ill 

Esekiel,  Jr 83,  112 

Francis 16.") 

James Ill 

James,  son  of  Samuel Ill 

Jeremiah   63 

Jonah    163 

Jonathan    165 

Robert Ill,  454 

Samuel 64,  298 

Stephen,  15,    19,    21,42,53,84,166, 
214,  265,  344,  348 

to  be  sued 24  9 

com.  to  run  northern  boundary. .  .255 
commissioner  to   the   conffress  at 

Albany,  1754 ". .386 

it'port  relative  to  do 393 

Governor '. 4  27,  488 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


583 


Hopkins,  Stephen,  report  from  the 

com.  of  war 474 

messa2;e  from,  relative  to  Crown 

Point 50-2 

letter  to  Lord  Loudoun 569 

to  Gov.  Shirley 563 

to  the  com.  of  war,  of  Mass 564 

Rufus,  letter  to  Lord  Loudoun..  .  .565 

Capt.  Wm 394 

Honeyman,  Francis 312 

James,  Jr 15,  39,  197,  219 

James 489 

Hookey,  Joseph 165 

Stephen    164 

Howard,  Ebenezer 83 

Martin,  Jr 386,  505 

Howland,  Daniel,  21,  44,    65,    85,    112, 
163,  164,  245 

John 110,  215,  246 

Thomas 345,  383,  428,  490 

Hoxsie,  Gideon 550 

Joseph 345 

Stephen    85 

Hoyle,  John 28 

James ,....164 

Hubbard,  Ezekiel 118,  169 

Hudson,  Thomas 110,  "65 

Hulet,  John 83 

Huling,  Alex 495 

Hull,  Joseph 82 

John 251,  327,  543 

Robert 19,  64,  112,  214,  382,  489 

Teddiman 113 

Humphreys,  Josiah 490 

Hunt,  John 215,  298,  327 

Samuel 19 

Hunter,  Andrew 109,  312 

Hyams,  James,  son  of  Benj 165 


Indians,  act   to  prevent  the  enter- 
taining of 320, 

see  Ninegret. 

Six  Nations 93,  216, 

commissioners  to  meet  at  Albany, 

convention  at  Albany,  to  meet.  . . 
letter  from  Gov.  DeLancey,  rela- 
tive to 

treaty  concluded  with 

Sir  W.  Johnson's  account  of  trea- 
ty with 

Indigent  persons,  act  for  relieving..  . 

Ingraham,  Nathan 

Inman,  Capt.  Isaiah 

Obadiah 

Stephen    

Insane,  act  relating  to 

Insolvent  debtors,  act  for  the  relief 

of 

Ireson,  Joseph 

'Irish,  Jededlah 19 


340 

218 
219, 
235 
384 


385 
393 

529 
472 
487 
.64 
.83 
.82 
.57 


279 
109 
,  83 


Irish,  Samuel     165 

Irons,  Samuel 20 

Iron  works,  protection  to 17 

act  of  Parliament,  relative  to 313 

letter  from  the  Duke  of  Bedford, 

relative  to 313 

T.  Hill,  relative  to :   314 

Irwin,  James    82 

Jacob,  Joseph 76,  84 

James,  Edward Ill 

Jonathan 83 

Jamestown  ferry 159,  504,  i43 

pier  and  ferry  at 254 

report  on  the  purchase  of  ferries 

at 259 

ordered  to  be  sold 306 

choosing  officers  in 562 

Jeffers,  Benj 109 

Jenckes,  Jeremiah 164 

Ebenezer 454 

John 81,  110 

Josiah 62 

Daniel..  .245,  255,  311,  369,  382,  427 

Ubadiah 110 

Wilham 15,  18 

Zachariah    165 

Jenkins,  John 6,  35 

Job 488 

Robert,  Jr 313 

Jepson,  John 19 

Jess,  Joseph 164 

Johnson,  Augustus 395,  505,  540 

Johnson,  Elisha    81,  246,  298 

Ezekiel 488 

John 42,  64,  85 

Isaac 83 

Obadiah 63 

Robert    493 

Sir  VVm..  letter   to  J.  H.  Lydius 

relative  to  Crown  Point 210 

Gov.  tJhirley  to 455 

vote  of  thanks  to 479 

communicates    the  thanks  of  the 

King,  to  the  R.  I.  troops 521 

letter  to    Gen.  Abercrombie,  giv- 
ing an  account  of  a  treaty  with 

the  Indians 529 

Jones,  Amos 83 

Henry 165 

Josiah 165 

Jordan,  Capt 170 

Joslin,  Thomas Ill 

Joyeux,  Jean 445 

Judah,  Jacob 225,  295 

Jurors' fees,  act  relating  to,  56,57,  73, 

156,  227,  260,  317,  357 

Justices's  warrants,  vote  relative  to..  .25 

Kelly,  Robert 487 

Kenion,  Daniel 165 


584 


GENERAL    INDEX. 


Kenion,  David    165 

Enoch    165 

Enoch,  Jr 165 

Joha    61 

Joseph 165 

Kent,  act  incorporating  the  county 

of 301 

Kent  CO.  court  house,  lottery  grant- 
ed for    378 

Killiv,  Christopher 121 

Kickamuit,  act  to  prevent  seining  in,  472 

Kimball,  Deau 63,109,  487 

Nathaniel 83 

Kiii'T,  in  council,  order  from,  direct- 
ing form  of  prayer 26 

order  from,  relative  to  trade,  com- 
merce and  manufactures,  etc.  .  .351 

King,  Benjamin 497 

Ebenczer 83 

John 488 

William    43,  165 

Ivinasley.   S.unuel 164 

Kinnicut,  Edward 266 

i^oger 42 

Thomas 164 

Lieut.  Col 194,  195,  206 

Kinyon,  Nathan 488 

Knight,  Jeremiah 81 

Jonathan 495 

Jonathan,  Jr 19 

Joseph 64 

Robert,  Jr • 62 

Knolton,  Thomas     83 

Knox,  John 82 

Knowles,  Admiral,  letter  relative  to 

the    Canada   expedition,   ■r27,    229, 
240 
proehmation  discharging  the  men 
belonging  to  the  Canada  expe- 
dition  25  7 


Ladd,  John 83 

Land  titles,  act  for  establishing 226 

Lang,  Nii.'holas 357 

Langley,  Nathaniel 62 

Jjangworthy,   Southcote 81,  109 

l^apham,  Jienjamin 110 

Thnmns 214,  265,  281 

Larkin,  John,  Jr 488 

J>avigne,  Jf)lin 446 

Laws,  public,  to    be    revised,  38,  53,  67, 

70,  125 

to  be  printed 120,  227,  334 

Law,  Jonathan 1 3o 

Jyawrcnce,  bir  Chai'le.-',  to  Governor 

Hopkins 529 

Lawtun,  jVdani 112 

lienjamm 166 

(JeoVge 62,  82,  166 

Jeremiah 44,  64,  166 

John 44,  56,  64 


Lawton,  Jonathan   109 

Jonathan,  son  of  Jeremiah 81 

Robert,  21,  44,  64,   85,  109.  167,  246, 
346,  427,  489 

Robert,  Jr 82 

Thomas 110 

Timothy 19 

Lee,  Lea,  James Ill 

Thomas 165 

Leston,  John 165 

Lestock,  Admiral 190 

Letson,  John Ill 

Robert Ill 

Lewis,  David,  Jr 488 

Enoch 43 

Ezekiel 110 

Jacob .43 

James    20,  62 

John 19 

Jonathan 62 

Nathaniel 64,  112,  297,  311,  345 

Stephen    19 

Thomas HI 

Library  in  Providence  authorized..  .378 

Light  house,  act  for  regulating 279 

to  be  built  on  Beaver  Tail 279 

Lillibridge,  Robert 360,  478 

Lindie,  Gindefer 109,  163 

Linscomb,  John 484 

Lippitt,  Christopher 490 

Jeremiah,  21,  3  7,   112,   327,371,427, 

489 

Joseph 214,  245,  428,  462 

Liquors,  act  licensing  sale  of. .  .260,  340 

provided  at  the  public  expense.  .  .267 

Lit.tlefield,  John,  214,  245,  265,  344,489 

Caleb 488 

Nathaniel 166,  245,  382 

Nfithaniel,  2d 488 

Little  Corapton,  act  to   incorporate 

town  of 204 

annexed  to  Newport  co 209 

Little  Rest  Hill,  court   house  to   be 

built  at 349 

Livermore,  Samuel   466 

Lockman,  Leonard 70,  96,  271 

Lock,  Nathaniel 488 

Lockwood,  Adam 1 09 

Amos 265 

Loja,  Philip _.20 

Lopez,  Moses 307 

patent  for  making  potash 3  75 

Lords  commissioners,  letters  from,  350, 

355 

Lorenzo,  Francisco 49 

Lottery  granted  to  build  Fort  George,505 
Loudoun,  Lord,   to  be  commander 

in  chief  in  North  America 485 

letter  communicating  the   loss  of 

Oswego 510 

instructions  to  commiss'i's  to  meet,  518 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


585 


Loudoun,  Lord,  letter  to  the  Gov., 

ofH.  Fox,  relative  to 520 

letters  to  Governor  Hopkins,  531, 5G3, 
564,  565,  566 

do.  relative  to  Crown  Point 545 

Love,  Adam 43 

Gabriel 43 

Love),  John 63 

Louisbourg  expedition,  letters  from 

Gov.  Shirley,  relative  to 74 

acts,  relative  to  expedition  against,  117, 
124, 127 

votes  relative  to 157,  158,  201 

letters  from  Gov's.  Shirley,  Clin- 
ton and  Wanton,  Admiral  War- 
ren, Sir  W.  Pepperell  and  oth- 
ers, relative  to 133  to  151,  229 

note  relative  to 154 

Gov.  Wolcott's  certificate  rela- 
tive to  the  services  rendered  by 

llhode  Island  troops  in 155 

letters  from  the  Duke  of  Newcas- 
tle, relative  to    161,  162 

Low,  Anthony 487 

Stephen 16G,  327,  344 

Lund,  Jacob,  naturalized 

Luther,  Seth    42 

Lydius,John  H 210,  217,  393 

Lyman,  Phineas 348 

Lyon,  Joshua 19 

Lyndon,  Josias,  19,    53,    109,    163,190, 

215,  266 

Samuel,  Jr 62 

Malbone,  Evans 62,432 

Godfrey 39,  189,  432 

Man,  John,  Jr 165 

Moses    165 

Nathaniel 63,  83 

Oliver 83 

Pelatiah 255 

Thomas     83 

Manchester,  Gideon 98 

John = 206,  215,  246 

Jolm,  Jr .81 

Isaac    84 

Mathew     19 

Martin,  James,  6,  22,  44,  65,  85,  1 13,  167 

John 21,214,  254 

committed  to  jail,  apology  from,  372, 

373 

Joseph    82,  214 

William    82,382 

Mascarene,  Gov 191,  192 

Mason,  John 98 

Timothy 42 

Massacachuage  Bridge 50 

Massachusetts    boundary,    proceed- 
ings in,  6,  27,  35,  38,  116,  121,  218, 
/j?/.     25^2,  255,  275,  281,  290,  305,309,333 
commissioners 15 

VOL.  V.  74 


Massachusetts  boundary,   act  rela- 
tive to   appeals  from  "court  of 

commissioners  of 29 

expenses  connected  with,  allowed, .  33 

com.  to  draw  up  statement  of 33 

act  appointing  commissioners  to 

mark 197,  299 

report  of  commissioners  on.  .199,  280 

report  of  com.  on,  in  1 750 322 

do.      do.         do.     1752 346 

com.  to  inquire  into 333 

petition  of  Gov.  Greene,  relative 

to 367 

applies  for  surrender  of  rioters.. .  .107 

Mathewson,  Nathan 42 

Winchester 166 

Mattason,  Matteson,  Abraham 20 

Amos 83 

Ebenezer 20 

Henry,  son  of  Henry 83 

Josiah 488 

John,  Jr 488 

Mayer,  Christian,  naturalized 472 

Maxson,  Caleb 82 

Capt.  John 44,  64,  84 

Mawney,  Jonathan 54 

John 164,  358 

Peter 28,94,  159 

McCarter,  John 164 

McCoon,  Daniel,  Jr 110 

McDonald,  Barak 487 

Melvil,  Thomas 19 

Merchant,  Huxford 62 

Middletown,  act  to  incorporate. .  .66,  68 

highway  laid  out  in 263 

act  for  laying  out  a  drift-way  in,  275, 

281 
report  of  com.  on  drift-way  in. .  .332 

Military  watch,  act  establishing 57 

Militia,  acts  relative  to,   156,   227,  472, 

562 

Miller,  Benjamin 370 

Daniel 488 

Samuel 215 

Milward,  James 42 

Minot,  James 466 

Miraill,  Peter,  naturalized 378 

Mitchell,  Edward • 21 

Ilezekiah    42 

Moise,  John 110 

Monroe,  Joseph 455 

Moon,  James Ill,  488 

Moore,  David 83,  163,  312 

Moosup  Bridge 50 

Morris,' John 62 

Capt.  Robert 174 

Mortgages,  act  relative  to 99 

Mortgage    bonds,  committee  to  re- 
port on 290 

Mott,  Jacob,  Jr 82 

Nathaniel 82 


586 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Morey,  Mowray,  Elisha 110 

Joseph,  son  of  Daniel 110 

Jonathan 110 

Roj^er 42 

Kobert    83 

Samuel,  Jr Ill 

Mumtbrd,  Jarith 165 

Richard 487 

Samuel 

William 369,489,  560 

Munday,  Richard 71 

Mundon,  John 163 

Musscy,  James 274 

New  Hampshire  bills  of  credit  to  be 

received 290 

act  to  prevent  the  circulation  of  ..508 

Naval  office,  report  on    71 

fees  of 74 

Negroes,  votes  relative  to 72 

Newell,  Timothy 81 

Newcastle,  Duke  of 7 

letters  to 79 

letters  from 80,  161,  162,  226,  229 

order  to  the  colonies,  relative  to 

the  war  with  France 132 

New  Shoreham,  appropriation  for  a 

pier  at 46,  66 

soldiers  sent  to 107 

report  on  pier  at 116 

Newport,  petition  for  artillery  com- 
pany in 36 

artillery,  chartered 39 

billeting  soldiers  in 47 

petition  tor  dividing 54 

report  against  do 58 

Middietown  set  off  from 66 

act  relative  to  the  pier  in .157 

Long  Wharf  in 1 60 

act  relative  to  fires  in 317 

act  relative  to  courts  in 317 

act  granting  excise  on  liquors  sold 

in 340 

act   to   prevent  the  breaking  of 

lamps  in 340 

lottery,  to  pave  the  streets  in  . . .  .342 
fine  for  driving  loaded  carts  on 

pavement  in 360 

Fellowship  club  in,  chartered 403 

Newton,  Silas 62 

Nichols,  Andrew 488 

Benjamin 84,  109,  167 

account  with  the  colony,  and   re- 
port on ". 374 

David '.  . . . 83 

James Ill,  164 

John 20 

Jonathan,  64,  81,   112,  166,  214,  245, 

346 

Lieut.  Governor 397,  427,  489 

decease  of 614 


Nichols,  Joseph,  64,  84,  85,  214,  265,  327 

Kendall,  Jr 81 

Robert 42,  62,  112,  167,  215 

Samuel 419 

Stephen    83 

Thomas 21,  111 

Thomas,  Jr 43 

Thomas,  son  of  James 165 

William 454,  488 

Niles,  Paul 110,  164 

Samuel 83 

Jeremiah 112,  215,  327,  543 

Ninegret,  trustees   of,  to  render  an 

account  of  their  trust    25,  38 

Geo.  Wanton  overseer  of 25 

various  references  to    .  .  .38,  421,  182 

George 1 22,  222 

Chartes 122 

acts  allowing  him  to  sell  land  .  ...  156 

Sarah,  representation  from 222 

trustees  of,  removed 223 

an  infant,  act  for  the  relief  of  ...  .378 

Nixon,  James 164 

Noble,  Mark 484 

North  Kingstown,  highways  in 295 

Northup,  Gideon 495 

Col.  Immanuel,  44,  64,  84,    112,  214, 
245,  344 

Josah,  son  of  Henry 164 

Nicholas,  Jr 62 

Stephen    495 

William 495 

Norton,  Capt.  Benj 49 

Northern  boundary,  act  appointing 

commissioners  to  run 197,  299 

commissioners'  report  on,  1750. .  .322 
do.  do.         1752.    .346 

see  also  Massachusetts. 
Notary  public,  office   of,  established 

in  Providence 340 

Noyes,  Joseph    488 

Oaths,   certain    persons    exempted 

from  taking 365 

Olden,  Henrv    63 

Olney,  Charles 62 

Jonathan 42 

Josiah,  Jr 109 

Nedebiah    109 

Richard 164 

Stephen 164 

Thomas,  son  of  William 1G4 

Thomas 382 

Osborne,  Sir  D'Anvers,  note  rela- 
tive to 386 

Oswald,  James 546 

Oswego  taken  by  the  French 510 

Lord  Loudoun's  letter  relative  to,  510 
efl'ect  of  the  taking  of,  in  England,  565 

Owens,  John 3  70 

Thomas 489 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


587 


Pain,  Paine,  Gideon 488 

John 110,  112,  313,  370 

Ptoyal    488 

see  Payne. 

Page,  John   110 

Paget,  Henry    124,  164 

Palmer,  Moses 428 

Palmitter,  Jonathan,  Jr 82 

Peekham,  Benjamin,  Jr 04,  214,  327 

James 84 

Jonathan 84 

Joseph    298,  344 

Paper  money,  letters  from  the  board 

ot"  trade,  relative  to 6 

report  of  Governor  Ward,  to  the 

board,  relative  to 8 

acts  for  emitting,  40,  41,    75,   99,  130, 

226,  227,  318,  421,  481,  507 

votes  relative  to,  48,  74,  87,  263,  322, 

329,  331,497,503,  562 

act  to  prevent  counterfeiting 73 

protest  against  the  emission  of.  ...    75 
issue  of,  to  pay  Canada   expedi- 
tion     243 

letter  from  Gov.  Greene,  relative 

to 271 

report  on  issues  of 273 

letter  from  the  Duke  of  Bedford 

relative  to 278 

report  on    the    issues    of,  sent  to 

the  Duke  of  Bedford 283 

letter   to  the    Duke   of  Bedford 

relative  to ..  = 286 

petition  to  the  King,  relative  to  .  .311 
letter   from  Gov.    Greene,   rela- 
tive to 315 

committee  to  prepare  a  bill,  rela- 
tive to    317 

committee  to  examine  and  report 

on  the  petition  sent  to  the  King,330 
report  of  the  committee  on  the 

petition 334 

vote  relative  to  the  depreciation 

of 335 

protest  against  the  above  vote.  . .  .336 

Partridge,  lllchard 226,  564 

allowances  to 267 

letter  of  Gov.  Greene  to 359 

memorial  to  the  King 521 

Pate,  Mathew 19 

Robert        487 

Paul,  William 62 

Pawcatuck  Bridge,  18,  36,  50,  107,  198, 
252,  377,  483 

lottery  to  build    291,  317,  365 

Pawcatuck  River,  proposed  to  turn 

the  course  of 292,  342 

act  relative  to  fish  in 73,  279 

Payne,  Lawrence 81 

Azziakim 109 

Pierce,  Peai'ce,  Clothier  ,Jr 42,  493 


Pierce,  Pearce,  Giles 245 

Giles,  son  of  John 110, 112 

Jonathan 62 

John    356,  358 

Nathan 109 

Samuel 42 

Thomas     356 

Thomas,  son  of  John 80 

William 109 

Pearse,  John 131 

Pease,  Simon 39,  260,  313 

Zephaniah    , 109 

Peck,  John 487 

Jonathan 206,  246,  298,  327,  345 

Nathaniel 454,484 

Pelsue,  William,    505 

Pemberton,  Samuel 66 

Pendleton,  Joseph,  Jr 164 

Joseph 297 

lottery  to,  to  sell  real  estate 304 

Samuel,  arraigned  for  abusing  the 

Assembly 308 

Tlioraas   82 

William 198,  214,  245 

Pepperell,  Sir  William,  letters  to  be 

written  to 125,  218 

letters  from,  relative  to  the  Louis- 
bourg  expedition,  141,  143,  150,171 

biographical  sketch  of 151 

Perkins,  Ebenezer .43 

Oliver    165 

Samuel 83 

Perrin,  James 109 

Perry,  -James 84 

Samuel 21,  38,44,  167 

Simeon 370 

Simon 478 

Petel,John 62 

Petitions,    act  directing   the  mode 

of  receiving  and  acting  on 365 

Pettaquamscutt  river,  act  relative  to.  .99 

Pike,  John... 163,225 

Jonathan 164 

Phetteplace,  Benjamin 83 

Jonathan 62 

Samuel 62 

Walter 112,167,  190 

Phillips,  Azariah 110 

Christopher 19 

Israel 63 

Joseph 42 

Joshua    165 

Thomas 377 

William Ill 

William,  Jr HI 

Phips,  Gov.,  letter  to  Gov.  Wanton, 
relative  to  the  Louisbourg  ex- 
pedition  142 

letter  to  Gov.  Greene,  relative  to 

Canada  expedition 293 

letter  to  Gov.  Hopkins 430,  466 


588 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


rinnegar,  Wm 19 

Pitman,  Benj 19 

John 62 

Pitt,  William,  letter  to  R.  Island  . .  .570 

Plainficld  road,  to  be  surveyed 358 

Plummer,  liichard 165 

Point  Judith  Pond  fishery 462 

Polygamy,  act  against 279 

Pont,John 163 

Poor  children,  act  to  bind  out 40 

Poor  Debtors,  act  relative  to   156 

Pope,  Francis 42 

Population  of  the  colony  in  1749..  ..270 

Porter,  John 110 

Potter,  Capt.  Abel  .  .21,  44,  64,  85,  215 

Benjamin 63, 1 1 1 

Edward 63 

Ichabod 21 

Job    83 

John 20,  24,  45,  62,  G4,  298,  428 

John,  son  of  Ichabod 82 

John Jr.,  245,  382,  454,  484,  487 

Jonathan 110 

Josiah  . .    62 

Joseph 63,  111,  419 

Robert 382,490 

Simeon 345 

Thomas 49,  165 

William 164,  166,  350 

William,  Jr 83,  110 

William,  son  of  John 82 

Zabdiel 62 

Power,  John,  Jr 515 

Pownall,  Secretary  John,  letter  to 
the  Governor  of  R.  Island,  with 

queries 437 

other  letters  from 467 

Prince,  Benoni Ill 

Mathew 82 

Prince   of  Wales,  form   of  praver 

relative  to 330,  338 

Prior,  Robert 109 

Prisoners  of  war,  act  for  the  protec- 
tion of 156 

order  for  exchange  of 241 

Prisoners  for  d^t,  act  for  easing  .  .  .227 

Prosser,  Ichabod 19 

Protested  bills,  damage  on 74 

Providence  Bridge 50,  157 

artillery  company  in.  chartered.  . .  .87 
pest  house  to  be  built  in  . . .  .338,  365 

jail,  appro]iriation  for 371,  373 

act  to  establish  a  work  house  in  .  .378 
library  authorized   in,  and  room 

in  court  house  granted  for 378 

petition  for  the  division  of 386 

act   lor  setting   off  the    town  of 

Cranston  from 388 

fire  engine  to  be  purchased  for.  .  .401 
jail,  rc)iorl  on  the  building  of. . . .  .402 
\vork  house  to  be  built  in 498 


Providence  and  Warwick  highway, 

report  of  committee  on 52 

Randall,  Benjamin    428 

Joseph,  son  of  William 98 

Joseph,  3d 495 

Capt.  Jonathan,  20,  43,  64,  113,  215, 

265,  281,  325,  369,  432 

Job,  21,  44,64,  85,112,167,190,  214, 

245,  382,  490 

Jeremiah 62 

Peter 164 

Rape,  act  for  the  punishment  of 74 

Rathbone,  Rathbun,  John,  Jr 83 

Nathaniel 19 

Samuel,  Jr 428 

Thomas 82,  111 

Thomas,  3d 541 

Ratable  estates,  acts  relative  to 100 

Rates  levied  on  the  colony,  227,  243,  392. 
395,  472,  547 
list  of  the  towns  that  have  paid, 

with  the  sums 553 

Ray,  Capt.  Simon 21 

Rawson,  Grindall 359 

Read,  William,  189,  382,  392,  427,  484, 

489 

Joshua 455 

Realph,  Christopher 110 

Thomas 44,  265 

Redwood,  Abraham,  167,  170,  182,  213, 

312 

Jonas,  L 313 

Redwood  Library,  act  to  incorporate, 22 7 

Reed,  Jonathan 165 

Relph,  Thomas 370 

Thomas,  Jr 316 

Remington,  Benedict 82 

John,  son  of  Gershom 165 

Joshua 42 

Samuel 164 

Thomas 63,  109 

Retailers  forbidden  to  trust  for  more 

than  twenty  shillings 99 

Reynolds,  Elisha 349 

Grindall 484 

George 488 

James 43,  68 

John,  Jr 21,  44,  64,  85,  167 

John,  son  of  Samuel 83 

John,  son  of  Peter 110 

John,  son  of  John    83 

Capt.  John      327,  346,  370,  561 

John,  of  Exeter 382, 428 

Robert 83 

William    20,  165 

Richards,  William 313 

Rhodes,  Charles 19 

James 483,  488 

John 44,  53,  64,  84,  327,  370 

Samuel 312 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


589 


Rhodes,  William 113,  163,  215 

Kiehardson,  Ebenezer 313,  335 

Thomas 246,  267,  346 

Rice,  John 63,  356 

John,  Jr 112 

Nicholas 82 

Randall 370,  382,  489 

Thomas,  son  of  John 109 

Capt.  Wm.,  44,  63,  64,  85,  112,  163, 

189 
Richmond,  act  to   incorporate   the 

town  of 220 

Barzillai 454,  484 

Henry    488 

Stephen 360,  478,  490 

William 215,  246,  346,  370,  427 

William,  Jr 454,  484,  540 

Rider,  Joseph 84 

Rijlhton,  John 125 

Roberts,  John    165 

Mathew 43 

Philip    , 62 

Robins,  Caleb 166 

Robinson,    Mathew    .38,    62,    81,    276, 

325 

Robert 109 

Rowland    265,  297,  382 

Secretary  T.,  letters  to  Governor 

Greene 406,  407,  408,  417 

do.  do.,  to  Gov.  Hopkins 436,  468 

letter  to  Governor  Shirley 396 

William    24,  44 

do.     Deputy  Gov.    .  .113,  163,  215 

Rodman,  Joseph 20 

Samuel 113 

Thomas ...109 

Thomas,  Jr 312 

Walter 19,  312 

Rock,  William 44 

Rop;ers,  Benjamin 83 

Josias • 540 

James 266 

James,  exclusive  privilege  grant- 
ed to,  for  ten   years,  to  make 

pearlashes 380 

James,  Jr 20,  63 

Jeremiah Ill 

John 109,  246,  327 

Joseph 83 

Josiah 

Samuel 20,  63 

Samuel,  Jr 20,  84 

Thomas 83,  428 

William 312 

Rose,  Samuel 485 

Rosse,  Stephen    61 

Rouse,  John 81 

Rows,  John    79 

Russell,  Chambers,  letter  from,  rela- 
tive to  illegal  trade    258 

Giles   454,  484 


Giles,  Joseph  .  .327,  370,  382,  428,  560 
account  from  committee  of  war.  .  .552 
Josiah 463 

Sabbath,  act   to  prevent  sports  and 

labor  on 339 

Saffery,  Solomon 274 

Salsbury,  William 83 

Sanders,  Joseph 164 

Sands,  Edward 44,  84,  16G,  428 

Joshua    344 

Sanfbrd,  Ezbon 5,  20,  43,  64 

Incom 62 

Joseph 313 

Restcom 349 

Saunders,  Stephen,  Jr 82 

Sayer,  Capt.  Joshua 181 

Samuel 225 

Sayles,  Daniel 63 

John 21,  44,  53,  112 

John,  Jr 82,  490 

'  Richard,  Jr 110 

Scituate    and    Glocester,    dividing 

line  to  be  run 470 

Scott,  Abraham 165 

Edward,  63,  251,   326,  369,  382,  427, 

505 

John 164 

John,  Jr 82,  164 

Joseph 112,  126 

Seal,  to  be  procured 26 

Seamans,  John 165 

William 165 

Seaver,  David    62 

Segar,  Christopher    116 

Seuter,  Solomon 81 

Serle,  Searle,  Edward 164 

Nathaniel 266,  383 

Settlement,  act  for  gaining 260 

Sharpe,  Gov.  of  Maryland,  letter  to 
Governor   Greene,  relative  to 

French  encroachments 403 

William 353 

Shearman,  Abiel 82 

Eber -.58 

George 164,  485 

Henry 540 

Jonathan 82 

Moses Ill 

Samuel 110 

Sheffield,  Benjamin 21 ,  44 

Edmund 55,  370 

Ezekiel 42 

James,  112,  166,  189,   214,   245,  382, 
392,  427,  552 

Sheldon,  Abraham,  Jr 495 

Joseph 166 

Stephen     109 

Sheriffs  may  call  special  courts 99 

Eber,  Sherman    19 

John 42 


590 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Shirley,  Gov.  Wm.,  letters  to    67 

letters  to  Gov's.  Greene  and  Wan- 
ton, relative  to  Louisbourg  ex- 
pedition, 74,  133,    134,  135,  to  138, 
185,  191,  195,  196'  203 

letters  from 206 

votes  and  proceedings  relative  to,  207 
letter  to  Gov.  Greene,  relative  to 

Crown  Point 209,  210 

letter  to  same 412,  413,  414,  415 

letters   to    Gov.  Wanton,  relative 
to  the  Six  Nations  of  Indians,  216, 
219 
letter  to  Gov.  Wanton,  relative  to 

prisoners  at  Quebec 224 

letter   to    Gov.  Wanton,  relative 
to  the  Canada  expedition,  227,  229, 
to  240,  257,  381 
letters  to  Maj.  Gen.  Sir  W.  John- 
son       455,  459 

letters  to  Gov.   Hopkins,  relative 
to    Crown   Point   expedition,   461, 
475,  523,  525,  527 
letters  to  Gov.  Hopkins,  531,  533,  563, 

565 
to  do.,  relative  to   ships   at  Hali- 
fax   526 

Shippey,  Henry 110 

Job    63 

Joseph 110 

Shipping,  act  levying  duties  on  .  . .  .472 

Short,  Samuel,  Jr 165 

Shrife,  Joshua    488 

Simmonds,  Edward 487 

Simon,  Peter 340 

Sisson,  Barney 477 

Barnet    488 

Gideon 313 

Jonas 313 

Thomas,  Jr 164 

Skillion,  John    Ill 

Slaughter,  Joseph 110 

Slaves,  votes  and  orders  relative  to,  177 
act  to  prevent  the  entertaining  of,  320, 

340 

act  relative  to  the  freeing  of. 4  72 

Slocnm,  Ebcnezer 109 

John 109 

Joseph 21,  44,  85 

Samuel G4 

Thomas 82 

Small  pox,  acts  relative  to,  99,  227,  260, 
338,  365 

Smith,  Aliraham,  Jr 110,  165 

Benjamin 20,  84,  297 

Uan'jel 63,  81,  292,  377,  488 

Daniel,  son  of  Elisha 82 

Elias 83 

Gideon    83 

James 266 

Capt.  Jolui   44,  85 


Smith,  Joseph,  son  of  Joseph 110 

Joseph 313 

Moses    109 

Nathan 488 

Richard     42,127,246,327,382 

Samuel 165 

Simon 19,  246 

Stephen    165 

Stephen,  Jr 83 

Stephen,  son  of  Thomas 488 

AVilliam 85,  112,  158,  164,  338 

South  Kingstown  ferry 242 

South    Kingstown,    court  house    to 
be  removed  from  Tower  Hill, 

to  Little  Rest   349 

and  Exeter,  dividing  line  between, 

to  be  run 561 

Spain,  war  with 3 

peace  with 250,  255 

Spanish  prisoners,  votes  relative  to,  61, 
67,  68,  99,  178 

Spanish  privateers 394 

Spear,  Elkanah 4  84 

Spencer,  Christopher 58 

David 488 

Job 488 

John 15,44,  166,  214,  560 

John,  Jr 44,  82,  215 

Joseph 83,  165 

Rufus 165 

Thomas 15,  245,  265,  327 

William 82,  112,  382,  490 

William,  Jr 110  t 

Spink,  Benjamin 85  ' 

Ishmael 6,  35,  64 

Josiah 63 

Samuel Ill 

Shebna 165 

Spooner,  John 1 09 

Sprague,  Amos 98 

Anthony,  Jr 165 

John , 83 

David    495 

Samuel 110 

St.  Clair,  General 172,  186 

Stacy,  Henry .62 

Joseph 42 

Stafford,    Major   Joseph,  21,  44,  64,  84, 

166 

John 43 

Robert 63 

Richard 428 

Thomas,  son  of  William 83 

Thomas,  Jr 83 

Thomas,  Capt 215 

Stanton,  Clement 19 

David 82 

Joseph   215,  245,  370,  432 

Joseph,  trustee 38,  1 1 2 

Samuel 83 

Starkweather,  Ephraim 4  93 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


591 


Statutes  of  England,  not  to  be  en- 
forced   unless    introduced  by  a 

law  of  the  colony 276 

bill  for  introducing,  to  be  reported, 289 

ed      277 

list  of,  recommended  to  be  adopt- 

Steere,  Steare,  Jeremiah 165 

Jonah 1 G5 

Richard,  21,  44,  85,  96,  112,  214,  325, 
428, 550 

Thomas 64,  85,  166 

Stelle,  Isaac 62 

Sterry,  Nathan 487 

Kobert    419 

Stevens,  John    313 

Robert 62 

William 312 

Stiles,  Isaac    165 

Stillman,  Elisha 82 

Stoddard,  Robert 487 

William 164 

Stone,  Andrew 350,  546 

Benjamin 109 

Johii    109 

Story,  Joseph   143 

Stoughton,  William 38,  196 

Streight,  Henry    Ill 

John 488 

Thomas 112,  167 

Studley,  Benoni 488 

Sullivant,  Owen 376 

Strengthfield,  William    62 

Stronihorn,  James 43 

Sugar   planters,    com.    of    inquiry, 

relative  to 331 

Sutton,  Aaron 42 

Siran,  Alexander 164 

Sweet,  Benjamin 109 

Benjamin,  Jr ....  63,  82 

Ebenezer    165 

George 488 

Gilfen 20 

Jeremiah 488 

Joseph 43 

Jcsiah 83 

Pentecost 109 

Robert 63 

Stephen    166 

Sweeting,  Henry 17 

Tartar,  sloop,   notes  relative  to,  36,  116, 

153,  177,  192,  250 

act  for   fitting    out,  90,  100,  102,  167, 

172,  216,  247 

takes  a  prize 248 

report  relative  to 253 

to  be  sold  at  auction 256 

Taxes,  acts  and  votes  relative  to  . . .  .95, 

243,  398,  465,  547 

paid  by  the  several  towns. .  .399,  547 

protests  against  certain 549 


Tax  committee,  report  from 476 

Taggart,  Henrv 19 

Wilham....'. 487 

Talby,  Edward 485 

Talman,  Benjamin    109,  164 

Silas   82 

Tanner,  James 81 

John 81,   109 

Joseph.    43 

Tarbox,  Samuel 110 

Tate,  William 62 

Taylor,  Benjamin 

Taylor,  Comfort 72 

George 17,106 

John 85,  112,  167,  215,  246,  540 

William 42 

Robert,  son  of  Peter 

Thomas  T 487 

Tender  consciences,  act  relative  to.  .100 

Tew,  James,  Jr 454,  484 

William 63 

Edward 225 

Thayer,  Benjamin 541 

Samuel,  ordered  to  be  brought 
before  the  Assembly,  for  mis- 
demeanor   552 

ordered  to  be  imprisoned 554 

Thomas,  Samuel 42 

William ..488 

Thompson,  Benjamin 83 

John 488 

Thurber,  Edward    42 

James 487 

Thurston,  Edward 429 

Grindall 42 

John 109,313 

Joseoh 42 

Jonathan 313 

Peleg 62 

Thomas 83 

Tibbetts,  George,  Jr 64,  166 

Henry 164 

Thomas 82 

Tift,  Teft,  Daniel 110 

Eebenezer 165 

John 4'.!9 

Nathan 110 

Peter,  Jr 164 

Samuel 327,  383 

TiUinghast,  John,   76,  84,  111,  265,  346, 

427 

Jonathan 313 

Samuel 42 

Pardon 313 

Tirrell,  John 518 

Tiverton,    act    to    incorporate    the 

town  of 204 

annexed  to  Newport  county 209 

Tompkins,  Samuel 300 

Tonnage  duty  increased 393 

Torrev,  William 81,   l(t» 


592 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Tourtellot,  Abraham 214 

Towns  authorized  to  raise  monies. .  .260 

Townsend,  Admiral 191 

Charles 355 

Solomon 313 

Transports,  let.  to  London,  relative  to,  29 

Tredwin,  John 82 

Trespasses,  act  to  prevent 99 

Tripp,  Abiel 62 

John 164 

Job 21,  55,  112,  166,  246,  345 

Tripp,  Scott 83 

Peleg Ill 

William 298 

Troops,  votes  for  raising 404 

act  for  raising  four  companies  of.  .418 
Tucker,  Benj...  .  .84,  112,  166,  214,  265 

Samuel,  Jr 487 

Turgee,  Thomas 82 

Turner,  Joshua,  Jr 164 

William 298,  345,  490 

Tweedy,  John 312 

Ulerton,  John    370 

Updike,  Daniel,  15,  53,  65,  85,  112,  116, 
167,  190,  215,  267,  427,489 
commissioner  to  meet  Gov.  Shir- 
ley, French  encroachments.  . .  .464 

Utter,  Thomas 487 

Zebulon     488 

Vanghan,  Jonathan 495 

Caleb.    43 

David 82,  110 

Daniel 82,  110,  164 

Jolni,  Jr 82 

Vendue  masters  to  call  special  courts,  57 
acts  relative  to 156 

Vernon,  Samuel    312 

William 39 

Vessels  stopped  from  going  to  sea  .  .444 

Vice  admn-alty,  fees  of  court  of..  .  74,  96 
to  be  examined    79 

A''igilant,  sloop  of  war 117,  119,  138 

Voting,  act  relative  to 73 

Wanton,  Gov.  cor.  with  Gov.  Shir- 
ley and  Admiral  Knowles,  rela- 
tive to  Canada  expedition,  230,  240 

AVall,  Henry 63,  382 

John 110,  165 

V.'illiam 61 

Walton,  John 64,  109 

Walling,  Cornehus 165,  488 

Wales,  Samuel 19 

Walker,  llezekiah 42 

Walter,  John    490 

John,  Jr 428 

Wanton,  Benjamin 487 

Edward 62,  2G6,  345,  370,  493 

Geo.,  64,  112,115,166,197,215,265,298 


Wanton,  George,  Jr 163 

Gideon 22,  28,  44,  163 

Governor 113,  215,  298 

letters  to  and  from,  relative  to  the 
Louisbourg  expedition.  .133  to  151 

letter  to  Gov.  Shirley 220 

to  be  arrested  for  grossly  abusing 

the  Assembly     379,383 

bound  over  for  trial 391 

John 342,  49 

John,  son  of  Gideon 

Gideon,  Jr 164 

Joseph 98,  326 

Joseph,  Jr 62,  489 

Philip 19 

Wm.  Gardner    487 

War,  committee  of,  appointed 410 

act  for  continuing 435 

Ward,  Pilchard,  Governor 3,  18,  63 

letter  to  board   of  trade,  relative 

to  paper  money 8 

Samuel 489,  550 

to  revise  the  laws 513 

protest  of ■  .  . 562 

Thomas,   15,   39,   53,   215,   267,    346, 
381,  427,  489 

Wardwell,  John 419 

Warner,  Ezekiel,  6,  19,  35,  44,  65,  112, 

214 

Oliver   

John 19,  84 

Warren,  John,  son  of  Joseph 163 

Admiral,  Sir  Peter,  letters  to  be 

written  to 125,268 

other  references  to 117 

letters  from,  relative  to  the  Louis- 
bourg   expedition,    137,    139,    144, 
148,    150,   171,     183,    185,   191, 
192 
letters  from  Gov.  Wanton,  to,  139,  183 
letters  from  Gov.  Greene,  to,  187,  192 
Moses 541 

Warren,  act  incorporating  town  of.  .204 

Warwick  and  Providence  road,  re- 
port on 52,  59 

Waterman,  Amaziah 179 

Benoni 214,  245,  478,  489 

Christopher 82,  560 

John,  son  of  Richard 495 

Resolved 21,  62,  313 

Resolved,  Jr 82 

Watson,  Benjamin 164 

Caleb * 495 

JeoflVey 167,266,346,  371,  381 

Jeoffrey,  Jr 488 

John 297 

Nicholas 82,  165 

Stephen     495 

Westerly   and   Exeter,    report    on 

boundary  between 477 

Weaver,  Benjamin 62 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


593 


Weaver,  Elisha 84 

Harrison 61,  165 

John 166 

Joseph,  Jr Ill 

Richard 165 

Thomas,  son  of  Thomas,  Jr 84 

Webster,  John 246 

Weeacheconet  road , 37 

Weeden,  Daniel 85,  265,  488 

Joseph 127 

William,  Jr 19 

Weight,  Benjamin 113 

Eliphalet      83 

George 83 

Capt.  John,  64,  85,  215,  266,  428,  490 

Welch,  Daniel 42 

William 83. 

Wells,  John 20 

Samuel 38 

Thomas,  Jr 81 

Wentworth,  Gov 196 

Thomas 31 

West.  John 82 

Westcott,  Jeremiah- 82 

Oliver     83 

Samuel    109 

Stephen    495 

West,  I.,  letter  relative   to  grant  of 

money  by  Parliament 527 

Westerly,  highways  in 341 

report  of  the  committee  on  high- 
ways in 361 

Westgate,  Robert,  Jr 42 

Weston.  John    345 

West  Greenwich,  act  for  the  incor- 
poration of 14 

Wethered,  Joseph 110 

Weybosset  Bridge,  act  authorizing 

lottery,  to  build 100 

acts  and  orders  relative  to     169 

report  ot  lottery  committee  on  . .  .287 

act  to  regulate  money  raised  for.  .292 

river,  act  relative  to  ferry  over  ..  .  1  79 

Whale  fishery,  act  to  encourage,  318,340 

Whaley,  Samuel 165 

Wheatley,  Robert 493 

Wheaton,  Nathaniel 487 

Whipple,  David 490,560 

Eleazer     164 

Israel 246,266 

Jabez    487 

Jeremiah 383,  428 

Joseph 20,43, 

act  for  the  relief  of    3  78 

Deputy  Governor,    65,  81,  167,   214, 
328,  345,  371 

resignation  of 377 

Joseph,  Jr 265,  297 

John 83 

Jonathan 109 


Whipple,  Levi     437 

Thomas,  Jr i64 

William 20 

White,  Oliver    i63 

Whitehorne,  John 313 

Samuel i64 

Whitford,  Ezekiel . . . . , 83 

Nicholas,  son  of  Pascho Ill 

Whitman,  Elisha 488 

Samuel    164 

Whiting,  John 62 

Wiatt,  William    42 

Wickes,  John    19,  38 

Joseph 19 

Wickham,  Benjamin    386,  489,  540 

Charles 19,  42 

Samuel 39,  76,  84,  112,  166,  214 

Thomas 39,  245,432 

Wight,  Jabez 485 

Wightman,  James 295 

Wigneron,  Ch.  Anthony 

Widicke,  Lodowick 313 

Wilcox,  Abraham 62 

David      110 

Jeremiah 165 

Samuel 20 

Stephen    309 

Stephen,  Jr 83 

William 166 

Wilkey,  Jeremiah m 

Wilkinson,  Benjamin 82 

John 81 

John,  Jr 110 

Isaac 245 

Joseph 42 

Philip 19,  39,  189,  312 

William 79 

Willet,  Francis    15,  295 

Willard,  Secretary,  letter  from,  rela- 
tive to  the  Indians 93 

relative  to  Cape  Breton 212 

Wilbore,  George 165 

John 83,  215,  300 

Stephen     no 

Willis,  Henry    62,  164 

Williams,  Goliah 165 

Natnan 488 

Silas 63,  490 

Stephen    83 

Willmarth,  Timothy 63 

Willson,  Wilson,  Benjamin 812 

James 83 

Joseph,  Jr 313 

Robert 83 

Samuel no 

Thomas m 

WiUiam    ill 

Wilmot 327 

Windsor.  Abraham 82 

John 82 


VOL.  V. 


75 


594 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Windsor,  Joseph 370,  515 

Joshua 488 

Samuel,  Jr 109 

Winslow,    General,   letter  to    Gov. 

Hopkins 527,  528 

Winsor,  Joseph 540 

Wolcott,  Lt.  Geu.  Roger 116 

account  of  the  Louisbourg  expe- 
dition  155 

Roger,   Jr.,   report  on   northern 
boundary    348 

Wood,  John .165 

Joseph 246,  383,  428 

William    42 

Woodmansie,  Joseph,  Jr 83 

Woodward,  Nathaniel 255 


Woodward,  Thomas 82 

William 163 

Woods,  act  to  prevent  the  firing  of. .  340 
Warden,  Gideon 82,  110 

John 164 

Wright,  William 165 

Writs,  acts  relative  to  service  of.  . .  .156 

in  personal  actions    156,  157 

Yeamans,  Joseph 487 

Years,  John 225 

Young,  Archibald 124 

David 20 

John 83 

Zeaw,  David 110 


#371 


()') '  .^*"  :  ■; 


