Thomas H. Keown m. Phoebe Ellen McKinney, 14 Jun 1870, Greentop (Green Top), Schuyler Co., Missouri
Image saved: Thomas and Phoebe Keown 61st wedding anniversary - The Tribune 13 Jun 1931.jpg
Source: The Tribune (San Luis Obispo Daily Telegram), San Luis Obispo, California, Sat 13 Jun 1931,
page 1, article "Celebrate 61st Wedding Date"
(Found via Ancestry's "U.S., Newspapers.com Marriage Index" AI-extracted index, collection 62116,
record 198947439, which pointed to this Newspapers.com article/image.)

Full transcription:

"Celebrate 61st Wedding Date

ARROYO GRANDE, June 13. -- Happily married since June 14, 1870, Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Keown will
celebrate their 61st wedding anniversary quietly at their home here tomorrow.

They were married at Green Top, Missouri, five years after the Civil War, when Thomas Keown was a
handsome young veteran of the Union cavalry. He was 25 and she was 20 the day of the ceremony at
the Baptist parsonage in Green Top.

March 4, 1897, the day President William McKinley was inaugurated, they moved into their present
home in Arroyo Grande. They came here after Mr. Keown had made a success of farming in Kansas.

Mrs. Keown has been a member of the Women's Relief Corps [several/8?] years, and members of
Colonel Harper[?] corps will congratulate her on her anniversary. She is an Iowan by birth.

Mr. Keown was born in Kentucky[?], enlisting in the Missouri Cavalry during the Civil War.

But they are both Californians by adoption, and the extent of their friendships in their adopted
state will be evidenced by the large number that will mutually congratulate them on the
anniversary of their wedding."

NEW DETAILS not previously in the Research Log: Phoebe Ellen (McKinney) Keown was born in Iowa;
the couple married at a Baptist parsonage in Green Top, Missouri, ages 25 (Thomas) and 20 (Phoebe)
on the wedding day; they farmed in Kansas before relocating to Arroyo Grande, CA on 4 Mar 1897
(McKinley's inauguration day, used here only as a memorable date marker); Phoebe was a longtime
member of the Women's Relief Corps (a Union veterans' auxiliary organization).

NOTE: Ancestry's AI-extraction listed "Officiant: President William McKinley" -- this is a clear
AI-extraction error. The article does not say McKinley officiated the 1870 wedding (he could not
have -- he was not yet president and had no connection to Missouri); it merely uses his 1897
inauguration date as the marker for when the Keowns later moved to California. Also note Thomas's
birthplace is given elsewhere (Find A Grave, other census records) as Ohio County, Kentucky, which
this clipping's faint print seems to corroborate.
